 
DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS 
Veterans Health Administration 
 
 
[Click here and type date] 
Dear VHA Health Care Provider: 
Omeprazole has been added to the VA National Formulary following the recent FDA approval of generic 
omeprazole as an AB-rated, therapeutic equivalent of Prilosec®. Generic omeprazole is now the least 
expensive proton pump inhibitor (PPI) on formulary in the VHA. Since the PPIs are considered to be 
therapeutically interchangeable, generic omeprazole should be prescribed when clinically appropriate as the 
preferred orally administered PPI. The use of generic omeprazole in place of other PPIs currently on the 
VANF (lansoprazole and rabeprazole) will save the VHA at least $50 million per year. 
Dosing. Generic omeprazole will be available in the VHA only as 20-mg, gold and white capsules. In 
general, for acid-related gastrointestinal disorders including eradication of Helicobacter pylori infection 
related to duodenal ulcers, omeprazole 20 mg daily is therapeutically comparable to standard doses of other 
PPIs (i.e., esomeprazole 20 mg, lansoprazole 30 mg, pantoprazole 40 mg, and rabeprazole 20 mg daily).  
Alternative Routes of Administration. For patients who have difficulty swallowing capsules, generic 
omeprazole capsules may be opened and the microtablets sprinkled on apple sauce. For enteral tube 
administration, alternatives other than generic omeprazole should be used. These include lansoprazole mixed 
in apple juice only, Simplified Lansoprazole Suspension, Prilosec granules mixed in orange juice, or 
Simplified Omeprazole Suspension using Prilosec. There are no studies to support the stability and 
intragastric pH control of generic omeprazole when mixed in orange juice or prepared as Simplified 
Omeprazole Suspension. 
Drug Interactions. The interaction between PPIs and benzodiazepines is probably of more clinical concern 
with omeprazole (and esomeprazole) than the other PPIs. Patients currently on lansoprazole, rabeprazole, or 
pantoprazole and who are concomitantly taking CYP450-metabolized benzodiazepines such as diazepam 
should be cautioned that they may experience an increase in benzodiazepine-related effects when switched to 
omeprazole. Patients who develop intolerable symptoms as a result of this drug interaction may benefit from 
a reduction of the benzodiazepine dose, use of a benzodiazepine that is metabolized by glucuronidation 
(lorazepam, oxazepam, or temazepam), or the use of another PPI.  
Other Considerations. Generic omeprazole, like Prilosec, contains lactose and may not be suitable for 
patients with severe lactose intolerance. Other PPI products do not contain lactose. 
For a more complete discussion of drug interactions and the therapeutic interchangeability of PPIs, see the 
Abbreviated Drug Class Review:  Proton Pump Inhibitors, available at:  
http://vaww.pbm.med.va.gov/reviews/ppiabbreviatedreview.pdf. 
If you have any questions or concerns regarding the use of generic omeprazole, please contact the pharmacy 
at your facility. 
 
Sincerely, 
[Click here and type name] 
[Click here and type job title] 
PPI Provider Letter (Final 110603) 
