 
 
 
 
July 1, 2004 
 
Department of Commerce 
ATTN:  Kristie Mikus 
14th and Constitution Avenue 
Room 4039 
Washington, DC 20230 
 
RE:   Request for Information Pursuant to a Study by Department of Commerce on 
International Drug Pricing as Required by Section 1123 of the Medicare 
Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The Generic Pharmaceutical Association (GPhA) appreciates the opportunity to provide 
input to the U.S. Department of Commerce’s International Trade Administration on 
international drug pricing.  GPhA represents manufacturers and distributors of finished 
generic pharmaceutical products, manufacturers and distributors of bulk active 
pharmaceutical chemicals, and suppliers of other goods and services to the generic 
pharmaceutical industry.  More than half of all prescriptions dispensed in the United States 
last year were filled with generics, yet generic drugs represent less than 8 percent of total 
pharmaceutical expenditures.  No other industry has made, nor continues to make, a greater 
 
contribution to affordable health care in this country than the generic pharmaceutical 
industry.   
 
GPhA is committed to a balance between innovation and access.  To that end, we are 
committed to innovation in medicines and the preservation of intellectual property 
protections both in the United States and abroad.  With this fragile balance as our main 
concern, we strongly believe that it is essential that new trade agreements take into 
consideration existing U.S. measures relating to the accessibility of affordable 
pharmaceuticals.  Accordingly, if trade agreements contain certain provisions that promote 
innovation, yet are devoid of other essential provisions that foster access to generics (such 
as the Bolar, generic exclusivity and declaratory judgment provisions), American’s access 
to affordable medicines could be severely harmed as a result of future harmonization 
measures.     
 
The generic pharmaceutical sector is uniquely impacted by harmonization of agreements on 
intellectual property protections for pharmaceuticals — particularly insofar as they increase 
market exclusivity periods or fail to include essential access provisions.   New trade 
agreements could potentially affect American consumers’ access to affordable drugs as 
well as the business interests of the U.S. generic pharmaceutical industry.  As evidence to 
support our concern, we need only look at the fall-out of the harmonization efforts relating 
to TRIPS.  A study conducted by University of Minnesota Professor Stephen 
Schondelmeyer concluded that the cost of the TRIPS harmonization efforts would "exceed 
six billion over the next two decades." The study also suggested  that "[t]he annual generic 
savings lost by American consumers due to delayed generic entry [as a result of TRIPS] 
will range from $200 million in some years to over $500 million in other years."1 
Accordingly, the important role that generic drugs play in providing American consumers 
with affordable medicines can, and should be expanded into other nations; yet, we also 
                                                 
1 S. Schondelmeyer, "Economic Impact of GATT Patent Extension on Currently Marketed Drugs," PRIME 
Institute, University of Minnesota, March 1995. 
 
must be diligent in our efforts to preserve U.S. provisions that ensure access to affordable 
medicines here at home.    
 
DISCUSSION 
 
As the ITC responds to the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and Modernization 
Act of 2003’s mandate to study and report on the drug pricing practices of countries that 
are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 
GPhA urges it to consider the impact of such practices on the balance between innovation 
and access.     
 
QUESTIONS 
 
1. 
How do OECD countries set pharmaceutical prices?  Within OECD countries,  
           what mechanisms do governments use to control pharmaceutical expenditures? 
 
The pharmaceutical pricing policies of OECD countries vary significantly and, thus, there 
is not one global policy that dictates how pharmaceutical prices are set.  Countries 
generally follow into one of two categories:  (1) highly regulated countries, such as  Japan, 
Canada, and Italy; and (2) less regulated countries, like the U.K., Germany and the U.S.  
Consequently, some highly regulated countries use complex and aggressive price control 
schemes, whereas other countries in this category model their pharmaceuticals prices after 
neighboring countries.  Because of the complexities and variants of pricing schemes of 
member countries, we have attached a chart outlining the practices of many of the OECD 
countries.  
 
Of significance is the fact that in countries where prices of pharmaceuticals are heavily 
regulated, the generic utilization is low.2  For example, in Italy the unbranded generic 
                                                 
2 See Foreign countries data based on P.M. Danzon and L.W. Chao, "Prices and Availability of Pharmaceuticals:   
   Evidence From Nine Countries," October, 2003; 
 
utilization rate is 2 percent.  Likewise, in France and Japan, the unbranded3 generic 
utilization rate is 7 percent and 8 percent, respectively.  In contrast, countries with less 
regulation (Germany, U.K., U.S.), the generic utilization rates are much higher.4  While 
Canada is a highly regulated country with price controls, Canada also has other significant 
governmental policies that encourage generic utilization.5    
Unbranded Generics as a Percentage of Presciptions Dispensed by Country
2%
6%
7%
8%
18%
29%
37%
51%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Italy
M exico
France
Japan
Germany
Canada
United Kingdom
United States
 
 
                                                 
3  “Unbranded generics” compete on price and, thus, are generally not marketed to physicians.  In contrast, 
“branded” generics are products that compete partly on brand image and are marketed to the health care 
community.   
4 Id.  
5 In Canada, the generic drug price is about  80% of the brand price.   Canada  
  has had policies to encourage compulsory licensing and for pharmacists to dispense generics.  Id.  
 
          
          Foreign countries data based on P.M. Danzon and L.W. Chao, "Prices and Availability of  
          Pharmaceuticals:  Evidence From Nine Countries," October, 2003; U.S. data from IMS Health, 2003;  
          Reugers News, Generic Drugs Sales Soaring to $80Bln by 2008, citing Graham Lewis of IMS Health  
          discussing international generic growth, which confirmed the 2003 generic utilization rates of France (6%)  
          and Italy (2%).   
 
Branded & Unbranded Generic Drugs as a Percentage of 
Prescriptions Dispensed
2%
6%
7%
8%
18%
29%
37%
51%
32%
30%
21%
32%
43%
30%
12%
14%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Italy
Mexico
France
Japan
Germany
Canada
United Kingdom
United States
% Branded Generics Prescriptions Dispensed
% Unbranded Generics Prescriptions Dispensed
 
Foreign countries data based on P.M. Danzon and L.W. Chao, "Prices and Availability of Pharmaceuticals:   
Evidence From Nine Countries," October, 2003; U.S. data from IMS Health, 2003. 
 
Another essential fact is that in the United States, the vast majority of generics are 
“unbranded” generic products.  Thus, in the United States unbranded generics compete on 
price and not on the “marketing image” of the product.  Competing on price within a free 
market system allows that U.S. to encourage strong generic substitution (51 percent), while 
also benefiting from a low percentage of total drug costs for these products (generics 
account for about 8% of the total U.S. pharmaceutical expenditures).  In contrast, in 
 
Germany, most of the generic products are “branded generics” (they compete on market 
image of the product) and the country has a total utilization rate of branded generics and 
unbranded generics of 61 percent. Yet, Germany’s overall cost for these products is much 
higher, equally 34 percent of total sales.6   
 
 
2. 
If price controls and other government cost mechanisms were eliminated in 
           OECD countries, how and to what degree would pharmaceutical prices and  
           expenditures change in those countries and in the United States?  What effects  
           would these changes have on the sales and profits of pharmaceutical  
          manufacturers?  
 
Although generic drugs account for over half of the prescriptions filled in the United States, 
the generic utilization rates in most other OECD countries are much lower.  For example, 
in Spain, Japan, France, and Australia, 10% or less of prescriptions are filled with generics.   
 
When prices of brand pharmaceuticals are heavily regulated by foreign governments, and 
in some cases the price of the generic artificially inflated, there is less incentive for 
consumers to switch to generics.  Lower utilization also decreases the market for generic 
manufacturers and results in reduced competition.  By removing the price regulation from 
the brand drugs, the need and the market for generics will expand, leading to more 
manufacturers, greater competition, lower generic drug prices, and ultimately greater 
overall cost savings than currently realized through price controls. 
 
In the United States, governments, insurers, and individuals still have the ability to pay less 
for their prescriptions because of the robust generic drug market.  In Canada, for instance, 
some generic drug prices are six to ten times more expensive than the U.S. generic 
                                                 
6  Id. 
 
equivalent.7  If Canadians had access to generic drugs at the price that they are in America, 
it would save the system $400 million annually.8  Most other countries could save similar 
amounts or more by allowing the generic industry to flourish in their countries, by 
removing price controls, allowing true competition, and providing incentives for consumers 
to switch to generics when they are available. 
 
Additionally, the generic drug industry in the United States produces cost savings while 
maintaining the incentive and reward for innovation of new and vital medicines.  This 
balance rewards both the consumer and the manufacturer by encouraging research and 
development of new products now and providing a pathway for affordability in the future.   
 
3. 
Could OECD countries reduce costs by increasing the use of generic drugs?  
What steps would the governments need to take to facilitate the use of generic  
drugs?  
 
If foreign governments implemented aggressive generic substitution measures, they would 
likely realize savings that equal or exceed those of gained through price controls.   
As previously stated, in the United States, 51% of all prescriptions filled are with generics, 
but they only account for 8% of the total drug costs.  Research has shown that a 1% 
increase in generic utilization results in an additional 1% savings for consumers.   
                                                 
7 Palmer D’Angelo Consulting Inc. Report Series, “Generic Drug Prices:  A Canada-US Comparison,”  
August 2002 
8  Id.  
 
The United States has adopted many different strategies for increasing substitution for 
generics by consumers.  They include: 
 
1. Rigorous Federal Generic Abbreviated Approval Program:  
Yielding Consumer Confidence 
U.S. law demands that generic pharmaceuticals must be the same as their brand 
counterparts.  FDA assures that the generic product will provide the same 
medicine and produce the same medical results as that of the brand product.  
And, thus, FDA ensures that the variability of switching between a brand and 
U.S. generic product is not different than the variability between  
 prescription refills of the same brand product.  The only difference is cost.     
 
2. State Substitution Laws: 
Most states have generic substitution laws that encourage the dispensing of 
generic pharmaceuticals, including mandatory substitution models. Also, some 
state programs have used more aggressive formulary and co-payments measures 
to provide an incentive to consumers to use generics.    
 
3. Economic Dispensing Incentive 
Pharmacist and other healthcare providers have economic incentives to dispense 
U.S. generic pharmaceuticals.   
 
4. Consumer Education 
Public and private entities provide educational consumers on the value of 
generic pharmaceuticals.  
 
In the United States, government agencies, private market payers, and other interested 
groups have sought to educate consumers on generic drugs.  Generic drugs are exactly the 
same as their brand equivalent and required to be approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration to be interchangeable.  Health benefit plans and government programs that 
cover prescription drug costs for their beneficiaries have used among other things, 
 
formularies, mandatory substitution, tiered co-payments, step therapy programs, and other 
means to encourage generic use.  Driving consumers to generics by formulating preferred 
options through formularies or creating incentives for consumers through the differential of 
out-of-pocket costs between brands and generics have both proven successful for 
controlling costs in America without controlling prices being charged by the 
manufacturers.   
 
The strength of the U.S. generic industry also been enhanced by several key congressional 
measures contained within the section 11 of the MMA, which have enabled generic drugs 
to enter the market more quickly.  The provisions address among other things:  
 
  
(1) Restoring the Value of Generic Exclusivity Reward to challenge questionable  
                  brand patents that needlessly block generic competition  
 
(2) Preserving the Roche-Bolar provision that allows generic firms to develop 
                  drugs prior to patent expiry so that consumers will have timely access to  
                  affordable medicine. 
 
(3) Eliminating multiple thirty month stays that needlessly delayed the  
                  introduction of affordable medicines. 
 
(4) Shoring up the ability to bring a Declaratory Judgment action to secure  
                  timely resolution of patent disputes. 
 
Yet, more can be done to further enhance the United States’ utilization of generic 
pharmaceuticals and, thereby provide consumers and health care providers with additional 
cost savings.  Actions include, but are not limited to: (1) solidifying a definitive, efficient 
pathway for affordable biopharmaceuticals; (2) mandating the use of therapeutically 
equivalent generics in all federal and state programs; (3) removing all needless generic 
substitution carve outs in federal and state programs; (4) having generic approvals be an 
Administration priority, with agency consults, legal and scientific issues resolved in a 
timely fashion, resulting in generic approval times of 180 days or less; (4) conducting 
scientific research to support the approval of nonsystematic generic medicines; (5) 
 
substantially improve the funding for and staffing of the FDA’s office of generic drugs; and 
(6) educating consumers of the value of generic medicines.   
 
CONCLUSION 
 
As the Commerce Department produces its report on drug pricing practices of countries 
that are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) and their effects on the United States, GPhA appreciates the opportunity to 
provide information on how generics can play an important role in providing access and 
savings. The generic drug industry in the United States has seen substantial growth over the 
past 20 years thanks to the Hatch-Waxman Act of 1984, which struck the balance between 
innovation and access.  If countries with strict price regulations were to liberalize their 
regulations and provide incentives to encourage a vibrant and competitive generic drug 
market, the savings from generic utilization would provide access to quality medicine and 
also yield significant financial headroom to fund new innovative medicines.  Also, a strong 
generic industry would produce more savings over time than the current pricing systems 
the foreign countries may have now, as well as spur innovation of new medicines.   
 
Americans have access to both the newest medicines and affordable generic drugs thanks to 
open competition, protections for intellectual property, strong access provisions and 
rewards for taking risks.  If other countries were to open their markets to true competition 
and infuse strong generic utilization policies into their health care system, utilization rates 
for generics should increase and lower overall drug expenditures.   
 
Submitted by: 
Generic Pharmaceutical Association
 
GENERIC PHARMACEUTICAL ASSOCIATION                                  
ATTACHMENT I 
 
 
EGA Survey 2004 on Pricing & Reimbursement Systems 
www.egagenerics.com 
The following tables and notes provide a summary of a selection of the information 
gathered from the survey EGA carried out recently on pricing and reimbursement 
systems throughout the EU and Greater Europe. The results of this survey represent 
the situation in the various countries as reported to us in January/February 2004. 
While every effort has been taken to ensure the accuracy of this presentation, P&R 
systems are notorious for changing frequently, so be sure to check with the 
appropriate authorities to verify the current status of any given point. 
 
TABLE I:  PRICING SCHEMES FOR GENERICS 
Free Pricing? 
 
D, FIN, S , UK , LT MT 
 
Regulated pricing?  
 % Below Originator  
 
 
 
 
 
Maximum price (index price)  
  
Negotiable (price/volume)   
 
 
 
A(25-30%), B(26%), E(30%), 
F(30-40%), I(20%), NL(40%),  
P(35%), CRO(5%), CY(10-20%), 
EE(30%), HU, LV (20%), RO, SI , 
TR(20-30%)  
DK, BG, CZ, PL, SK 
IRL, PL  
 
Notes: 
S: Free, below originator price. 
UK: Need to differentiate between hospital market, brand market etc. Changes due later in 2004. 
LT: Price is proposed by producer, but if it is more than 5% higher from the average in all European 
countries where product is registered, it will be  
difficult for the the product to receive reimbursement status (indirect price control mechanism ). 
MT: A call-for-tender system (including price) exists for products financed and distributed by the 
State. 
LV: Price used to be 20% lower because of reimbursement policy (if higher, off reimbursement list); 
negotiable pricing is to be expected soon. 
SI: Price must be 10% below existing products on the market. The maximum price for medicines is 
85% of the average wholesale price (so-called comparative price) for the same product (or at least 
the same active substance and pharmaceutical form) in Italy, France and Germany. The maximum 
price for generics is 95% of the comparative price or 77.5% of the originator price if generic is not 
available. 
TR: The price of a generic product cannot be more than 80% of the originator for the initial generic 
product to come to market. This price decreases for subsequent generic products. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II:  GENERIC PRESCRIBING 
Question 
            Yes 
      NO 
Are doctors encouraged to 
prescribe generics? 
 
A, B, D, GR, NL, BG, 
CRO, CY, EE, HU, PL, 
SI , TR 
If yes: 
Is this done through... 
 
         Budgetary restrictions?  
          
         Budgetary incentives?  
          
         Other means? 
 
 
 
 
I, LV, LT, MT, RO, CZ, SK  
 
E , IRL, P , UK  
 
DK, F, FIN, S 
 
Notes:   
I: If the doctor prescribes an originator product that costs more than an equivalent generic medicine and if 
does not want the pharmacist to substitute the prescribed product with a generic, this decision must be 
explained and justified.  
LT: Not very strictly controlled after bad experience. This is politically very sensitive. 
MT: Regulated by purchasing/State Formulary mechanism, not individual budget. 
CZ: Yes but limited. 
E: In Spain several autonomous regions have competencies over pricing & reimbursement issues. In some 
of these, prescribing is encouraged by budget, in some by incentives, and in others both means are used. 
P: The Portuguese government has run a highly successful “pro-generic” information campaign aimed at 
consumers. 
UK: Primary care budgetary targets incentivise the use of generics. Generic prescribing is the norm in 
hospitals. 
DK: Generic substitution. 
F: In June 2002 consultation fees were raised to €20 in exchange for increased generic prescribing, but no 
direct incentives to prescribe generics were established. 
FIN: Formally no, but generic substitution was implemented on 1 April 2003. The substitution system 
encourages doctors as they want to control/know which products patients are actually receiving, and if 
patients are asking for less expensive products. 
S: Generic substitution rules require dispensing the least expensive product at the pharmacy. Budgetary 
 
restrictions exist at local levels, but not for individual doctors. 
SI: Only budgetary monitoring and comparison of individual prescription habits between doctors, but 
without legal restriction. 
 
 
 
TABLE 3: GENERIC SUBSTITUTION  
 
Question 
 
   YES 
            NO 
Is Generic Substitution 
Allowed? 
 
 
D, DK*, E, F*, FIN* , I*, 
NL, P*, S*, EE*, HU, LV*, 
LT, MT, PL, RO, SI 
A, B, GR, IRL, UK , BG, 
CRO, CY, CZ , SK, TR 
 
Notes: 
* In many cases doctors can prevent generic substitution by ticking a box or by 
    writing “NS” (No Substitution) on the prescription form. 
D: Doctor’s decision / Pharmacist’s voluntary decision. 
E: Doctor’s decision. Is allowed in certain situations, such as when a prescription does not respect the 
reference price or if the pharmaceutical company is not delivering due to stock problems. 
FIN: Generic substitution is obligatory, but the patient has the final word. Even when the generic product is 
refused, the patient will still receive full reimbursement for the more-expensive originator product. 
I: Legal obligation. 
NL: Doctor’s decision. 
S: Substitution is compulsory, unless the patient is willing to pay the difference in price. 
UK: Not in local pharmacies. Substitution is general practice in hospitals. 
CZ: Only in exceptional cases when there is no prescribed product; not very often used. 
 4 
 
 
 
TABLE 4: INFORMATIONAL CAMPAIGN 
Question 
 
               YES 
                     NO 
Has the govt. undertaken an 
active information campaign 
on generics for consumers? 
 
E, F, I, P, SI 
 
A, B, DK, D, GR, FIN, IRL, NL, 
S, UK, BG, CRO, CY, CZ, SK, 
TR, EE, HU, LV, LT, MT, PL, RO 
 
Notes: 
I: Two years ago in 2002. 
SI: It was more an education campaign. 
 
Abbreviations Used 
 
A— Austria  
 
B — Belgium  
 
BG — Bulgaria  
 
CRO — Croatia  
 
CY — Cyprus  
 
CZ — Czech Repub.  
 
DK — Denmark  
 
D — Deutschland  
 
E — Spain  
 
EE — Estonia  
 
FIN — Finland  
 
F — France  
 
GR — Greece  
 
HU — Hungary 
 
 
I — Italy  
 
IRL — Ireland  
 
LV — Latvia  
 
LT — Lithuania  
 
MT — Malta  
 
NL — Netherlands  
 
PL — Poland  
 
P — Portugal  
 
SK — Slovakia  
 
SI — Slovenia  
 
S — Sweden  
 
TR — Turkey  
 
UK—United Kingdom  
 
 
 
Generic Pharmaceutical Association 
 
 
 
ATTACHMENT II : GENERAL OVERVIEW OF PUBLIC LITERATURE 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
Australia 
(LSE Health): 
Stevens, Alan, 
“Pharmaceutical 
Pricing and 
Reimbursement 
Policies in Australia”, 
2001. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS): Considerable subsidies 
are paid for pharmaceuticals covered by the PBS, which means that 
the price to the consumer is lower than it might otherwise be. 
Pharmaceuticals listed under the PBS fall into three broad 
categories: 
- 
Unrestricted: these medications have no restrictions on 
their therapeutic uses; 
- 
Restricted Benefit: the listing in the PBS Schedule details 
the specific therapeutic uses for which these medications 
can be prescribed; and 
- 
Authorized Required Benefit: as with the Restricted 
Benefit, the Schedule lists the specific uses for which 
these medications can be prescribed is required to obtain 
prior approval from the Government’s Health Insurance 
Commission. 
 
Pricing of pharmaceuticals: 
Demand for prescription pharmaceuticals is significantly influenced 
by the operation of the taxpayer-funded PBS. Accordingly, 
pharmaceutical firms are keen for their products to be listed on the 
PBS to generate sales. 
Products will be considered for listing after receiving marketing 
approval from the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), 
which considers safety and efficacy issues. Applications for listing 
on the PBS are considered by the independent Pharmaceutical 
Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) which consists of medical 
specialists, general practitioners, a pharmacist and a consumer 
representative. When recommending which drugs and medicinal 
preparations should be subsidized through the PBS, the Committee 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------- 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, December 
18, 2003 
must be assured that the drug is effective, safe and cost-effective in 
comparison with other available treatments. 
 
Price Control Policies: 
The majority of prescriptions are written for medications that are 
subsidized under the PBS. The price of all products listed on the 
PBS are reviewed annually by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing 
Authority (PBPA). The price reviewed and agreed to with suppliers 
is at the price to pharmaceutical level (which includes a 10% 
wholesaler’s margin).  
 
In reviewing the price of listed items and in considering the price of 
items recommended for listing, the Authority takes into account the 
following factors: 
1- PBAC comments on clinical and cost effectiveness aspects 
of items; 
2- The price of alternative brands of a drug; 
3- Comparative prices of drugs in the same therapeutic 
group; 
4- Cost information provided by the supplier; 
5- Prescription volumes, economies of scale and other factors 
such as expiry dating, storage requirements, product 
stability and special manufacturing requirements; 
6- The level of activity being undertaken by a company in 
Australia, including new investment, production, R&D 
7- Prices of the drug in reasonably comparable countries; 
8- Other relevant factors which the applicant company may 
with the Authority to consider; and 
9- Any directions of the Minister. 
 
Pricing methods used by the PBPA: 
1- Benchmark pricing 
2- Cost Plus Method 
3- Average Monthly Treatment Cost 
 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
Prices for New Items: 
The main mechanism to determine initial prices is the advice of the 
PBAC which provides advice on clinical effectiveness and cost 
effectiveness (value of money). In recent years the PBAC has 
increasingly recommended the use of price/volume arrangements. 
 
Special Cases for Pricing: 
Brand premiums:  
Therapeutic Group Premium Arrangements 
Special Patient Contribution Arrangements 
 
------------------------ 
The Australian market for pharmaceuticals stood at around US$4.9 
billion in 2002, equal to US$248 per capita. The per capita figure is 
relatively low for a developed country due to a number of reasons. 
Drug prices are relatively low in Australia, compared with many 
other developed markets, principally due to government price 
controls. Medicines Australia has estimated that around 87% of 
drugs are priced below the OECD average. Despite continued 
pricing and reimbursement pressures, growth in the market stood at 
around 9.5% (local currency terms) in 2002. This partly reflects the 
increasing use of the newest, most expensive drugs. 
Austria 
(LSE Health): 
Kanavos, Panos, 
“Austria: 
Pharmaceutical 
Pricing and 
Reimbursement” 
2001. 
A new pricing and reimbursement system was introduced in 
October 1998, replacing price controls with a price-contracting 
scheme involving price/volume agreements and rebates on excess 
sales. Companies will propose a price to the Krankenkassen, giving 
all necessary supporting data. The two parties will come to an 
agreement on price as well as on rebates if agreed sales volumes are 
exceeded. The product will then be placed on the Social Security 
Reimbursement list. The paybacks will take the form of either a 
price cut or a cash rebate depending on the number of packs sold. 
The previous price law is unaffected, since it provides only that the 
Minister of Health “may” set maximum prices. For the first time, 
the agreement provides companies the opportunity to choose 
between the net price contracts, which have been the norm in 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
Austria and price/volume contracts. 
Belgium 
(LSE Health) 
Kanavos, Panos & 
Eggermont, Michael, 
“Belgium: 
Pharmaceutical 
Pricing and 
Reimbursement”, 
2001. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-------------------- 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, May 19, 
2003. 
Price setting: A medicine authorized by the Medicines Commission 
cannot be sold in Belgium until its price has been set by the 
Ministry of Economic Affairs. The price may be forced downwards 
later on, if reimbursement status is sought. Pharmaceutical 
companies submit their price application simultaneously to the 
Transparency Commission (Ministry of Health) and the 
Commission des Prix Specialites Pgharmaceutiques (CPSP; Pricing 
Commission) which advises the Ministry of Economic Affairs. 
The Pricing Commission is supposed to reach a unanimous 
decision, but if no consensus is reached all voting members advise 
the Minister of Economic Affairs independently. The Minister does 
not need to provide a justification for the price decided upon. As 
part of the government’s efforts to speed up the overall approval, 
pricing and reimbursement times, the price setting process is 
parallel to the registration process. 
No formal system has been yet developed for comparing prices. 
Members of CPSP believe that setting a fair price is very difficult, 
largely because of the cost of data (or transfer price) supplied by 
the applicant are not sufficiently specified or transparent to 
determine which cost components are included (or double counted) 
and how much is spent in R&D. Therefore, especially for NCEs, 
they resort to comparing prices with prices of the same products in 
other EU member states and with prices of similar products already 
reimbursed in Belgium. In addition to that particular attention is 
placed on general and administrative costs, investment in R&D and 
salary costs.  
There is no regulation that specifically changes the price of a 
pharmaceutical product when its patent expires. Generics must be 
at least 20% cheaper than the branded product to qualify for 
reimbursement. 
In March 1994, a law was passed to allow companies to negotiate 
price-volume contracts for innovative products. 
 
Price revisions: 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
Price revisions (price freezes and cuts) have been very frequent and 
are partly associated with the country’s efforts to meet the 
Maastricht convergence criteria. 
 
 
---------------------------- 
Cost Control Policy:  
Since 1990, the drug industry has been subject to a tax on 
pharmaceutical revenues generated by sales of reimbursable drugs. 
Initially set at 2.5%, the tax has been revised several times and 
reached 4.5% in 2001. The sales tax represents an annual charge of 
around 75 million euros to the pharmaceutical industry. In 1996, 
the Belgian authorities began to implement a number of measures 
to curtail rising drug expenditure, including a price freeze on all 
reimbursable pharmaceuticals, a 2% price reduction on all 
pharmaceutical specialties and a 4% price reduction on drugs 
registered for more than 15 years.  
 
The price reduction for drugs registered for more than 15 years 
(which was subsequently increased to 8% in 1999 and 12% in 
2000) has largely been justified by the fact that Belgian prices for 
older drugs are above the European average. However, the 
pharmaceutical industry is concerned that the measure applies not 
only to old molecules but to all generic forms containing these old 
molecules, despite the fact that these new preparations have their 
own R&D costs.  
 
In 2000, further price control measures included a 20% reduction in 
the price of large drug packs, and selective price cuts for drugs in 
high volume therapeutic classes. In late 1999, the Ministry of 
Social Affairs asked the CTSP to investigate the possibility of 
simplifying reimbursement procedures for certain groups of drugs 
in exchange for significant price cuts from the manufacturers in 
question. In January 2001, an agreement was reached which saw 
the price of H2 antagonists cut by one third. In exchange for the 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
price cut, prescriptions for H2 antagonists no longer require pre-
approval from INAMI.  
 
According to the pharmaceutical industry, AGIM, the overall bill to 
the pharmaceutical industry of the government's price control 
measures between 1990 and 2002 amounted to 1.4 billion euros, of 
which 169 million euros in 2000 alone. 
Canada 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, May 26, 
2004. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) was created 
in 1987 to ensure the pricing of patented medicines is not 
‘excessive’. The PMPRB reviews the prices of all new and existing 
patented products, whether they are prescription or over-the-
counter (OTC) drugs, and has annually published pricing guidelines 
for manufacturers since 1989. While the PMPRB operates a policy 
of voluntary compliance, additional powers were given to the board 
in 1993 under Bill C-91, whereby the Board can reduce excessive 
prices set by manufacturers, return excess revenues to the federal 
government, and fine or imprison the violator. Manufacturers are 
required to report introductory prices within 60 days of the first sale 
and continue to provide price and sale information for each six 
month period while the drug remains patented. 
 
While there is no requirement for a manufacturer to seek the 
approval of the PMPRB before implementing a price increase, the 
PMPRB expects manufacturers to comply with the Guidelines. The 
PMPRB monitors prices as part of its regulatory mandate, to ensure 
this is the case. 
 
Under the PMPRB Guidelines, price increases are limited to 
increases in the Consumer Prices Index (CPI). In 2002, the prices of 
patented medicines declined by an average of 1.2% compared with 
the previous year. In 2004, the price increases allowed for 
patented drug products are based on the forecast increase in the CPI 
of 2.2%. The Guidelines allow a larger increase in some cases, but 
never more than 3.3%. 
 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
 
----------------------- 
(LSE Health) Corvari, 
Ron, King, Derek and 
Sanidas, Micheal, 
“Canada-
Pharmaceutical 
Pricing and 
Reimbursement”, 
2001. 
 
 
Policies at the Federal Level: Pricing of Patented 
Pharmaceuticals: 
The Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB) is an 
independent quasi judicial body which protects consumer interests 
and contributes to Canadian health care by ensuring that prices 
charged by manufacturers of patented medicines are not excessive. 
The PMPRB is responsible for regulating the prices that patentees 
charge for prescription and non-prescription patented drugs sold in 
Canada for human and veterinary use to ensure that they are not 
excessive. If, after a public hearing, the Board finds that a price is 
excessive it may order the patentee to reduce the price and take 
measures to offset any excessive revenues it may have received. In 
many cases the price reviewed by the PMPRB is the “factory gate”  
price at which the manufacturer sells the product to wholesalers, 
hospitals or pharmacies. The PMPRB’s jurisdiction includes 
patented medicines marketed or distributed under voluntary 
licenses, has no authority to regulate the prices of non-patented 
drugs, including generic drugs sold under compulsory licenses and 
does not have jurisdiction over prices charged by wholesalers or 
retailers nor even pharmacists’ professional fees. 
 
The PMPRB regulates the price of each patented drug product, 
including each strength of each dosage form of a patented 
medicines. 
 
Excessive price guidelines: 
The Patent Act stipulates those factors that the Board, during the 
course of a public hearing, must take into consideration when 
determining whether a medicine is being sold or has been sold at an 
excessive price. These factors are: 
- 
the prices at which the medicine has been sold in the 
relevant market; 
- 
the prices of other medicines in the same therapeutic class; 
- 
the prices of the medicines and of the other medicines in 
other countries; 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
- 
changes in the Consumer Price Index; and 
- 
such other factors as may be specified by regulations. 
If after considering these factors, the Board is unable to determine 
if a price is excessive, it may consider the costs of making and 
marketing the medicine as well as well as other factors, which can 
be specified by regulations or that the Board considers relevant in 
the circumstances. 
The PMPRB reviews the average price of each strength of an 
individual dosage from of each patented medicine. In most cases, 
the unit is consistent with the assigned Drug Identification Number, 
or DIN. 
The Regulations provide for the reporting of the average price per 
package or the net revenue from each package size of a DIN. 
Pursuant to the Regulations, the average price or the net revenue 
should take into account reductions given as a promotion or in the 
form of rebates, discounts, refunds, free goods, free services, gifts 
and other such benefits. 
The Board, in consultation with interested parties, has developed 
various tests to determine whether the price of a drug product is 
within the Guidelines. 
The Reasonable Relationship Test considers the association 
between the strength and the price of the same medicine in the 
same or comparable dosage forms. The reasonable relationship test 
defines a maximum non excessive introductory price for the DIN. 
The determination will be based on one of three possible tests: 
Test 1: Same Strength Test 
Test 2: Unit Price Linear Relationship Test 
Test 3: Different Strength Test 
 
The Therapeutic Class Comparison Test compares the price of the 
DIN under review with the prices of DINs that are clinically 
equivalent and are sold in the same markets at prices that the Board 
considers not to be excessive. 
 
The International Price Comparison Test compares the average 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
transaction price of the DIN under review with the publicly 
available ex-factory prices of the same medicine sold in countries 
listed in the Regulations (Germany, France, Italy, Sweden, 
Switzerland, The United Kingdom and the United States) 
Czech 
Republic 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, August 19, 
2003. 
Czech drug reimbursement levels are tightly controlled by the 
government, and are considered to be among the lowest in Europe. 
The relevant legislation is No. 509/2002, which replaced the older 
drug decree 57/1997. The basic format of the price/reimbursement 
system remains the same, however. 
 
Prices for all pharmaceuticals are controlled through the reference 
pricing system which only allows for the defined daily dose of the 
cheapest drug within a therapeutic category to be reimbursed. More 
expensive drugs are prescribed subject to patient co-payment. 
Denmark 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, June 16, 
2003 
The pricing of all goods in Denmark is monitored by the 
Competition Council, which has the authority to intervene against 
unreasonable prices. Prices are assessed on the basis of necessary 
production and marketing costs. Since 1983, however, special 
consideration has been given to intensive research and development 
based industries, such as the pharmaceutical industry. The Council 
has not, since the 1983 Act was passed, had cause to intervene 
against prices of medicinal products set by manufacturers and 
importers. 
 
Following the introduction of price freezing in January 1994, free 
pricing for prescription pharmaceuticals ceased in Denmark. In 
March 1995, the Ministry of Health entered into an agreement with 
the pharmaceutical industry, whereby importers and manufacturers 
reduced the prices of prescription drugs covered by the 
reimbursement scheme by five per cent. Non-reimbursable 
prescription drugs and OTCs were subject to a two per cent price 
reduction. This agreement was in force until 1st April 1997, by 
which time no new agreement had been reached with the industry 
on further price reductions. As a result, Act number 224 was 
passed, introducing a temporary price freeze for medicinal 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
products. Under the Act, companies were restricted to the pharmacy 
purchase prices in force as of 24th March 1997. For new products, 
first marketed after 1st April 1997, the price could not exceed the 
initial notified price before 1st March 1998, although exceptions 
were allowed in special circumstances under the authority of the 
Danish Medicines Agency. 
 
The two-year pricing agreement between the Danish 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers' Association (Lif) and the Ministry 
of Health ended in March 2000, allowing companies to fix their 
own prices. The agreement, introduced in February 1998, allowed 
limited growth in health insurance reimbursement spending of 0.8% 
in 1998 and 3% in 1999. In addition, the prices of reimbursable 
products could not increase before 1st March 2000, and OTCs were 
restricted to a 5% increase over the same period. 
 
In December 2000, another price freeze was introduced. The freeze 
covered reimbursable pharmaceutical products and has caused 
some controversy due to different price ceilings placed on products 
sold only in Denmark and those also sold in other European 
countries. Prices for products in the first category were fixed as at 
17th November 2000. Prices for products sold outside Denmark 
were calculated by taking the average price in other European 
countries as at 17th November. If the average was less than the 
Danish price, then the average price applied. This price freeze 
lasted until 25th June 2001, when a new scheme was introduced, 
whereby prices cannot exceed the average price for the same 
medicine sold elsewhere in northern Europe. The countries selected 
for comparison include 11 EU member states along with Iceland, 
Liechtenstein and Norway, but exclude Greece, Luxembourg, 
Portugal or Spain. 
 
Since October 1991, wholesalers' profits have been determined by 
competition and are fixed as a result of individual negotiations 
between wholesalers and manufacturers or importers. Pharmacy 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
gross profits are usually fixed in accordance with agreements 
between the Ministry of Health and the Association of Danish 
Pharmacy Proprietors. As a result of the agreement between Lif and 
the Ministry of Health, the pharmacies' gross profit for 1998 was 
set at DKr 1,876 billion. 
 
As with other commodities in Denmark, medicinal products are 
subject to VAT, currently at 25% of consumer prices. 
 
Transparency Lists 
Subsequent to the introduction of the reference price system in 
1993, the Ministry of Health publishes quarterly reference price 
lists, which also contain price comparisons for the medicinal 
products covered by the scheme. The National Board of Health 
informs pharmacists fortnightly of the prices of all available 
medicinal products on the market for comparison purposes. General 
practitioners may also subscribe to this information. 
 
Generic substitution 
Since 1991, a generic substitution scheme, the 'G' scheme, has been 
in operation in Denmark. Under the original scheme, doctors were 
able to choose to write a generic prescription, leaving the choice of 
drug to the pharmacist. Since 19th May 1997, however, a 'G' has 
been printed on all prescriptions and the scheme has effectively 
operated in reverse. In effect, when a pharmacist receives a 'G' 
prescription, the cheapest generic product should be dispensed, 
unless the doctor specifically marks the prescription to the contrary. 
Substitution is mandatory in the following circumstances: 
* For medicinal products priced at less than DKr 100, the 
pharmacist must substitute the medication for the cheapest product, 
if this is at least DKr 5 below the price of the product prescribed by 
the doctor; 
* For medicinal products priced at DKr 100 and upwards, the 
pharmacist must substitute when a product is available at five per 
cent or DKr 20 below the price of the prescribed product. 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
Patients must be informed of generic substitution, however, and 
have the right to refuse. In addition, pharmacists are obliged to 
inform patients of price differences between original products and 
parallel imported products, following the same guidelines as for 
generic products. 
 
In June 1997, a notice was published by the Board of Medicines 
instructing doctors how to declare non-substitution preferences on 
the prescription form. The instructions allow doctors to request no 
substitution, no generic substitution, or no substitution with a 
parallel import with a different name from the Danish original. The 
notice states that if the doctor does not state that a specific product 
must be dispensed, and if a parallel import with the same name is 
available, then the pharmacist may dispense either the original or 
the parallel import under the previous guidelines. 
France 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, November 
18, 2003. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The prices of reimbursable drugs are regulated by the government, 
whereas all other drug prices, i.e. non-reimbursable drugs, and 
drugs sold to hospitals, are freely set by manufacturers. Since 1994, 
the price of reimbursable drugs has been set on the basis of 
negotiations between the company concerned and an 
interministerial drugs pricing committee initially known as CEM 
(Comite Economique du Medicament) and then as CEPS (Comite 
Economique des Produits de Sante) within the context of a series of 
industry framework agreements which were signed in January 
1994, July 1999 and June 2003. In recent years, the pricing system 
has placed increasing emphasis on the real therapeutic value of 
products and the work of CEPS has been strengthened through the 
establishment of a group of experts in the pharmaceutical 
economics field to assist the pricing committee in its assessment of 
product value and the criteria for proving clinical improvements 
over existing products has been strengthened. 
 
The pricing process for new products incorporates a number of 
phases, involving CEPS and the Transparency Commission, which 
is charged with assessing the medical value of products. Once an 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
application has been received, the Transparency Commission 
assesses the product and gives it a value rating known as the ASMR 
(amelioration du service medical rendu). This decision is then 
communicated to the pricing committee which enters into 
negotiations with the company. Price setting is based on the 
product's ASMR rating, prices of comparable medicines and 
projected consumption levels. Pricing decisions are then published 
in the Official Journal. A total of 1,162 drug pricing applications 
were received by CEPS in 2002, a fall of 35% over the 1,785 
applications made in 2001. Generics accounted for around 36% of 
applications (31% in 2001). During 2002, CEPS dealt with 1,688 
applications from 142 companies, up 12% on 2001. The increase in 
activity enabled the backlog of applications, which had been rising 
steadily in recent years, to be cut from 1,319 at the end of 2001 to 
793, of which 384 concerned first-time registrations. 
 
In recent years, the CEPS has been trying to speed up its decision-
making time in line with EU time limits. In 1996, only 17% of 
products were dealt with in 180 days or less, and the majority of 
these were generics. By 1999, drug pricing decisions were taking 
an average of 196 days, close to the EU target, with generics 
averaging 166 days and products approved through the European 
centralized procedures taking an average of 231 days. However, the 
average time taken to reach a pricing decision rose again in 2001 
and 2002 to 202 days and 243 days respectively. This was despite 
the fact that the government had pledged to further reduce the 
length of the pricing process by speeding up communication 
between the Transparency Commission and the CEPS, and by 
reducing delays (currently around two months) in officially 
publishing pricing decisions. In 2002, first-time registrations were 
processed in an average of 216 days up from 186 days in 2001 and 
177 days in 2000, when 68% of applications were dealt with in less 
than six months. Applications for generics were processed faster at 
an average of 135 days for all generic applications and 99 days for 
first-time registrations. The longest time lapse was recorded for line 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
extensions, which took an average of 337 days. 
 
According to CEPS, one of the reasons the average time to reach a 
pricing decision was so much higher in 2002 was its success in 
cutting the backlog of applications last year, meaning that the 
committee's workload included a greater proportion of longstanding 
applications than in previous years. The contract pricing agreement 
between CEPS and the pharmaceutical industry includes a clause 
designed to speed up pricing decisions on products approved 
through the European centralized system. This allows companies to 
submit pricing applications to the CEPS, following a favorable 
decision by the Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products 
(CPMP), but before an official authorization has been published. 
 
Following the signing of a second industry framework agreement in 
July 1999, all companies with sales over 15 million euros were 
required to sign a contract with the pricing committee before the 
end of 1999 or be subject to a payback mechanism if annual drug 
spending targets are exceeded. Price contracts, valid for a 
maximum of four years, set agreed prices for all of a company's 
reimbursable products, and also cover other factors such as annual 
growth targets, and levels of promotional spending. The pricing 
system also incorporates a new rebate system, whereby individual 
companies are required to pay back a certain percentage if their 
sales levels exceed the agreed annual growth targets. This is in 
addition to an industry-wide rebate system, which the government 
can impose if sales growth in certain therapeutic classes is deemed 
excessive in comparison to the overall annual growth rates for 
pharmaceutical expenditure. 
 
The pricing committee also launched an initiative to eliminate wide 
variations in prices within therapeutic categories, particularly for 
those products that have been on the market for many years. This 
process, which involved drawing up average daily treatment costs 
for commonly used products, has resulted in a series of imposed 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------ 
“Why Foreign Drugs 
are Cheaper”, The 
National Journal, 
April 17, 2004 
price cuts in recent years. The five product categories initially 
targeted were vein tonics, vasodilators, calcium supplements, 
magnesium supplements and mucolytics. The pricing review is 
separate to a review of all reimbursed products launched in mid-
1999 by the Transparency Commission to assess at what level 
products should be reimbursed, if at all (see reimbursement below 
for further details). 
 
In addition to price cuts resulting from the Transparency 
Commission's review, CEPS also implemented a series of price cuts 
in 2001 targeting mainly well established high volume products, 
which were registering high growth rates. A total of 103 products in 
253 presentations were affected by this procedure, comprising 
mainly statins and sartan cardiovasculars, PPIs, antibiotics, 
antidepressants, H1 antihistamines, growth hormones, triptans and 
setrons. Price reductions ranged from 1% to 15%, the majority 
being 4%-5%. CEPS assesses the overall saving at 202 million 
euros, based on sales volumes in 2000. Whereas the price cuts due 
to insufficient medical benefit have tended to affect mainly French 
firms, many multinationals, including GSK, Novartis Pharma, 
MSD-Chibret, Roche and Lilly, were affected by this measure and 
in some cases relatively new products had their prices reduced. 
 
A third framework agreement was signed between the government 
and the pharmaceutical industry in June 2003. The agreement, 
which runs until 2006, maintains the system of rebates incorporated 
into the previous framework agreement, but introduces a new 
pricing system for innovative medicines, which should enable 
companies to benefit from higher prices for these products. Under 
the new system, manufacturers of new products given a medical 
value rating of I or II can request a price (valid for five years) 
broadly in line with price levels of other major European markets 
(Germany, Italy, Spain, UK), provided the company agrees to 
recompense the social security system in the event of its initial sales 
forecasts being exceeded. Products given a rating of III may also 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
benefit from this system provided their sales levels are not expected 
to exceed 40 million euros by the third year of marketing. 
According to the pharmaceutical industry association LEEM, 
around 15 new drugs will be eligible each year. The agreement also 
promises to cut the time it takes for important new drugs to come to 
market. A target of no more than 180 days has been set for drugs 
approved under the centralized European procedure and for drugs 
with a value rating of III or IV. Innovative products processed 
under the price proposal procedure will benefit from even shorter 
times; 70 to 80 days according to LEEM, which is hoping that 
actual approval times for other drugs with a medical benefit of IV 
or higher will average 120-130 days. Pharmacy margins are agreed 
with the government. LEEM calculates that in 2002 pharmacists 
received an average of 25.2% of the retail price of a reimbursable 
drug, while manufacturers received 66% of the total price and 3.3% 
went to wholesalers. The remaining 5.5% went to the government 
in the form of value added tax (2.1%), and other charges (taxes on 
advertising, levies on direct sales etc). 
 
In September 1999, a new pharmaceutical distribution margin 
system came into effect. Designed in part to encourage generic 
substitution by pharmacists, the new system replaced the former 
six-tier mark-up with a two-tier mark-up of 26.1% on products 
costing up to 23 euros (ex-factory prices) and 10% on those costing 
more than 23 euros, in addition to a dispensing fee of 0.5 euros per 
pack. An additional payment of 0.3 euros is made for some 40 
special products including HIV/AIDS medications, preparations 
used in the treatment of drug/alcohol addiction, and stupefacients. 
At the same time, generics were allocated a special mark-up, 
equivalent to the margin applicable to the originator product within 
each generic group. Whilst pharmacists have benefited from a more 
favorable system of margins, wholesalers, who were recently 
criticized in a report by the French Court of Accounts for making 
excessive profits, stand to lose out, partly through lower wholesale 
margins, and partly because pharmaceutical manufacturers are now 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
able to offer discounts of up to 10.74% on the wholesale price of 
generics, compared to 2.5% on reimbursable drugs. Figures from 
LEEM reveal that while the cost of living more than doubled 
between 1980 and 2000, the retail price of pharmaceutical products 
increased by only 34% over the same period. According to SNIP, 
pharmaceutical prices in France, though still not comparable to 
those in free-pricing countries such as the UK and Germany, are 
beginning to differ from those in other countries applying a 
controlled price policy (e.g. Italy and Spain). Overall, French prices 
are close to the European average, but they remain more than 20% 
lower than prices in the UK and Germany, although they are 30% 
higher than prices in Spain. 
----------------------------- 
How Drug Prices Are Determined: 
France, which has a national health care system, caps the total 
amount it will pay for drugs annually nationwide. At the 
beginning of each year, drugmakers enter into price and volume 
agreements with the government. Once a drugmaker sells to the 
limit, the firm must pay the government a rebate for any additional 
sales. 
 
Pharmaceutical Industry Complaint: 
U.S. drug companies say the volume caps often work against drugs 
that sell well. They say they cannot in good conscience stop 
supplying drugs partway through the year and that companies are 
penalized for any drugs they furnish after reaching their volume 
limit. 
 
Current Status: 
The French government is crafting regulations to get newer, 
innovative drugs into the market faster. In the meantime, while 
drug companies are waiting for approval to sell a new drug, they 
can enter the market and set their own price for six months. 
Germany 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
The 12th Amendment to Medicines Law & Health Reform 2004 
came into force 1st January 2004 as part of the GKV modernization 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
Markets 
Pharmaceuticals, 
May 26, 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
legislation and the overall reform project called ‘Agenda 2010’. 
The law superseded and built up on the 11th Amendment and 
continued to focus on cost containment. Following points form the 
cornerstone of this amendment: 
 
- Increased compulsory rebate: manufacturers, which under the 
11th Amendment had to grant a 6% rebate, from 2004 have to grant 
a 16% rebate. At the same time rebates previously given by 
wholesalers have been reduced roughly by half. Pharmacies will 
now receive a fixed amount (8.10 euros) per issued prescription in 
addition to a 3% sales margin. From the selling price pharmacies 
will then have to grant a 2% rebate to the statutory sickness funds. 
- Extension of the GKV reference price mechanism to patented 
prescription drugs: patent protected drugs are to be become subject 
of the GKV reference price mechanism as soon as three 
preparations of a substance class are on the market. This new move 
is largely a response to a declining effectiveness of the GKV 
pricing mechanism because patent protected drugs brought onto the 
market after 1996 were exempt from the mechanism, thus leading 
to a shrinking segment which is actually subject to GKV reference 
pricing (from 59.9% in 1997, to 50.0% in 2000 to 36.8% in 2002). 
With the new regulation, only products with a clear therapeutic 
improvement would be exempt from what is effectively a pricing 
system for patent protected drugs (though manufactures can set 
prices higher than GKV guidelines, with the patient however 
having to pay the difference). Under initial plans the extension and 
new regulation was to come into force October 1st 2004, although 
the decision has been delayed several times and, based on latest 
information, a decision is not expected before 15th June. The 
principal bone of contention relates to interpretation when a drug 
has an actual therapeutic improvement. 
- Bonus system for doctors prescribing generic and cheaper 
versions. 
- Extension of ‘aut-idem’ regulation: on top of pharmacies having 
to dispense a cheap equal (aut-idem) preparation to the patient 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
------------------ 
“Why Foreign Drugs 
are Cheaper”, The 
National Journal, 
April 17, 2004 
unless a doctor specifies a certain drug, it is now compulsory for 
pharmacies to dispense a cheaper drug even when a already cheap 
drug was prescribed by the doctor. Industry had argued for an 
extension of fixed price brackets instead of having compulsory drug 
substitution alongside these fixed prices. 
- Restriction of re-imbursement of OTC medicines: as of 1st 
January 2004 many non-prescription drugs will no longer be 
reimbursed by the GKV. Exceptions are made for drugs that are 
taken in relation to severe illnesses.  
- Restriction of certain prescription drugs: certain drugs will no 
longer be reimbursed if the insured has reached the age of 18.Also 
restricted are medications which are primarily aimed at improving 
the quality of live rather than cure a condition. 
-‘un-economical’drugs or ones with unproven, clear scientific 
benefit and classified as such back in 1990 are no longer 
reimbursed. 
- Mail order of medicines, including prescription drugs, has been 
allowed since 1st January 2004. 
- Patient co-payments: patients will have to pay a 10% co-payment 
per prescription, which is a minimum of 5 euros and a maximum of 
10 euros. This will effectively make cheaper drugs more expensive, 
while expensive ones become relatively cheaper. Co-payment 
expenditure is limited to a maximum of 2% of gross annual income, 
for chronic illnesses the limit is 1%. 
 
People qualifying for an exemption or limitation include: 
• children and adolescents aged below 18 years 
• pregnant women if drugs are needed due to pregnancy 
• patients who were exempted by status (welfare recipients, 
unemployment aid recipients, students, etc.) 
• insurants with a low monthly income (single persons earning less 
than 952 euros, persons with one child) 
• If income below 1,309 euros; for each additional relative in the 
household the limit is raised by 238 euros 
• chronic sick persons from further co-payments if they spent more 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
than 1% of their income for treatment of the same disease 
• generally all insurants above a limit of 2% of their income 
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
How Drug Prices Are Determined: 
Germany, which buys more drugs than any other country in 
Europe, engages in reference pricing. 
 
Pharmaceutical Industry Complaint: 
U.S. drugmakers oppose reference pricing because they say it sets 
prices too low for innovative drugs. 
 
Current Status: 
Germany excluded innovative drugs from reference pricing in 
1996, but it will reinstitute the practice next year because of budget 
pressures. Until then, drugmakers must pay the government a 16 
percent rebate on all sales of innovative drugs. 
Greece 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, August 19, 
2003 
Pharmaceutical pricing in Greece continues to be an area of much 
contention. Government legislation on pricing, introduced in 1997, 
basing prices for pharmaceutical products on the lowest price of the 
product in the EU, remains a source of considerable debate. The 
legislation cut wholesalers' profit margins from 5.8% to 5.0%, and 
pharmacists' profit margins to 21%. The maximum price for 
generics was reduced from 86% to 80% of the original drug's price. 
In November 2000, the EU referred Greece to the European Court 
of Justice over its pricing system, claiming it violated the treaty on 
the free movement of goods. The EU has also claimed that pricing 
and reimbursement processes fail to comply with measures set out 
in the EU price transparency directive, criticizing in particular the 
mechanics of its reimbursement system. 
 
In November 2001 the Council of State issued their decision, to 
abolish the regulation providing that the prices of medicinal 
products were approved under the condition that they did not 
exceed the lowest price that they have in the other European 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
countries. According to Greek legislation after the abolishment of 
the regulation in question the determination of the prices of 
medicinal products must be based on the former method applied 
(average of three lowest prices in Europe). Although the court 
decision was served, the Ministry of Development proceeded to 
issue a pricing bulletin based on the previous rules, contrary to the 
EU judgment. Subsequently, the SFEE deposited two applications 
to the Council of State for the annulment and suspension of the 
above price bulletin. The Minister asked for a dialogue with the 
industry in order to find a compromise solution on the issue of 
pricing of medical products. This issue is unlikely to be resolved in 
the near future. 
 
The pharmaceutical industry association, the SFEE, has also voiced 
its concern over the consequences of the country's pricing system, 
most notably with regard to the possibility of drug shortages. The 
SFEE claims that the low drug prices in Greece will lead to drug 
shortages, as wholesalers are bulk buying pharmaceuticals solely to 
parallel export them to high-priced markets, such as the UK and 
Germany. Multinational companies have declared their readiness to 
downsize or even close manufacturing operations in the face of the 
low prices, with many already refusing to fulfill exceptionally large 
orders. The government, however, has refused to implement 
universal price increases, only suggesting that companies apply for 
individual price rises. 
Ireland 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, November 
18, 2003 
Under an agreement between the Department of Health and 
Children and the Irish Pharmaceutical Healthcare Association 
(IPHA), drug prices in Ireland are currently subject to a price freeze 
which has been in effect since 1st August 1997 and extended to 
31st July 2001. Since this date, either party may give 12 months 
notice of renegotiations.  
 
The agreement covers all reimbursable prescription medicines 
under the three Community Drug Schemes (outlined below) and all 
medicines supplied to hospitals and health boards. Under the 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
agreement, the price of any new pharmaceutical products 
introduced to Ireland after 1st August 1997 should not exceed the 
lesser of the currency adjusted UK wholesale price and the average 
wholesale price in five reference countries (Denmark, France, 
Germany, Netherlands and the UK). The DoH may also request 
cost-benefit studies for new chemical entities. Prices of existing 
products can be reviewed if the cumulative average increase or 
decrease of the wholesale pharmaceutical price indices is more than 
10% in the aforementioned countries. 
Italy 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, February 24, 
2004 
In 1994, the Italian government introduced a controversial new 
pricing system under which pharmaceutical prices are calculated 
using a 'European average price', as a reference price for drugs on 
the Italian market. The legislation ruled that all drugs priced above 
the reference price had to be reduced immediately to that level, 
while those products with lower prices could raise their prices over 
a five year period, at the rate of one increment per year. 
 
In 1995, across the board price cuts of between 2.5% and 5% were 
imposed on the industry. Companies with less than 10% growth in 
turnover between 1993-94 were compelled to make a 2.5% price 
cut, while those with growth exceeding 10% suffered a price cut of 
5%. In 1996, the 'same price for same drugs principle' was 
introduced, reducing the prices of reimbursed drugs to that of the 
cheapest product in each therapeutic group, leaving companies with 
the choice of reducing their prices or having their products de-
listed. 
The system was heavily criticized by the pharmaceutical industry, 
which claimed it had led to prices in Italy being up to 30% lower 
than the EU average. The main problems stemmed from the criteria 
used to calculate the 'European average price', since it was based on 
prices in only four of the 15 EU countries (France, Spain, Germany 
and the UK), it included generic drugs in pricing comparisons, and 
used purchasing power parity (PPP) as a currency conversion 
mechanism. In many cases, particularly with regard to innovative 
products, it was not profitable for manufacturers to market their 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
products in Italy since prices had fallen so low that imported 
products could only be sold at a loss. The system was, in effect, 
preventing manufacturers from trading in Italy, and therefore 
probably in contravention with Article 30 of the Treaty of Rome by 
restricting the free circulation of goods. The European Commission 
believed this may be the case, and sent Italy a letter of 'formal 
notice' citing possible infringement of EU law in 1996. Italy's 
Council for State followed up the EU action and ordered the 
Comitato Interministeriale per la Programmazione Economica 
(CIPE - Interministerial Economic Planning Committee) to change 
its pricing method. 
 
The revised pricing system was eventually finalized in 1998, 
providing for the use of up to 12 EU countries for pricing 
comparisons. Products must be marketed in at least four countries, 
however, two of which must have direct pricing controls. The new 
system also uses actual exchange rates rather than PPPs. An 
additional complication is the calculation of 'average weighted 
sales'. The sales and consumption of specific presentations in 
various markets is calculated to give a 'unit cost' which is taken into 
consideration when deciding the Italian price. 
 
The new system was effective from 1st July 1998. As a result, price 
increases were announced for 2,415 reimbursed products in six 
annual stages, while 333 products were subjected to immediate 
price cuts. The European Commission was still not satisfied, 
however, since generics remained in the price comparisons and the 
new system did not compensate companies for the low prices in 
force under the previous system. 
 
Further changes were initiated through the 1999 finance bill. Under 
the bill, products which were initially allocated non-reimbursement 
status and have since been admitted to the reimbursement list, and 
products which received market authorization through the national 
system, are subject to automatic price cuts of 15%. Subsequently, 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
the prices of the affected products will be increased to the 'average 
European price' level in six annual stages. 
 
Following complaints that the 'average European price' mechanism 
made it unprofitable for some companies to import and sell their 
products in Italy, a situation which was deemed to be a violation of 
the European Union free movement of goods, the CIPE introduced 
a further change to the pricing procedure. Companies with reason to 
believe prices for their products have been set too low under this 
procedure should supply documentation detailing the costs incurred 
in marketing the products in Italy, along with the price set using the 
average European price system. The documentation will be 
examined by a special committee, which will begin a price 
negotiation with the company within 45 days. A final decision will 
be made within the succeeding 45 days. 
 
The prices of innovative products approved through the EU 
centralized and mutual recognition procedures are negotiated 
between manufacturers and the government under a CIPE 
regulation, using pharmacoeconomic criteria. 
 
A variety of factors are considered in the calculation of a product 
price, for example, cost-benefit ratio, marketing costs, size of the 
market, the price elsewhere in Europe, domestic sales forecasts, and 
estimated patient numbers. A product's innovative quality and 
therapeutic value is taken into account, as is patient outcome and 
savings to the SSN, for example, through reduction in hospital stay 
and reduced use of healthcare services. Prices agreed through 
negotiations are liable to review every two years, and adjusted if 
sales exceed forecasts. The negotiation procedure should be 
completed within 60 days of receipt of a company's application. 
 
The CIPE regulation does not, however, detail the 
pharmacoeconomic methodology to be used or the studies 
companies should submit to the government. For this reason, the 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
Italian Group for Pharmacoeconomic Studies (GISF) drafted some 
basic guidelines in 1999. Class C drugs, which include OTC 
products, are not subject to government price controls. During 
1998, a 'code of conduct' was agreed between the industry 
association, Farmindustria, the OTC association, Assosalute, and 
the Ministry of Health, following criticism from consumer groups 
about price increases. Under the code, companies agreed to increase 
prices only once per year and by a limited amount. Despite the 
industry's good intentions, however, the antitrust authority 
(AGCM) investigated the code and concluded that it eliminated 
competition in a significant proportion of the market and had to be 
discontinued. 
Japan 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, April 22, 
2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The prices of reimbursable drugs are set by the Ministry of Health, 
Labour & Welfare, through the Chuikyo (Central Social Insurance 
Medical Council).  
 
Japan's pricing system is complex and often less than transparent; it 
has long been the subject of international criticism, from PhRMA 
and others, for failing to adequately reflect the value of innovative 
patented drugs. Since 1992, the Chuikyo has accepted economic 
data from manufacturers in support of a preferred price. An appeals 
system was created in October 2000. In 1999, there were 11,288 
drugs listed on the National Health Insurance drug price list. The 
number of listed drugs has tended to fall in recent years, from over 
16,000 in the mid 1980s. More than 2,000 drugs were removed 
from the list in 1995/96. 
 
The future shape of the system is the subject of much debate; a 
government-proposed reference pricing system was due to be 
implemented in April 2000, but has now been indefinitely 
postponed. Drug pricing procedures were, however, altered for 
2001, in a move designed to improve transparency within the 
pricing system. Drug prices are now sent by the MLHW to be 
considered by the Drug Pricing Organisation (DPO), a body 
composed of academics and medical experts. The DPO will review 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
data submitted by the manufacturer, and the MLHW, and will then 
send a price recommendation to the Chuikyo. Once a price has been 
approved by the Chuikyo, the drug should then be listed within 90 
days. Drugs put on the price list must be marketed within three 
months. The DPO is expected to meet at least four times a year. 
 
Yakkasa 
In Japan, there is a difference between the price at which a drug is 
sold by wholesalers and its official reimbursement price, which is 
always higher. In effect a discount offered by wholesalers, this 
price difference is known as 'Yakkasa'. It has long been an 
important source of income for hospitals and dispensing doctors, 
who are naturally not keen to see the current situation ended. The 
level of discount allowed is known as the R Zone (Reasonable 
Zone). This has been reduced in steps since 1992, from 15% to 2-
5% in 1998. The Japanese government has indicated that it will 
abolish the R Zone, and Yakkasa with it, although wholesalers and 
some local manufacturers certainly remain opposed to this. 
 
Price reductions 
Drug price reductions take place in April, usually every other year, 
but sometimes annually. In April 1997, pharmaceutical 
reimbursement prices were reduced by an average of 4.4%. Some 
categories were more severely affected, however. Synthetic 
antibacterial products suffered the biggest cuts, with an average cut 
of 7.1%. Fujisawa's immunosuppressant, Prograf (tactrolimus) was 
subject to a special price cut of 33%, under a rule which permits the 
government to re-price pharmaceuticals where their daily cost is at 
least 40% more than that of similar products. 
 
A further series of wide-ranging price cuts were introduced in April 
1998. The prices of nearly 1,600 prescription drugs were reduced 
by an average of nearly 10%. In April 2000, a maximum 2% R 
Zone was introduced. The effect of this is to bring reimbursed drug 
prices down to the average market price, i.e. discounting margins 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
will disappear. The effect of the reform is expected to lead to an 
average fall of 7% in the price of reimbursed drugs. The price 
reduction for domestic manufacturers works out slightly lower than 
the average, at 6%. There are around 14,000 reimbursable drugs in 
Japan; of these, 8,935 had their prices cut, while only 61 drugs 
received price rises. In April 2002, price cuts amounted to an 
average reduction of 6.3%, resulting in a [yen ]400 billion (US$3.1 
billion) loss in revenue to the domestic pharmaceutical industry. 
Drugs with expired patents faced cuts for the first time, of around 
10%, where in the past government had not lowered reimbursement 
prices The actual figure by prefecture varies from between 13% to 
around 70%, and out of 47 prefectures, nine have a ratio of less 
than 30%. Although official figures have yet to be released, 
industry experts estimate that the government drug price cut due to 
occur in April 2004 will be somewhere between 5-7%. In the 
Japanese healthcare budget for 2002, there was an anticipated [yen 
]280 billion reduction. The reformation of the health insurance 
system was expected to account for [yen]100 billion with the 
remaining [yen]180 billion saving through changes to drug pricing 
and medical fees reimbursement, Prices of both drugs and medical 
materials cut by 1.4%, with reimbursements for technical fees 
slashed by 1.3%, a total reduction of 2.7%. Of these revisions, the 
four most significant changes expected are: 
• 
reduced reimbursement prices for original brand 
products already on the NHI Drug Price List; 
• 
special application of the recalculation rule for 
drugs with modified directions for use or dosage; 
• 
promotion of the use of generic drugs; 
• 
expanded application of the special healthcare 
expenditure. 
Mexico 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, April 11, 
2003 
The pharmaceutical industry is one of the few still subject to 
government price control. In 1996, however, the Mexican Ministry 
of Trade and Industry granted the pharmaceutical industry greater 
flexibility in the drug pricing system, allowing companies to 
increase prices when they choose, instead of at three monthly 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
intervals, as was the case previously. In addition, companies are 
able to forecast the factors on which increases are based, such as 
inflation and exchange rate, rather than waiting for them to be 
published. Under current regulations, maximum drug prices are set 
in consultation with the Secretaria de Salud (Health Secretariat), the 
Secretaria de Comercio y Fomento Industrial (Secretariat of Trade 
and Industrial Development) and the Secretaria de Hacienda y 
Credito Publico (Ministry of Finance).Prescribed medications are 
free of charge to public sector patients. 
The 
Netherlands 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, October 14, 
2003 
Recent efforts by the Dutch government have focused on 
encouraging market forces and competition on prices to keep costs 
low. Pharmaceutical care policy has focused on changing the roles 
and responsibilities of players involved in the supply of medicines 
and promoting cost effective prescribing by doctors. In January 
1996, against strong opposition from the pharmaceutical industry 
association, Nefarma, the new Medicines Price Control Act (Wet 
Geneesmeddelen Prijzen - WGP) was passed, effectively reducing 
prescription drug prices by around 20% to bring them into line with 
average prices in Belgium, France, Germany and the UK. 
Following the adoption of the new law by the Dutch Upper House, 
Health Minister Els Borst announced statutory maximum prices, 
initially for around 3,000 medicines. The maximum price is that 
which can be charged by suppliers to dispensing chemists. 
Administrative fines of around 45,000 euros are in operation for 
medicines supplied at prices higher than the specified maximum. 
 
Despite industry concerns and alternative proposals, the cabinet 
decided to implement the WGP with effect from 1st June 1996. All 
reimbursable drugs became subject to fixed maximum price 
controls, with the exception of reimbursable over-the-counter 
(OTC) drugs which were exempted during the first year of the law's 
implementation. This measure was taken to provide the OTC 
market with the opportunity to demonstrate that sufficient 
competition existed within it to justify its exclusion from price 
regulation. In mid 1998, the government affirmed that free pricing 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
for most OTCs would remain. 
 
In 1997, the industry association, Nefarma, and the Dutch OPG 
group, began separate legal proceedings against the 1996 price law. 
Nefarma took the matter to court over a discrepancy between 
domestic and external providers and a lack of transparency. By the 
end of 1997, Nefarma claimed that prices under the new law had 
declined by an average of 21%. 
 
At the end of May 1998, the Council of State finally ruled that the 
Health Ministry had been incorrectly calculating maximum prices 
for pharmaceuticals for almost two years. Rather than using the 
average prices of drugs in the reference countries, the lowest prices 
had been used unlawfully. The Council of State also indicated that 
the pricing law may be in breach of the EU directive on 
transparency because it does not require the Minister of Health to 
respond to a request for a price increase within 90 days. In addition, 
by setting the maximum prices for reimbursement so low, imported 
products could not be sold at a reasonable profit in the Netherlands 
and, consequently, Article 30 of the EU treaty with respect to free 
movement of goods may have been breached. 
 
Parallel importing into the Netherlands has declined and recorded a 
negative growth of 2.7% in 2002. Also, despite having rectified the 
incorrect calculation of maximum prices for pharmaceuticals, 
prices in the Netherlands remain relatively low and are still subject 
to fixed maximum price controls. 
New 
Zealand 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, September 
18, 2004 
Pharmaceutical pricing in New Zealand is determined by the 
Pharmaceutical Management Agency (Pharmac), which is owned 
by the Health Funding Authority. Pharmac's role is to manage the 
Pharmaceutical Schedule on behalf of the Minister of Health. 
Pharmac operates a reference pricing system, whereby medicines 
are reimbursed at the level of the lowest priced product in a 
particular therapeutic sub-group. It is the responsibility of Pharmac 
to determine the therapeutic sub-group of a product. 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
In recent years, Pharmac has addressed the task of cost-containment 
with some relish, refusing to list some new treatments, reducing 
subsidies and de-listing products, often to the fury of the 
pharmaceutical industry. For example, prior to June 2000, Pharmac 
repeatedly refused to provide subsidies for beta-interferon drugs, 
used by multiple sclerosis patients, citing the drug's high cost. 
Subsidies for the drug were first refused in 1996, and again in 1999, 
following a Pharmac review. Pharmac was then directed by the 
Minister of Health to fund beta-interferon. As a result, a specialist 
group, the MS Treatments Assessment Committee, was established 
to implement the funding process. As of June 2000, two beta-
interferon products have been funded by Pharmac: Biogen's 
Avonex and Schering AG's Betaferon. Funding for beta-interferon 
is, however, only available to patients meeting certain criteria, for 
which there is a current limit of 180. The patient limit was reached 
in December 2000, and patients now applying for funding will have 
to wait until a place becomes available, or funding by Pharmac 
increases above the 180-patient limit. 
 
In 2000, Pharmac also cut subsidy levels for antidepressants by 
around 60%, a move that played a substantial part in Lundbeck's 
decision to close its New Zealand operations in 2000. Other drugs 
have also had their subsidies cut in the last few years, including 
ACE inhibitors, cholesterol-lowering drugs and calcium channel 
blockers. 
 
Pharmac has issued several drug tenders since its establishment in 
1993. Under the tendering process, one brand of drug in a class is 
given 'preferred supplier' status, for the period of the tender, which 
is usually between one and three years. Other drugs in the same 
class are still listed in the schedule and may be prescribed, but the 
preferred drug must be substituted, unless specifically indicated 
otherwise by the prescriber. While preferred drugs are always fully 
reimbursed, non-preferred drugs are not, and may attract no subsidy 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
at all. Pharmac claims to have achieved savings of NZ$60 million 
annually since the introduction of tenders. 
 
The tendering process is not restricted to branded drugs and 
Pharmac accepts tenders for 'sole suppliers' of generic medicines. It 
was envisaged that there would be a far greater number of generic 
tenders, but this has never occurred due to opposition. As of 
January 2001, the sole supply brand for 250mg and 500mg 
amoxicillin capsules has been Ospamox, and Rubifen is the sole 
supply brand for methylphenidate. 
 
In a number of cases, Pharmac has made agreements with 
pharmaceutical companies, whereby price cuts are a precondition of 
entry on to the schedule, or where the company agrees to cut prices 
elsewhere in order to obtain a given reimbursement price on a new 
product. 
 
In February 2002, the health minister announced the establishment 
of a national pharmaceutical purchasing strategy with the intention 
of streamlining the cost of hospital drugs throughout New Zealand. 
Under this initiative, Pharmac will be granted full authority to 
purchase pharmaceuticals for each District Health Board, as 
opposed to the previous process where the DHB's bought drugs 
directly from manufacturers. This move has been met with 
scepticism by many DHB's, concerned that Pharmacs relentless 
efforts regarding cost containment will have a negative effect on 
local healthcare provision. 
Poland 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, July 14, 
2003 
Drug pricing:  
Although the Ministry of Health had proposed to abolish price 
controls for all reimbursed pharmaceuticals from 1st January 1998, 
the prices of some products remain under state control amid fears of 
a soaring drugs bill. The prices of all domestically produced 
prescription drugs, which represent approximately 70% of the total 
output of Polish pharmaceutical factories, remain regulated by the 
Ministry of Finance. Prices are set on the basis of input costs plus a 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
20% mark-up. In July 1997, the Ministry of Finance increased the 
prices of domestic pharmaceuticals by an average of 12%, in line 
with inflation. In December 2001 Poland's pharmaceutical pricing 
law was last updated. In the same year the Ministry of Finance 
raised prices of domestically refunded drugs by 19%, well above 
the inflation rate. 
 
Prices for imported medicines subject to reimbursement are 
negotiated by the manufacturer with pharmaceutical authorities. 
The retail and distributor margins are set by the Ministry of 
Finance. The wholesale margin on drugs, currently 9.91%, is 
calculated as a percentage of the official wholesale price. Prices and 
margins for medicines fully paid for by the end-user (imported and 
locally produced) are not controlled. 
 
Pharmaceutical pricing 
 
The current difference between setting prices for domestically 
produced drugs and foreign imports is likely to be against EU 
regulations. At present, foreign companies are able to negotiate a 
drug's price for the reimbursement list with the Ministry of Health 
and Social Welfare, while the Ministry of Finance sets rigid official 
prices for Polish drugs. Other drugs, i.e. not reimbursed, have 
market prices. 
 
This diversified pricing system will have to be changed in line with 
EU regulations and a new pharmaceutical law is currently being 
debated in parliament. It is estimated that the abolition of official 
prices will lead to a 10-20% price increase and a greater 
differentiation of the market. 
 
Polish health reforms have been towards a decentralized health 
system, similar to that in the UK, where GPs are the first point of 
contact for most patients, thereby acting as 'gatekeepers' to 
secondary care. Some specialists can be approached directly, 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
including gynecologists, oncologists, dermatologists, psychiatrists 
and dentists, but most services require a referral. Prior to the 
reforms, people could enter the health service at any appropriate 
point. 
 
The progress of reform, however, has been far from smooth. Public 
dissatisfaction with the speed of reform and the new structure of the 
sector has been growing. Reform has been handicapped by 
financial difficulties, largely stemming from a collapse in the 
collecting of funds through the health insurance system. Added to 
this has been increasing criticism of the declining standard of 
healthcare facilities and outmoded equipment. A program of 
modernization and the installation of new medical equipment, 
however, has been promised by the government; 297 hospitals are 
set to be modernized, with 175 set to receive new medical 
equipment. Four hospitals are planned for closure. A large cut in 
the health sector workforce has also been forecast, with an 
estimated 24,000 - 30,000 staff to be laid off. The extent to which 
these plans have been, or will be implemented, however, remains to 
be seen. 
Portugal 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, May 19, 
2003 
Pharmaceutical product pricing is administered jointly by the 
Ministries of Finance, Health, and Trade. All prices are recorded 
and reviewed annually by the pharmacy and medicine regulatory 
body, Infarmed, the Department of Competition and Prices (DCP) 
and the Pharmacists and Pharmacy Bar. 
 
Prices are negotiated between the pharmaceutical industry and the 
Ministry of Trade, using a comparison system with other southern 
European countries. Prices are subject to Infarmed approval. 
 
In September 2000, new price controls were introduced for non-
prescription medicines through Decree 713/2000. The following 
information must be supplied to the Direccao-General do Comercio 
e da Concorrencia (Directorate General for Trade and Competition 
- DGCC): 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
* The retail price applicable of the date of the decree or, for Venda 
Livre (free sale) products, the ex-factory price; * The first price 
change since the Decree became effective; * Subsequent price 
changes and justification for these changes; * Any other 
information requested by the DGCC. If the DGCC considers prices 
and/or price increases to be unacceptable, it reserves the right to 
intervene and may set new prices. These new prices will be subject 
to the approval of the Sectretary of State for Trade and Services and 
will take effect eight days after notification. 
 
Maximum mark-ups were also set in the same decree, at 8% for 
wholesalers and 20% for pharmacies. These are calculated on the 
retail price less VAT. The retail price must appear on the outer 
packaging of the product. 
South 
Korea 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, August 19, 
2004 
There are two systems of pricing for pharmaceuticals in Korea, the 
Standard Retail Price and the Medical Insurance Price. The Korean 
pricing system is far from transparent and has come under severe 
criticism from the international industry. As a result, several 
reforms are currently under discussion. 
 
Products are currently classified as OTC or prescription only. A 
major pricing review was carried out in early 1998. Of the 26,000 
pharmaceutical licensed products in Korea, 15,499 were classified 
as OTC drugs, and 10,698 were classified as prescription only. If 
anything, there was a slight switch away from OTC products; while 
324 prescription drugs were reclassified as OTC, more than double 
that number of OTC drugs were placed on the prescription only list.
 
Standard Retail Price (SRP)The SRP system is used for drugs not 
reimbursed under the medical insurance scheme. It was introduced 
in 1984, to stabilize prices, minimize consumer price discrepancies 
and guarantee availability of pharmaceuticals. The system is 
managed not by the government, but by the Korean Pharmaceutical 
Manufacturers Association (KPMA), the Korean Pharmaceutical 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
Traders Association (KPTA) and the Korean Pharmacists 
Association (KPA). 
 
In order to obtain an approved SRP, the drug's supplier must submit 
its preferred price for the drug, to either the KPMA or KPTA, who 
will then decide if this price is reasonable, based on criteria such as 
investment costs, selling expenses and the presence on the market 
of similar products. The product may not be sold until an agreement 
with the KPMA/KPTA has been reached. 
 
Prices for imported products tend to end up far higher than those 
for locally produced ones. The SRP for domestic products, usually 
set by the KPMA, is around 80% of the ex-factory price. For 
imports, usually set by the KPTA, the SRP is often more than 
double the import price. 
 
Unsurprisingly, it is generally felt that the SRP is due for extensive 
reform, if not outright abolition, since its principal effects are as an 
obstacle to free trade and as a way of keeping prices higher than 
they might otherwise be. Alternatives to the SRP system are 
currently under discussion. 
 
Medical Insurance PriceThe MIP system is used in hospitals, 
clinics and pharmacies designated as medical insurance facilities by 
the National Federation of Medical Insurance. The MIP system is 
managed by the Insurance Management Division, of the Pension & 
Health Bureau, itself a part of the MHW. 
 
In order to obtain an MIP, the supplier of the drug must submit its 
proposed price to the KPMA, as for the SRP system. The KPMA 
will recommend a price, based on this data, to the MHW. The 
ministry then decides on the reimbursement price, after taking into 
account the likely effects on the insurance budget. 
 
In late 1997, it was announced that reviews of reimbursement 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
prices would take place monthly and not at six month intervals. 
This is in response to the rapid depreciation of the won and the 
country's straitened economic situation. In early 1998, around one 
fifth of reimbursable drugs had their prices raised, in some cases by 
over 50%, in order to counter rising production costs due to the 
rising price of raw materials. 
Spain 
“New Spanish 
government "will cut 
health bill to EU 
levels, views more 
power for regions”, 
Pharma 
Marketletter, May 
14, 2004r 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------- 
“Spain- New 
reference prices will 
lower the price of 
over 2,000 drugs”, 
Espicom Business 
Intelligence, October 
31, 2003 
 
 
 
 
 
Spain's drugs bill rose 60% during 1995-2003 and continued 
growing last year despite the previous government's introduction of 
an austere reference pricing system based on the three cheapest 
drugs in each therapeutic category. The PSOE said in its electoral 
program that it will introduce a new system, based on 
pharmaceutical active principles. 
 
In late-2003, the PSOE also said it would curb drug spending by 
introducing visas for the use of expensive medicines, establish a 
system of personalized drug doses and create a program to foster 
rational drug use. Overall, it said, the scheme would cut the drugs 
bill 40% and save the state 3 billion euros ($ 3.58 billion) a year. 
 
Farmaindustria had called these proposals "erroneous and 
unrealistic," claiming that the best way to cut drug spending is by 
reducing reference prices, encouraging generics, rationalizing drug 
use and improving health service efficiency. 
 
---------------------------------------------------------------- 
On October 25th. 2003 the Spanish government published its new 
Order of Reference Prices in the Boletin Oficial del Estado 25th. 
According to the Health Minister, Ana Pastor, the new Order will 
lower the prices of 2,070 drugs, with a market value of just over 1.6 
billion euros. These drugs comprise 62 active ingredients in 82 
categories, affecting around 20% of all drugs available under the 
national health system (SNS). Some drug prices will be cut by up to 
80%. It is hoped that these cuts will allow the government to 
continue to finance the newest, more expensive, drugs coming onto 
the market. 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
 
 
 
------------------------ 
Pastor Warns 
Pharmaceutical 
Companies that 
Prices Must Come 
Down”, Global 
Newswire, October 
28, 2003 
Reference prices will be determined by looking at the DDD price 
for three companies' product in each of the 82 categories. All 82 
contain at least one generic. Where a prescribed drug is priced 
above the reference price, it must be substituted for a lower-priced 
version, provided that an equivalent drug exists. Drugs with a 
manufacturer price below two euros are not included in the new 
pricing scheme. 
The was widely criticized by consumer groups, the political 
opposition and local generic manufacturers. The AESEG, which 
represents Spanish generic manufacturers, has stated that the 
scheme will damage the generic sector, by lowering prices by 25-
30% and placing 30% of generic manufacturers in financial 
difficulty. This could result in 1,000 jobs being cut and a reduction 
of investment in innovation. 
 
----------------------------- 
Ana Pastor, the Spanish health minister, warned that those 
pharmaceutical groups whose products were overpriced would have 
to change their strategy once the new reference price system is in 
place in the Spanish health service.  She said that the same drug can 
vary in price by as much as 80 per cent among different 
pharmaceutical groups. The health minister said that the companies 
that will be most affected by the changes will be those that deal in 
drugs that have been on the market for more than ten years and 
whose investment has already been recovered. 
Sweden 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, December 
18, 2003 
The principal pricing authority in Sweden is the National Social 
Insurance Board (RFV), under the supervision of the Ministry of 
Health and Social Affairs. The body responsible for fixing 
medicine reimbursement prices is the Division of Drug Affairs, a 
unit within the RFV. The basis of medicine pricing is the 1996 
Ordinance on Limitation of the Costs of Medicinal Products. 
 
A decision is reached on a pricing level after discussions between 
the RFV and the manufacturer, which take place after the 
manufacturer has submitted an application. Prior to the RFV 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
deciding an appropriate price, the county councils are given the 
opportunity to express their opinion on the case. The processing 
period for pricing matters is on average between six and eight 
weeks. 
 
In deciding on a price level, the RFV takes into consideration the 
economic and clinical value of the product, the impact on the 
reimbursement bill, the price in the country of origin, and the price 
and cost of related products. The manufacturer is obliged to provide 
information relating to the product's price in foreign markets, in 
particular from Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, 
Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Switzerland, the UK and the 
USA. 
 
Applications for price increases on product lines already marketed 
are considered only once per annum. Companies are permitted to 
decrease and increase their prices freely under the allocated price 
ceiling. Price increases for a product in its first two years after 
manufacture are rarely permitted. 
 
The Division of Drug Affairs authorises over 3,000 prices per 
annum, with three quarters of applications relating to price changes 
and around seven per cent concerning new products. 
 
In December 1999, the Swedish government passed the ordinance 
SFS 1999: 1373 regarding a new schedule for state fees for 
controlling medicinal products. A summary of the new fees can be 
found in the Marketing Authorisation Fees and Registration Fees 
sections. The move followed pressure from the Medical Products 
Agency (MPA), the pharmaceutical regulatory authority, to 
increase the fees. 
 
Reference Pricing System 
The reference pricing system in Sweden includes around 70 multi-
source preparations. The fixed reimbursement price in a group is 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
based on the cheapest generic plus 10%. The co-payment fee is 
based on the reference price, which is revised on a quarterly basis. 
Only around 10% of market volume is affected, and there are no 
plans to enlarge the scheme. 
 
Price Structure 
There are three pricing categories in Sweden; the pharmacy selling 
price (AUP), the pharmacy purchasing price (AIP), and the 
wholesalers purchasing price (DIP). Pharmacies add 19.6% to their 
purchasing price, which gives them a margin of 16.4%. 
Wholesalers add 3.3% to the manufacturers price, which gives them 
a margin of 3.2%. This accounts for 2.7% of the pharmacy selling 
price. The price at which manufacturers sell to wholesalers 
accounts for 80.9% of the pharmacy selling price. 
United 
Kingdom 
World 
Pharmaceutical 
Markets, July 14, 
2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Since 1957, pharmaceutical prices have been controlled indirectly 
in the UK by the Department of Health, under the Pharmaceutical 
Price Regulation Scheme (PPRS). The scheme, which has 
undergone a number of major changes since its inception, regulates 
the overall profitability of pharmaceutical companies from their 
sales to the NHS. The PPRS is the product of an agreement 
between the government and the pharmaceutical industry and 
provides a framework for negotiation. 
 
All branded prescription products are covered by the scheme, 
whether or not they are under a current patent. Pure generics have 
been excluded since 1986. Reimbursement of these 
pharmaceuticals is based on the price levels set competitively in the 
market. 
 
Despite speculation that the voluntary scheme would be replaced by 
legally binding contracts under the 1999 Health Act, negotiations 
between the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry 
(ABPI) and the government resulted in a new version of the PPRS. 
The current agreement runs from October 1999 until October 2004. 
The government also has 'reserve powers' under the Health Act, 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
---------------- 
[LSE Health], 
Kullman, David, 
“United Kingdom-
Pharmaceutical 
Pricing and 
allowing the Health Secretary to take action against companies that 
fail to comply with the scheme. Under the new PPRS, branded 
prescription medicines were subject to a 4.5% price reduction and 
applications for subsequent price increases must be referred to the 
Department of Health. 
 
All companies are now required to submit detailed financial 
returns, although those with turnover of less than [GBP]25 million 
may only need to do so when applying for a price increase. Larger 
companies need to submit reports annually. 
 
Because the scheme is related to profit control, rather than the 
prices of individual products, prices for new products entering the 
market do not have to be agreed with the PPRS Branch in order for 
the product to be reimbursed, and may be set at the discretion of the 
manufacturer. The company will, however, need to take into 
account the anticipated effect of the product on its overall profit 
target. 
 
The profit target set under the new PPRS is 21% and profit levels 
are expected to fall within a 'margin of tolerance'. This has been 
widened under the new agreement, to between 50% and 140% of 
the target. If a company's profits are more than 40% above the 
target they are considered to be excessive and the company will be 
expected to either reduce its prices or repay the excess to the 
government. If, however, a company's profits are less than 50% of 
the target, it can seek a price increase to take it up to 80% of the 
target. 
 
There are also additional allowances which recognize R&D. When 
assessing profit, the basic R&D allowance of 20% can increase to 
23%, depending on the number of inpatient active substances with 
an NHS turnover of [GBP ]500,000 or more (up to a maximum of 
12). 
 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
Reimbursement 
Policies”, 2001 
Generic drug pricing 
 
The PPRS does not apply to generic drugs. Instead, their prices are 
set according to the Drug Tariff. Under this, products fall into one 
of five categories. Most generics fall into category A, where the 
price is determined by a weighted average of list prices of three 
manufacturers and two wholesalers. 
 
The pricing system for generics has been under government review 
since the price rises which occurred as a result of shortages of some 
products in 1999. A series of transitional price ceilings for specified 
drugs was established in 2000. This arrangement was extended in 
2002, and will remain in place pending agreement on a permanent 
system of generic pricing. 
 
--------------------------------------------------- 
The National Health Service (NHS) is financed mainly through 
central government general taxation together with an element of 
national insurance (NI) contributions: 
 
 
 
 
 
Pricing of Pharmaceuticals: 
 
 
- 
Pricing method (s) for ethical pharmaceuticals 
The prices of branded prescription medicines supplied to the NHS 
by the pharmaceutical industry are indirectly controlled through the 
Pharmaceutical Price Regulation Scheme (PPRS). It is an 
agreement negotiated between the UK government and the 
pharmaceutical industry represented by the Association of the 
British Pharmaceutical Industry (ABPI). This scheme, administered 
by the Department of Health, controls the profits that 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
pharmaceutical companies are allowed to make through their trade 
with the NHS, whilst recognizing that the industry needs to earn 
enough money to enable it to develop and market new and 
improved medicines. 
The PPRS applies to all licensed, branded medicines sold to the 
NHS. It does not cover generic medicines nor over the counter 
(OTC) medicines sold to the general public. 
On market entry, companies have freedom of pricing for new 
products, defined as those introduced following a major application 
for a marketing authorization from the appropriate licensing 
authority i.e. a new active substance, within the constraint of their 
profit target under the PPRS. A company continues to have 
freedom of pricing for line extensions (e.g. new presentations and 
formulations) for such new products for a period of five years from 
the grant of the original marketing authorization. 
Products not subject to a major application for a marketing 
authorization require the Department of Health’s agreement to the 
price before launch and are subject to negotiation with the 
individual company. The Department takes into account the 
company’s profitability under the PPRS, the prices of other 
presentations of medicines and forecast sales. 
 
- 
Pricing methods for generic products: 
The “Maximum Price Scheme” was introduced in August 2000. 
This scheme prohibits the sale of certain unbranded generic 
medicines to community pharmacies and dispensing doctors at 
more than the maximum price. It applies to anyone who sells the 
generics concerned in these circumstances. It applies to companies 
whether or not they are members of the voluntary PPRS . 
  
At the end of 2003 the Department of Health published its 
proposals for a new system of reimbursing the cost and 
supply of generic medicines for the NHS following 
widespread consultation with the industry. This would 
replace the maximum price scheme introduced in 2000 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
following concerns over costs and availability of generic 
medicines. Once agreed, the scheme would start in April 
2004. Key points include the proposal that prices at which 
pharmacy contractors are reimbursed would be linked to 
prices charged by manufacturers and that information from 
manufacturers would be used to calculate the volume 
weighted average price.  
The DoH is also proposing that there should be incentives 
for pharmacies to benefit from procurement decisions 
where these also benefit the NHS, and if there are a limited 
number of manufacturers of a generic medicine or the 
supply is concentrated, manufacturers would be required to 
seek the Department's agreement to any price increase. 
Manufacturers and wholesalers would be required to 
submit quarterly information for generic medicines on their 
income revenues, cost of purchases and volumes of 
transactions, although how this would be policed is as yet 
unknown. 
In addition, manufacturers could decide the prices of new 
generic products at their own discretion following the 
granting of a marketing authorization, provided the drug 
tariff was less than the equivalent branded medicine. 
However, at the same time, the DoH is considering 
provisions that would prevent companies exploiting this 
freedom, although these criteria too have not yet been 
clarified. 
The NHS spends over pounds 1 billion each year on generic 
medicines in primary care. Seventy six per cent of 
prescriptions were written generically in 2002, with over 53 
per cent of scripts dispensed generically the same year. If 
there were no generics the medicines bill would increase to 
pounds 11.1bn, so generics provide a pounds 4.6bn saving. 
 
COUNTRY 
SOURCE 
PRICING 
Every 1 per cent increase in generics dispensed saves the 
NHS pounds 39.2 million. 
 
