 
1
 
 
 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
International Trade administration 
 
Public Hearing on The U.S. Department of Commerce’s 
Study on International Drug Pricing as Required by 
Section 1123 of the Medicare 
Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act 
of 2003 
 
August 3, 2004 
 
 
Written Testimony of Kathleen Jaeger 
President & CEO 
Generic Pharmaceutical Association  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2300 Clarendon Blvd                                    Arlington, VA 22201 
Ph. 703-647-2480                   Fax. 703-647-2481 
www.gphaonline.org 
 
 
 
2
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The Generic Pharmaceutical Association (GPhA) appreciates the opportunity to provide 
input to the U.S. Department of Commerce’s International Trade Administration on 
international drug pricing.  GPhA represents manufacturers and distributors of finished 
generic pharmaceutical products, manufacturers and distributors of bulk active 
pharmaceutical chemicals, and suppliers of other goods and services to the generic 
pharmaceutical industry.  More than half of all prescriptions dispensed in the United 
States last year were filled with generics, yet generic drugs represent less than 8 percent 
of total pharmaceutical expenditures.  No other industry has made, nor continues to make, 
a greater contribution to affordable health care in this country than the generic 
pharmaceutical industry.   
 
GPhA is committed to a balance between innovation and access.  To that end, we are 
committed to innovation in medicines and the preservation of intellectual property 
protections both in the United States and abroad.  With this fragile balance as our main 
concern, we strongly believe that it is essential that new trade agreements take into 
consideration existing U.S. measures relating to the accessibility of affordable 
pharmaceuticals.  Accordingly, if trade agreements contain certain provisions that 
promote innovation, yet are devoid of other essential provisions that foster access to 
generics (such as the Bolar, generic exclusivity and declaratory judgment provisions), 
American’s access to affordable medicines could be severely harmed as a result of future 
harmonization measures.     
 
The generic pharmaceutical sector is uniquely impacted by harmonization of agreements 
on intellectual property protections for pharmaceuticals — particularly insofar as they 
increase market exclusivity periods, fail to include essential access provisions, or contain 
provisions that impede access to affordable medicines.  New trade agreements could 
potentially affect American consumers’ access to affordable drugs as well as the business 
interests of the U.S. generic pharmaceutical industry.  As evidence to support our 
concern, we need only look at the fall-out of the harmonization efforts relating to the 
Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS).  A study 
conducted by University of Minnesota Professor Stephen Schondelmeyer concluded that 
the cost of the TRIPS harmonization efforts would "exceed six billion over the next two 
decades."  The study also suggested  that "[t]he annual generic savings lost by American 
consumers due to delayed generic entry [as a result of TRIPS] will range from $200 
million in some years to over $500 million in other years."1   Given that harmonization 
                                                 
1 S. Schondelmeyer, "Economic Impact of GATT Patent Extension on Currently Marketed Drugs," PRIME 
Institute, University of Minnesota, March 1995. 
 
3
efforts have such significant repercussions on the U.S. market for generic 
pharmaceuticals, it is important for the U.S. to focus attention on ensuring that access and 
innovation issues are appropriately balanced abroad.  As the TRIPS study has 
demonstrated, a failure to do so can harm access and innovation here in the U.S.  
Accordingly, the important role that generic drugs play in providing American consumers 
with affordable medicines can, and should be expanded into other nations; yet, we also 
must be diligent in our efforts to preserve U.S. provisions that ensure access to affordable 
medicines here at home.    
 
DISCUSSION 
 
As the ITC responds to the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and Modernization 
Act of 2003’s mandate to study and report on the drug pricing practices of countries that 
are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), 
GPhA urges it to consider the impact of such practices on the balance between innovation 
and access.     
 
QUESTIONS 
 
1. 
How do OECD countries set pharmaceutical prices?  Within OECD countries,  
           what mechanisms do governments use to control pharmaceutical expenditures? 
 
The pharmaceutical pricing policies of OECD countries vary significantly and, thus, there 
is not one global policy that dictates how pharmaceutical prices are set.  Countries 
generally fall into one of two categories:  (1) highly regulated countries, such as Japan, 
Canada, and Italy; and (2) less regulated countries, like the U.K., Germany and the U.S.  
Consequently, some highly regulated countries use complex and aggressive price control 
schemes, whereas other countries in this category model their pharmaceutical prices after 
neighboring countries.   
 
Of significance is the fact that in countries where prices of pharmaceuticals are heavily 
regulated, the generic utilization rate is low.2  For example, in Italy the unbranded 
generic3 utilization rate is 2 percent.  Likewise, in France and Japan, the unbranded 
generic utilization rate is 7 percent and 8 percent, respectively.  In contrast, countries 
with less regulation (Germany, U.K., U.S.), the generic utilization rates are much higher.4  
While Canada is a highly regulated country with price controls, Canada also has other 
significant governmental policies that encourage generic utilization.5 
                                                 
2 See Foreign countries data based on P.M. Danzon and L.W. Chao, "Prices and Availability of 
Pharmaceuticals:  Evidence From Nine Countries," October, 2003. 
3  “Unbranded generics” compete on price and, thus, are generally not marketed to physicians.  In contrast, 
“branded” generics are products that compete partly on brand image and are marketed to the health care 
community.   
4 Id.  
5 In Canada, the generic drug price is about 80% of the brand price.   Canada  has had policies to encourage 
compulsory licensing and for pharmacists to dispense generics.  Id.  
 
4
    
Unbranded Generics as a Percentage of Presciptions Dispensed by Country
2%
6%
7%
8%
18%
29%
37%
51%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Italy
Mexico
France
Japan
Germany
Canada
United
Kingdom
United
States
 
 
          
          Foreign countries data based on P.M. Danzon and L.W. Chao, "Prices and Availability of  
          Pharmaceuticals:  Evidence From Nine Countries," October, 2003; U.S. data from IMS Health, 2003;  
          Reugers News, Generic Drugs Sales Soaring to $80Bln by 2008, citing Graham Lewis of IMS Health  
          discussing international generic growth, which confirmed the 2003 generic utilization rates of France (6%)  
          and Italy (2%).   
 
 
 
Branded & Unbranded Generic Drugs as a Percentage of 
Prescriptions Dispensed
2%
6%
7%
8%
18%
29%
37%
51%
32%
30%
21%
32%
43%
30%
12%
14%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Italy
Mexico
France
Japan
Germany
Canada
United Kingdom
United States
% Branded Generics Prescriptions Dispensed
% Unbranded Generics Prescriptions Dispensed
 
Foreign countries data based on P.M. Danzon and L.W. Chao, "Prices and Availability of Pharmaceuticals:   
Evidence From Nine Countries," October, 2003; U.S. data from IMS Health, 2003. 
 
5
 
Another essential fact is that in the United States, the vast majority of generics are 
“unbranded” generic products.  Thus, in the United States unbranded generics compete 
on price and not on the “marketing image” of the product.  Competing on price within a 
free market system allows the United States to encourage strong generic substitution (51 
percent), while also benefiting from a low percentage of total drug costs for these 
products (generics account for about 8 percent of the total U.S. pharmaceutical 
expenditures).  In contrast, in Germany, most of the generic products are “branded 
generics” (they compete on market image of the product) and the country has a total 
utilization rate of branded generics and unbranded generics of 61 percent.  Yet, 
Germany’s overall cost for these products is much higher, equaling 34 percent of total 
sales.6   
 
 
2. 
If price controls and other government cost mechanisms were eliminated in 
           OECD countries, how and to what degree would pharmaceutical prices and  
           expenditures change in those countries and in the United States?  What effects  
           would these changes have on the sales and profits of pharmaceutical  
          manufacturers?  
 
If price controls and other cost mechanisms were eliminated in other countries, and no 
efforts were taken to expand access to generic drugs, pharmaceutical prices in OECD 
countries would rise and consumers would likely be harmed – since the benefits to 
consumers from more innovation and higher quality drugs would be more than 
outweighed by the high prices that they would have to pay.  The win-win scenario is for 
OECD countries to eliminate price regulations while promoting access to generic drugs at 
the same time.  In such a scenario, consumers benefit from both high-quality innovative 
drugs and from price competition.  It would be particularly important to focus on access 
in those OECD countries where generic utilization rates are much lower than in the 
United States.  For example, in Spain, Japan, France, and Australia, 10% or less of 
prescriptions are filled with generics.   
 
When prices of brand pharmaceuticals are heavily regulated by foreign governments, and 
in some cases the price of the generic artificially inflated, there is less incentive for 
consumers to switch to generics.  For example, both France and Italy maintain low brand 
prices through rigid regulation.  As a result, the price differential between brands and 
generics is reduced, consumers are not price-sensitive to generics and the generic sector 
of the industry is small.7  Lower utilization rates decrease the market for generic 
manufacturers and result in reduced competition.  By removing the price regulation from 
the brand drugs, the need and the market for generics will expand, leading to more 
manufacturers, greater competition, increased innovation, lower generic drug prices, and 
ultimately greater overall cost savings than currently realized through price controls.  
 
In addition to price controls, the absence of a single pharmaceutical market in the 
European Union has stifled generic competition in EU OECD countries.  The EU has 
                                                 
6  Id. 
7 P. Danzon, “Making Sense of Drug Prices,” Regulation Vol. 23, No. 1, 58. 
 
6
developed a mechanism to ease regulatory barriers between European countries known as 
the Mutual Recognition Procedure, but because individual markets retain unique 
characteristics, generic manufacturers are finding it difficult to obtain a high rate of MRP 
application approvals.8 
 
In the United States, governments, insurers, employers, and individuals still have the 
opportunity to pay less for their prescriptions because of the robust generic drug market.  
In Canada, for instance, some generic drug prices are six to 10  times more expensive 
than the U.S. generic equivalent.9  If Canadians had access to generic drugs at the price 
that they are in America, it would save their system $400 million annually.10  Most other 
countries could save similar amounts or more by allowing the generic industry to flourish 
in their countries, by removing price controls, allowing true competition, and providing 
incentives for consumers to switch to generics when they are available.  
 
One critical mechanism that must be in place for a robust generic market is the 
Bolar provision that allows generic firms to develop drugs prior to patent expiry.  
The purpose of this provision is to ensure that generic medicines enter the market 
immediately after patent expiry to improve access and encourage competition.  This 
provision has been upheld by the World Trade Organization (WTO) as conforming 
to TRIPS in a WTO dispute ruling.  However, many OECD countries have not 
explicitly adopted Bolar-type provisions in their legislation.  This results in 
significant delays in the marketing of generic drugs by creating de facto patent 
extensions. OECD countries that do not have Bolar provisions should seek to 
incorporate them.  
 
In addition to government barriers to competition, non-governmental barriers exist in 
many OECD countries.  For example, in Japan, there is a significant cultural bias in favor 
of “brand” items of all types, and doctors in Japan do not customarily prescribe by 
chemical name.11  In Germany, the customary practice of prescribing a drug by chemical 
name followed by a manufacturers’ name creates stock and supply issues for the 
pharmacist.12  Several OECD countries lack incentives for pharmacists to prescribe 
generics.  
 
If price controls are removed, but there are non-governmental barriers to vibrant 
competition, consumers may be harmed.  The reason is that branded drug companies will 
be able to sustain higher prices without fears of competition from generic drug 
companies.  The goal should be to remove price regulations, while at the same time 
taking steps to lower non-governmental barriers to competition.  If a country were to do 
that, they would benefit from both the balance of innovation and access that has served 
the United States so well. 
 
                                                 
8 P. Wittner, “The European Generics Outlook,” 2003, 24-25. 
9 Palmer D’Angelo Consulting Inc. Report Series, “Generic Drug Prices:  A Canada-US Comparison,”  
August 2002 
10  Id.  
11 Remarks of Juichi Riku, Sawai Pharmaceutical Co., June 29, 2004, Seventh Annual International Generic 
Pharmaceutical Alliance Conference, Prague, Czech Republic. 
12 P. Wittner, “The European Generics Outlook,” 2003, 67. 
 
7
3. What factors influence, and how do companies determine,  research and 
development (R&D) expenditures?  
 
 
As mentioned above, GPhA is committed to a balance between innovation of new, life-
saving medicines and access to affordable pharmaceuticals.  To that end, we are 
committed to the preservation of intellectual property protections both in the United 
States and abroad as the incentive and reward for innovation of new and vital medicines. 
Indeed, many of GPhA’s member companies hold patents of their own.  GPhA also 
supports another key factor influencing R&D — the existence of a competitive 
pharmaceutical market.  When faced with generic competition, brand pharmaceutical 
manufacturers must invest in new product development in order to remain viable.  For 
example, using mail-order delivery, the substitution rate for generics for managed care 
patients can reach as high as 90 percent within one week after market entry.  This 
competition has a profound effect on brand market share. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As such, this highly competitive environment promotes investment in R&D.  Since the 
enactment of Hatch-Waxman, R&D investment by brand manufacturers has increased 
more than 500 percent.  By removing barriers to robust competition in the pharmaceutical 
marketplace, countries can foster the innovation of new therapies. 13 
 
 
 
                                                 
13 See P. Danzon “Testimony to the Task Force on Drug Importation,” April 27, 2004, “The U.S. 
competitive model…yields much stronger incentives for innovation than regulatory systems that constrain 
prices for innovative drugs and also undermine competition from generics.” 
Prozac 20 mg GSR 
Based on Fill Date
89%
90%
90%
92%
89%
91%
92%
90%
90%
91%
94%
92%
86%
87%
88%
89%
90%
91%
92%
93%
94%
95%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Weeks after generic availability
GSR
Mail
 
8
 
 
 
This approach rewards both the consumer and the manufacturer by encouraging research 
and development of new products now and providing a pathway for affordability in the 
future.   
 
4. 
Could OECD countries reduce costs by increasing the use of generic drugs?  
What steps would the governments need to take to facilitate the use of generic  
drugs?  
 
If foreign governments implemented aggressive generic substitution measures, they 
would likely realize savings that equal or exceed those gained through price controls 
while at the same time spurring the introduction of high-quality drugs that benefit 
consumers.  As previously stated, in the United States, 51% of all prescriptions filled are 
with generics, but they only account for 8% of the total drug costs.  According to a study 
published by Tim R. Covington, Executive Director of The Managed Care Institute at 
Samford University, an increase of only 1% in the nation`s generic prescription 
utilization rate (approximately 27 million scripts) would generate a payer savings of $1.3 
billion each year.  
 
The United States has adopted many different strategies for increasing substitution for 
generics by consumers.  They include: 
 
1. Rigorous 
Federal 
Generic 
Abbreviated 
Approval 
Program:  
Yielding Consumer Confidence 
U.S. law demands that generic pharmaceuticals must be the same as their 
brand counterparts.  FDA assures that the generic product will provide the 
same medicine and produce the same medical results as that of the brand 
product.  And, thus, FDA ensures that the variability of switching between a 
brand and U.S. generic product is not different than the variability between  
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Domestic R&D Spend - $ in Billions
 
9
 prescription refills of the same brand product.  The only difference is cost.     
 
2. State Substitution Laws 
Most states have generic substitution laws that encourage the dispensing of 
generic pharmaceuticals, including mandatory substitution models. Also, 
some state programs have used more aggressive formulary and co-payments 
measures to provide an incentive to consumers to use generics.    
 
3. Economic Dispensing Incentive 
Pharmacist and other healthcare providers have economic incentives to 
dispense U.S. generic pharmaceuticals.   
 
4. Health Plan Benefit Design 
Health benefit plans and government programs that cover prescription drug 
costs for their beneficiaries have used among other things, formularies, 
mandatory substitution, tiered co-payments, step therapy programs, and other 
means to encourage generic use.   
 
5. Consumer Education 
Public and private entities provide educational consumers on the value of 
generic pharmaceuticals.  
 
 
In the United States, government agencies, private market payers, and other interested 
groups have sought to educate consumers on generic drugs.  Generic drugs are exactly 
the same as their brand equivalent and required to be approved by FDA to be 
interchangeable.  Driving consumers to generics by formulating preferred options 
through formularies or creating incentives for consumers through the differential of out-
of-pocket costs between brands and generics have both proven successful for controlling 
costs in America without controlling prices being charged by the manufacturers.   
 
The strength of the U.S. generic industry also been enhanced by several key 
congressional measures contained within the section 11 of the MMA, which have enabled 
generic drugs to enter the market more quickly.  The provisions address among other 
things:  
 
• Restoring the Value of Generic Exclusivity Reward to challenge questionable  
brand patents that needlessly block generic competition.  
• Preserving the Roche-Bolar provision that allows generic firms to develop 
drugs prior to patent expiry so that consumers will have timely access to  
affordable medicine. 
• Eliminating multiple thirty month stays that needlessly delayed the introduction of 
affordable medicines. 
• Shoring up the ability to bring a Declaratory Judgment action to secure  
timely resolution of patent disputes. 
 
10
 
Yet, more can be done to further enhance the United States’ utilization of generic 
pharmaceuticals and, thereby provide consumers and health care providers with 
additional cost savings.  The tools to immediately increase generic drug utilization and 
the savings it provides include, but are not limited to: (1) solidifying a definitive, efficient 
pathway for affordable biopharmaceuticals; (2) mandating the use of therapeutically 
equivalent generics in all federal and state programs; (3) removing all needless generic 
substitution carve outs in federal and state programs; (4) having generic approvals be an 
Administration priority, which provide for agency consults, legal and scientific issues 
resolved in a timely fashion; (5) conducting scientific research to support the approval of 
nonsystematic generic medicines; (6) substantially improve the funding for and staffing 
of the FDA’s office of generic drugs; and (7) educating consumers of the value of generic 
medicines.   
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
As the Commerce Department produces its report on drug pricing practices of countries 
that are members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) and their effects on the United States, GPhA appreciates the opportunity to 
provide information on how generics can play an important role in providing access and 
savings.  The generic drug industry in the United States has seen substantial growth over 
the past 20 years thanks to the Hatch-Waxman Act of 1984, which struck the balance 
between innovation and access.  If countries with strict price regulations were to 
liberalize their regulations and provide incentives to encourage a vibrant and competitive 
generic drug market, the savings from generic utilization would provide access to quality 
medicine and also yield significant financial headroom to fund new innovative medicines.  
Also, a strong generic industry would produce more savings over time than the current 
pricing systems the foreign countries may have now, as well as spur innovation of new 
medicines.   
 
Americans have access to both the newest medicines and affordable generic drugs thanks 
to open competition, protections for intellectual property, strong access provisions and 
rewards for taking risks.  If other countries were to open their markets to true competition 
and infuse strong generic utilization policies into their health care system, utilization rates 
for generics should increase and lower overall drug expenditures.   
 
 
