 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF 
 
 
BRUCE L. DOWNEY 
 
CHAIRMAN AND CEO, BARR PHARMACEUTICALS, INC. 
 
 
 
“ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF A SAFE AND EQUITABLE BIOSIMILAR 
POLICY IN THE UNITED STATES” 
 
 
Before the 
HOUSE ENERGY AND COMMERCE  
SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH 
 
 
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 
MAY 2, 2007 
 
 
 
1282208.1 
 
 
Chairman Pallone, Ranking Member Deal and Members of the House 
Energy and Commerce Committee Subcommittee on Health.  I am Bruce Downey, 
the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Barr Pharmaceuticals, a leading 
global generic pharmaceutical company. 
 
I want to thank you for convening this hearing and for allowing me to 
express my company’s views on issues so vital to the continued success of the 
generic pharmaceutical industry – an industry that saves consumers and taxpayers 
literally billions of dollars each year in prescription drugs costs.  Indeed, no other 
industry has made, or continues to make, a greater contribution to affordable health 
care than the generic pharmaceutical industry. 
 
While my testimony today is on behalf of Barr Pharmaceuticals, I also serve 
as Chairman of the Generic Pharmaceutical Association, which represents more 
than 100 generic manufacturers, distributors and suppliers of bulk active 
pharmaceutical chemicals worldwide.  I mention my role in GPhA because it is 
important to note that the issue we address today – that of generic biological 
medicines – is at the top of the association’s priority list of legislative and policy 
initiatives. 
1282208.1 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Mr. Chairman, this Congress holds the key that will open the door for 
generic and other manufacturers to provide affordable access to many of the life-
saving biological medicines used in the treatment of diabetes, cancer, rheumatoid 
arthritis, HIV/AIDS and other diseases.  Today, the cost of these treatments can put 
them out of reach of many consumers.  The rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis 
treatment Enbrel®, for instance, costs an average of $16,000 a year per patient.  
Biological drugs for multiple sclerosis range in price from $16,000 to $25,000 a 
year.  Neulasta®, used to correct chemotherapy-induced white blood cell 
deficiency, costs an average $3,500 per chemotherapy cycle.   
What becomes frightening from the cost perspective is that not only are the 
costs of biological treatments getting more expensive each year, but the utilization 
of these medicines is growing, as well.  These two factors coupled together yields 
exponential growth in the amount we are spending on biologics every year.   
According to the 2006 Drug Trend Report released in April by Express 
Scripts, biotech drug spending increased 21 percent last year, even as growth in 
traditional prescription drug expenditures slowed.  The report showed that growth 
hormone deficiency spending rose nearly 23 percent in 2006 due to a 10.7 percent 
increase in utilization, coupled with the increase in product cost. 
 
1282208.1 
2
This dual impact of higher prices and greater utilization presents a recipe for 
disaster which will end in price controls.  The alternative, as we are seeing in the 
chemical drug sector, is competition. 
Thus, creating a pathway that allows for the introduction of safe and 
affordable generic alternatives to these medicines is vital.  It not only will save 
consumers and taxpayers billions of dollars a year, but, again, will allow more 
patients access to these important medicines. 
 
This committee is well aware of the role traditional chemical generic drugs 
play in helping consumers, insurers, and the government in achieving billions of 
dollars in savings each year.  Generic drugs filled more than one-and-a-half billion 
prescriptions in the U.S. last year.  That is nearly 55% of all prescriptions 
dispensed nationwide.  Considering that the average cost of a generic prescription 
is less than $30, while the average cost of a brand prescription is close to $95, it is 
easy to see how the Congressional Budget Office estimates the savings generated 
by generic drug use to be between $8 billion and $10 billion each and every year. 
 
As this Committee knows, Congress made these savings possible over 
twenty years ago with the 1984 enactment of the Hatch-Waxman Amendments to 
the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.  Hatch-Waxman achieves a critical 
balance between access to less costly generics and innovation of new brand-name 
drugs.  I, and many others, believe that it is time for Congress to take the next step 
1282208.1 
3
and let generic companies provide savings in the biological field.  Doing so, 
however, will require brushing aside the current political maneuvering that 
threatens progress on this issue, and enacting appropriate legislation that would 
allow FDA to begin approving safe, effective, and affordable generic biologics. 
DISCUSSION 
 
Today, I want to briefly discuss three points that I hope this committee will 
consider as you move forward on generic biologics legislation: 
(1) legislation must provide a regulatory pathway for approving generic 
biologics that is free of artificial barriers and unnecessary roadblocks, as 
well as a mechanism for allowing expeditious resolution of patent 
disputes that would delay generic market entry; 
(2) market competition generated by generic biologics would unleash 
incentives for further innovation of newer medicines, just as Hatch-
Waxman did over twenty years ago; and 
(3) generic biologics will provide a market-based mechanism to help manage 
private and federal expenditures and achieve significant savings. 
I. 
Legislative Framework 
 
Effective generic biologics legislation must include two parts:  a regulatory 
pathway that allows FDA to expeditiously approve safe and affordable generic 
biologics and a mechanism for allowing generic companies to resolve certain 
1282208.1 
4
patent disputes without delaying FDA approval.  I will discuss some important 
aspect about both of these issues. 
 
A. 
Approval Pathway 
 
Effective biologics legislation must include a regulatory approval pathway 
that does not impose unnecessary barriers to prompt market entry.  Hatch-Waxman 
was largely successful in achieving this goal for generic drugs regulated under the 
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, and this legislation should do the same for 
biologics regulated under the Public Health Service Act.  An adequate abbreviated 
pathway must include, for example: 
• clearly defined comparability criteria; 
 
• provisions giving FDA discretion to require the needed tests – and only 
the needed tests – to make safety and effectiveness determinations; 
 
• provisions setting forth the circumstances under which FDA can deny 
approval; 
 
• provisions setting forth the contents of an abbreviated biological 
application; 
 
• the ability to obtain an interchangeability rating that is immediately 
operative; 
 
• no unique names for generic biologics, which is fully consistent with 
FDA’s position that unique biologic names should not be used to 
differentiate products with the same active ingredient(s) when credible 
scientific data demonstrate that no pharmacologically relevant differences 
exist; 
1282208.1 
5
 
• a timely review process that allows a company to discuss with the FDA 
research and testing and to know when action on the application can be 
anticipated; and 
 
• an approval process that gives FDA flexibility as to what should be 
required on the label. 
 
 
Equally as important, effective biologics legislation must not include 
provisions like those advocated by groups such as BIO – provisions that would 
unnecessarily delay approval and/or prevent consumers from receiving the biggest 
benefit from generic biological products.  For example, legislation should not 
include: 
• a requirement that all generic applications include full clinical and human 
trials, or any clinical trials other than those that FDA deems necessary to 
the relevant scientific issues; 
 
• further legislation, or Congressional authorization/oversight or FDA 
regulations or guidances before the agency can give an interchangeability 
rating to a generic product; 
 
• unique 
names 
for 
generic 
biologics, 
which 
would 
impede 
interchangeability findings and thus prevent the substitution of generic 
for brand that is essential for cost savings; 
 
• provisions requiring agency-issued guidance or notice and comment 
rulemaking, which can take years and years to complete, before FDA can 
accept or approve a generic biologic application; and/or 
 
1282208.1 
6
• provisions requiring the generic company to have an identical label to the 
reference product, particularly where the brand has patented certain 
labeling information. 
 
There is no justification for provisions like these, which will delay generic market 
entry and the interchangeability rating needed for consumers to benefit most from 
generic competition.  They are entirely unnecessary to ensuring approval of safe 
and affordable generic biologics. 
 
For example, while today clinical data may be needed for most biological 
products, Congress should not impose rigid requirements for such testing in all 
circumstances.  Rather, Congress should give FDA the ability to draw on its 
decades of experience with these compounds by granting the agency the discretion 
to require such tests only when it determines that such clinical studies are needed.   
It is significant that FDA agrees.  FDA Deputy Commissioner Janet 
Woodcock addressed this during Congressman Waxman’s Oversight & 
Government Reform Committee hearings last month, testifying that the “use of 
human subjects for trials that are not needed but are simply to check a box on a 
regulatory requirement is not desirable.”  Dr. Woodcock added that the ability to 
physically characterize protein molecules and other complex substances “has 
evolved and is continuing to evolve” and that “flexibility in enabling FDA to 
incorporate the new science into the regulatory process . . . is in the best interest of 
the public as well as the agency and the industry.”  Congress has entrusted FDA to 
1282208.1 
7
make scientific judgments regarding drugs and biologics.  This scientific advice 
from the agency should be headed. 
 
Barr urges Congress to pass a regulatory framework for approving generic 
biologics that is free of unnecessary barriers and roadblocks in the form of artificial 
requirements, such as clinical studies and agency guidances.  Such a framework 
will give FDA the flexibility it needs to approve safe and interchangeable generic 
biological products as quickly as possible. 
 
B. 
Patent Provisions and Other “IP” Provisions 
 
A key part of effective generic biologics legislation is a mechanism that 
allows the generic company to resolve certain patent disputes without that 
litigation impacting FDA approval.  This was also a goal of Hatch-Waxman, 
although the brand industry has found ways around the law’s intent, which was 
that patent disputes be resolved early, so that the generics can enter the market at 
the earliest time after valid and applicable patents have expired.  Barr submits that 
any bill providing a pathway for generic biological products should take into 
account what we have learned from our 20-plus years of experience with the 
Hatch-Waxman patent provisions and improve upon that system in order to ensure 
that affordable biological products reach the public as quickly as possible.  Thus, 
an effective generic biologic bill must, at the very least, contain patent provisions 
like the following: 
1282208.1 
8
• First, companies need patent certainty prior to marketing.  Without it, 
companies will not invest in bringing affordable, comparable products to 
market prior to patent expiration because doing so could subject them to 
enormous patent infringement damages.  Thus, effective legislation must 
include provisions that allow a generic company to obtain the required 
certainty – through litigation if necessary – while FDA is reviewing the 
application.   
 
• Second, equally as important, however, is the fact that generic companies 
not be forced to litigate every patent relating to the brand product in order 
to obtain the patent certainty needed to launch.  Thus, a biological patent 
system should provide a mechanism for litigating only those patent 
disputes that the generic company believes would delay its launch.  There 
will be other patents – for example patents applicable to manufacturing 
processes that the generic company is not using – for which the only 
effect of early litigation would be unnecessary delay.  I am not 
suggesting that the brand company should forever be foreclosed from 
asserting its patents.  The brand company should have that opportunity, 
just not before the generic company markets its product.  Accordingly, 
the system that will allow for the most expeditious generic market entry 
is one that permits the generic company to select the patents that will be 
litigated pre-product launch.  This system also protects the brand 
company’s intellectual property by allowing for suit on any patent that 
can reasonably be asserted after the generic company begins marketing. 
 
• Third, generic companies need to be able to resolve patent disputes 
without those disputes delaying the FDA approval process, as we now 
experience with small molecule drugs under Hatch-Waxman. 
 
• Fourth, generic companies must be able to litigate patent disputes quickly 
and efficiently.  This will only happen if the generic company is 
permitted to designate a forum that would allow for more efficient 
litigation resolution.  Right now, the brand company has the ability to 
bring suit against an ANDA applicant in virtually any district court in the 
country.  Brand companies increasingly have brought suit in districts 
1282208.1 
9
with the longest time to trial.  In some courts, its takes from three to five 
years just to get to trial.  Where certainty is essential, this means more 
delayed market entry. 
 
• Fifth, if a brand company refuses to participate in the patent process, as 
increasingly happens with small molecule applications, the generic 
company must be allowed to enter the market without risking potentially 
massive damages.  Under proposals such as those found in H.R. 1038, 
generic companies have some protection in the event that the brand 
company refuses to participate in the patent process.  Brand companies 
have complained that this takes away substantive patent rights and forces 
them to give what amounts to a compulsory patent license.  Not true.  
These provisions only apply if the brand company violates its statutory 
obligation to participate in the patent process.  If the brand company 
follows the law, all of its patent rights would remain in tact. 
 
 
Finally, part of the so-called “IP” discussion surrounding generic biologics is 
the idea of exclusivity.  On the generic side, the issue is clear:  consumers and 
taxpayers, without question, will see the most significant savings from 
interchangeable products.  Thus, it is essential that any generic biologics bill 
incentivize generic companies to do the work necessary to achieve an 
interchangeability rating from FDA.  At present, no such incentive currently exists 
and, therefore, will need to be included in the legislation.   
On the brand side, the issue also seems clear:  lengthy, new exclusivity 
periods for brand companies are not necessary because the law currently provides 
more than enough incentive to continue innovating.  For example, brand 
companies already get significant incentives, including multiple provisions 
1282208.1 
10
allowing for patent term restorations, orphan drug exclusivity, and various tax 
credits.  If the brand companies disagree, they are free to come forward and present 
data to support their argument.  Indeed, Representative Waxman has invited 
discussion on this issue.  However, the brands have not yet come forward with any 
concrete data that would suggest that additional incentives are necessary.  It is my 
view that only if they do come forward with such evidence should Congress 
consider enacting new exclusivity periods. 
II. 
Generic Competition Will Spur Innovation 
 
There is a misconception that market competition from generic biologics 
would diminish the incentive for originators to innovate new biologics.  Generic 
competition will not slow innovation.  In fact, just the opposite would be true.  
Market competition generated by generic biologics would accelerate further 
innovation of new biological products, while at the same time lowering the cost of 
treatment with existing medicines. 
 
For example, Dr. Scott Gottlieb, recently the FDA Director of Medical 
Policy Development and Deputy Commissioner for Medical and Scientific Affairs, 
has explained:  “Legislation to expose today’s biologics to easier competition, after 
legitimate patents have expired, is going to accelerate development of improved 
products, not just lower-cost.  Those making static assumptions . . . about how 
much savings this legislation is likely to bring are losing sight of the competition 
1282208.1 
11
and progress it will have unleashed.”  [Forbes 4/17/07 edition (emphasis added)].  
Similarly, the January 2007 study released by the Pharmaceutical Care 
Management Association concluded that increased competition from generic 
biologics would not only create pressure to reduce the cost of these products, but 
also produce added incentives for further innovation.  Thus, generic biologics 
legislation would provide the dual benefit of increased savings and advancements 
in medical treatments. 
III. 
Savings 
 
No one can legitimately dispute that generic biologics will provide a market-
based mechanism to help manage private and federal expenditures and achieve 
significant savings.  And no one can dispute that the American health care system 
has ever needed those savings more than it does today.   
 
As the use of life-saving biological drugs continues to increase, so does the 
amount consumers and taxpayers spend.  Indeed, spending on biotech drugs 
increased 21% in 2006, to approximately $40 billion, according to the 2006 Drug 
Trend Report.  Spending in this sector is expected to grow to $100 billion over just 
the next four years.  By 2010, biological medicines will account for 26% of total 
drug spending in the U.S.  It is particularly important to note that Medicare 
spending for biological drugs continues to escalate disproportionately to Medicare 
funding.  To put things in perspective, Medicare and Medicaid will spend $2.5 
1282208.1 
12
billion this year on just one biological drug – the anemia treatment Epogen® – 
which is a half-billion dollars greater than the entire FY 2007 budget of the Food 
and Drug Administration. 
 
The solution to managing this spending is, of course, the use of safe and 
effective, lower-cost generic biologics.  Just as generic chemical drugs have saved 
billions of dollars so, too, will generic biological drug products.  A study released 
by Express Scripts in February 2007 showed that generic biologics would save 
payors $71 billion over 10 years.  An Engel & Novitt study in January 2007, as 
well as other independent economic analyses we have seen, show that generic 
biologics would generate significant savings for Medicare Part B reimbursed 
medicines.  Now, the brand companies take issue with some of these studies.  
Significantly, though, they do not take issue with the fact that generic biologics 
will save billions of dollars.  They only take issue with how many billions will be 
saved.  But in the end, whether the number is $71 billion or $7.1 billion, we simply 
cannot afford to lose the savings that, without question, would be achieved through 
use of generic biological medicines. 
 
Congress should act now and pass legislation giving FDA authority to 
review abbreviated applications for generic biologics.  The agency would be able 
to begin reviewing those applications as soon as they were submitted and the 
public would be assured that when the FDA approves a generic version of a 
1282208.1 
13
biological product, just as has been the case with traditional drugs over the past 30 
years, it will be safe, effective and have the same performance as the innovator 
product. 
CONCLUSION 
 
Chairman Palone and Members of the Committee, Barr always has been 
deeply committed to providing the public with affordable, safe generic drug 
products, and to do so as expeditiously as possible under the circumstances.  That 
is why Barr has joined with consumer groups like AARP, Consumers Union, 
Families USA; employee unions life AFL-CIO and AFSCME; major corporations 
like Caterpillar, Ford, GM, and Kodak; healthcare providers Aetna, Blue Cross 
Blue Shield and Kaiser Permanente; pharmacy leaders like CVS/Caremark and the 
National Association of Chain Drug Stores; and no less than 18 of the nation's 
governors in calling on Congress to pass legislation creating the framework for the 
approval of safe, effective and lower-cost generic biological drugs. 
Congress has the opportunity this year to create a huge win for patients, for 
taxpayers and for employers alike.  Indeed, effective generic biologics legislation 
very well could be the most important piece of consumer legislation enacted this 
year.  We urge Congress to move forward in this effort. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am happy to respond to any questions you and 
the Committee may have. 
1282208.1 
14
