 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Have You Thought About Using Generic Prescription 
Drugs?   
Did you know that BNL spent approximately $10 million on 
prescription drugs in our medical programs in 2007? 
That's a significant expense that can be reduced by the 
use of generic drugs. In 2007, 53% of the Cigna claims for 
prescription drugs were filled generically, compared to 
48% in 2006. While this has helped BNL to contain its 
medical plan costs, using generics in place of their brand-
name equivalents also saves you money  -  with lower   
co-pays.  
 
Here's what you may not know about generic drugs……… 
 
 
What are Generic Drugs?  
A generic drug is the same as a brand-name drug in: 
dosage, safety, strength, quality, the way it works, the way it 
is taken, and the way it should be used. Generic drugs must 
have the same active ingredients.  Colors, flavors, and 
certain other parts may be different, but these things don't 
affect they way the drug works. 
 
 
Are Generic Drugs as Safe and as Strong as Brand-
Name Drugs? 
Yes.  Generic drugs use the same active ingredients as 
brand-name drugs and work the same way.  The FDA also 
requires generic drugs must be as: high quality, strong, 
pure, and stable as brand-name drugs. They have the same 
risks and benefits as the brand-name drugs. 
  
 
Does Every Brand-Name Drug Have a Generic Drug? 
No.  When new drugs are first made, they have drug patents 
that are usually protected for 17 years.  The patent protects 
the company that made the drug first and does not allow 
anyone else to make and sell the drug.  When the patent 
expires, other drug companies can start selling the generic 
version of the drug, but, first, they must test the drug and the 
FDA must approve it.  Although your specific prescription 
drug may not have a generic equivalent, there may be other 
generic drugs available in that drug classification. 
 
GENERIC DRUGS:  
SAVE YOU MONEY.   
SAFE & EFFECTIVE. 
 
 
Why are Generic Drugs Less Expensive?  
Creating a drug costs a lot of money.  Since generic 
drug makers do not develop a drug from scratch, the 
costs to bring the drug to market are less.  They 
must show that their product performs in the same 
way as the brand-name drug. 
 
 
Can I Use the $4.00 Generic Drug Program at 
Wal-Mart? 
Yes.  Use your BNL medical program ID card at a 
Wal-Mart pharmacy and you'll pay the lower of the 
BNL co-pay or $4.00 for those drugs covered by 
Wal-Mart's Generic Drug Program.  Generic drug 
coverage at Wal-Mart includes many, but not all, 
generic drugs for a 30-day supply.  Inquire at your 
nearest Wal-Mart pharmacy or go online to 
www.walmart.com and follow the pharmacy link. 
 
 
 
Talk with your doctor about using 
generic drugs for your prescriptions.  He 
or she can prescribe the appropriate 
generic drug in that drug classification. 
 
 
 
 
      
     
 
