United States House of Representatives, 
Subcommittee on Commerce, Trade, and Consumer Protection Hearing on  
H.R. 1902, Protecting Consumer Access to Generic Drugs Act of 2007
 
May 2, 2007 
 
Statement of Michael Wroblewski 
Project Director, Consumer Education and Outreach 
Consumers Union, the Independent, Non-Profit Publisher of Consumer Reports 
 
 
Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee: 
 
 
Thank you for the invitation to testify today.  Consumers Union is the 
independent non-profit publisher of Consumer Reports.  Consumers Union investigates 
and reports extensively on the issues surrounding the costs, safety, and effectiveness of 
prescription drugs so that we can provide consumers with expert, non-biased advice to 
help them manage their health.1
Consumers Union strongly supports H.R. 1902, the “Protecting Consumer Access 
to Generic Drugs Act of 2007.”  This legislation ends the use of patent settlements in 
which the generic applicant receives anything of value in exchange for agreeing not to 
research, develop, manufacture, market, or sell its generic product.2  These settlements 
                                                 
1 Consumers Union is a nonprofit membership organization chartered in 1936 under the laws of the State of 
New York to provide consumers with expert and independent information, education and counsel about 
goods, services, health, and personal finance.  Consumers Union's income is solely derived from the sale of 
Consumer Reports and ConsumerReports.org, its other publications and from noncommercial 
contributions, grants and fees.  Consumers Union’s products have a combined paid circulation of 
approximately 7.3 million consumers.  In addition to reports on Consumers Union's own product testing, 
Consumer Reports and ConsumerReports.org regularly carry articles on health, product safety, marketplace 
economics and legislative, judicial and regulatory actions that affect consumer welfare. Consumers Union's 
publications carry no advertising and receive no commercial support. 
 
2 This compensation can take the form of a cash payment.  These types of payments were highlighted by 
the Federal Trade Commission’s enforcement actions involving Hytrin, Platinol, and Taxol.  See Abbott 
Labs., Dkt. No. C-3945 (May 26, 2002) (consent order); Geneva Pharms., Inc., Dkt No. C-3946 (May 22, 
2000) (consent order); Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Dkt. No. C-4076 (Apr. 13, 2003) (consent order).  It also 
could be in the form of the brand-name company agreeing not to launch an “authorized generic drug” prior 
to expiration of the brand-name drug company’s patents claiming the brand-drug product. 
 
with exclusionary payments restrict generic competition at the expense of consumers, 
whose access to lower-priced generic drugs may be deferred for years.  These settlements 
also jeopardize the health of millions of Americans who have difficulty obtaining safe 
and effective medicines at competitive prices.  In light of the recent increased use of these 
agreements with exclusionary payments,3 we urge prompt Congressional action to end 
this practice. 
This testimony first discusses why generic drugs are critical to affordable health 
care today and how Consumers Union is educating its readers and the public about the 
substantial benefits of generic drugs.  The testimony then explains how the dynamics of 
generic drug competition create powerful incentives for brand-name and generic 
companies to settle patent litigation in a way that harms consumers and innovation.  The 
Hatch-Waxman Act (the Act),4 which governs the approval of generic drugs, 
inadvertently exacerbates these incentives.  Moreover, continued reliance on the courts to 
provide consumers with timely relief is misplaced.   
The testimony also describes Consumers Union’s support of the other main 
provision of H.R. 1902 that updates the regulatory structure governing approval of 
subsequently-filed generic applications.  The provision breaks the bottleneck on FDA 
approval which can occur when generic applicants cannot obtain decisions on the merits 
concerning patent infringement. 
                                                 
3 See Prepared Statement of the Federal Trade Commission before the Committee on Judiciary of the 
United States Senate, “Anticompetitive Patent Settlements in the Pharmaceutical Industry:  The Benefits of 
a Legislative Solution,” (Jan. 17, 2007) at 17, (“More than 80 percent (9 of 11) of the settlements with first 
generic filers involved a payment to the generic challenger and a restriction on generic entry” in fiscal year 
2006.), (“FTC Senate Judiciary Committee Statement”) available at 
http://www.ftc.gov/speeches/leibowitz/070117anticompetitivepatentsettlements_senate.pdf. 
 
4 Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Restoration Act of 1984, Pub. L. No. 98-417, 98 Stat. 1585 (1984) (codified 
as amended 21 U.S.C. § 355 (1994)). 
 
 
2
Finally, the testimony describes Consumers Union’s support of several other 
legislative changes to speed generic entry, including: (a) clarifying the law to provide for 
the development of generic versions of complex molecular biologic medicines, (b) 
clearing the backlog of generic applications at the FDA, and (c) eliminating the abuse of 
citizen petitions in the generic drug approval process. 
I. 
Generic Drugs Can Help Dampen High Health Care Costs Now 
Health care costs continue to surge at double or triple the rate of general inflation, 
in part due to the high cost and rate of inflation of brand-name prescription drugs.5 
Generic drugs can dampen health inflation by providing equally safe and effective 
medicine at a far lower price—often prices up to 70 percent or less of the brand name 
drug.6  
New generic drug entry in 2006 illustrates the substantial savings that generic 
drugs can have on health-care spending.  During 2006, the cholesterol-lowering drugs 
Zocor and Pravachol, the antidepressants Zoloft and Wellbutrin, and the nasal spray 
Flonase all went generic.  Employers, governments, and patients paid $9.4 billion for 
these drugs in 2005 (the year before generic entry).  Because generic drugs can be up to 
70% less expensive than brand-name drug price, there is a potential annual savings of 
$6.6 billion on those five drugs alone assuming all brand prescriptions were filled with 
the generic version.7  This year and in 2008, several brand-drugs are expected to go 
                                                 
5 See Aaron Catlin, et al., “National Health Spending in 2005:  The Slowdown Continues,” 26 Health 
Affairs 142, 144, Exhibit 2 (Jan./Feb. 2007) (prescription drugs expenditures increased 13.1% in 2003, 
8.6% in 2004, and 5.8% in 2005).  
 
6 David Reiffen and Michael Ward, “Generic Drug Industry Dynamic,” 87 Review of Econ. & Stat. 37 
(2005). 
 
7 Rachel Brand, Popular Drugs are Getting Cheaper,” The Detroit News (Dec. 6, 2006), available at 
http://www.detnews.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20061206/LIFESTYLE03/612060326/1040.  
 
3
generic, including blockbuster drugs with over $1 billion in annual sales such as Prevacid 
(used to treat heartburn), Imitrex (to treat migraine headaches), Zyrtex (to treat allergies), 
and Effexor (to treat depression).8  The consumer savings once generic versions of these 
drugs are available will be immense.   
Consumer Reports strongly encourages the use of generics as a way for 
consumers to save money while obtaining quality health care.  We have made a major 
organizational commitment to educate consumers about generic drugs and to help 
consumers obtain reliable, easy-to-understand advice about the safest, most effective, and 
lowest cost prescription drugs available.  In December 2004, Consumers Union launched 
Consumer Reports Best Buy Drugs®, a free public education project.9  Attached to this 
testimony are two sample Best Buy Drugs summary reports on prescription drugs to 
reduce cholesterol and to relieve heartburn.  We currently provide information for 17 
different classes of medicine, and we plan to expand to additional classes in the near 
future.   
The goals of Best Buy Drugs are to: 
• improve the quality of care by ensuring people get the safest, most effective drugs 
with the least side effects; 
 
• improve access by helping consumers choose drugs that are most affordable 
(taking into account effectiveness, side effects, safety, and price); and 
 
• help consumers and taxpayers by reducing the cost of health insurance, 
consumers’ out-of-pocket expenses, and Medicare and Medicaid.   
 
                                                                                                                                                 
 
8 FDA, Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Evaluations (Electronic Orange Book) - via 
on-line resources FDC Reports, The Pink Sheet (2004-2005). 
 
9 Consumer Reports Best Buy Drugs®  is funded by grants from the Engelberg Foundation and the National 
Library of Medicine.  In addition, Consumers Union makes a large in-kind contribution to support this 
project.   
 
4
 
We estimate that a consumer who switches from a highly advertised, high-priced 
brand name drug to a Best Buy Drug can often save between $1,000 and $2,000 a year.  
Approximately 100,000 Consumer Reports Best Buy Drugssm reports are downloaded 
each month, including about 20,000 in Spanish.  In addition to our Web site 
www.CRBestBuyDrugs.org, we distribute print versions of our reports in five states with 
the help of pharmacists, senior organizations, doctors, and libraries.  The Best Buy Drugs 
website also provides additional information describing how Best Buy Drugs operates 
and the rigorous evidence-based review that is used to derive the “Best Buy Drug” in 
each class of medicine. 
 
Consumer Reports also has been active in reporting on the consumer benefits of 
generic drugs.  Most recent, Consumer Reports published a report in its November 2006 
issue that explained how cash prices for generic drugs vary widely at different types of 
pharmacies.  The report concluded that for five highly prescribed generic drugs 
(fluoxetine, lisinopril, lovastatin, metformin, and warfarin), median prices at mass 
merchant and online pharmacies were approximately 20 to 50 percent less expensive than 
prices at supermarket and drug chain pharmacies.10  We urged our readers to shop around 
for the best deals. 
II. 
The Dynamics of Generic Drug Competition Create Powerful Incentives for 
Brand-Name and Generic Companies to Settle Patent Litigation in A Way 
that Thwarts the Objectives of the Hatch-Waxman Act. 
 
The economics surrounding generic entry create powerful incentives for brand-
name and generic companies to enter into these types of patent settlements.  These 
incentives are created because the total profits available to the brand-name company prior 
                                                 
10 Consumer Reports (Nov. 2006) at 58-59. 
 
 
5
to generic entry exceed the total profits of both the brand-name and generic applicant 
after generic entry.11  The brand-name company has a powerful economic incentive to 
pay the generic applicant something more than it would earn by entry with its generic 
product, because the sum the brand-name company pays will still be less than the amount 
of money it would lose if the generic applicant did enter the market.   
Likewise, the generic applicant who is sued for patent infringement can earn more 
by entering into a settlement in which it agrees to defer market entry than it could earn by 
winning its patent challenge and competing in the market.  Indeed, the ability to obtain a 
cash payment and defer market entry could encourage generic companies to challenge 
strong patents that it would otherwise not challenge, to the detriment of consumer’s 
interest in continued pharmaceutical innovation.  In short, when these payments are 
allowed, the generic company may obtain more by settlement than it could have obtained 
by outright victory in the patent case.   
A. 
The Hatch-Waxman Act Inadvertently Exacerbates the Incentive to Settle 
Patent Litigation with Compensation Paid to the Generic Applicant. 
 
When Congress enacted the Hatch-Waxman Act, it represented a compromise 
between making available low-cost generic drugs, while at the same time restoring patent 
life lost due to the length of FDA brand-name drug approval process.12  This balance 
recognized two important consumer needs – the need for competitively priced 
pharmaceutical products and the need for strong patent rights to encourage development 
of life-saving medicines.  Congress created a number of industry-specific incentives to 
                                                 
11 See Robert Kneuper, “Four Economic Principles Underlying the FTC’s Position Against Reverse 
Payments in Patent Settlement Agreements,” The Antitrust Source (Jan. 2006) at 2, available 
athttp://www.abanet.org/antitrust/at-source/06/01/Jan06-Kneuper1=26f.pdf. 
 
12 H.R. Rep. No. 857, 98th Cong., 2nd Sess., Pt. 1, at 14 (1984). 
 
6
accomplish these goals.  In order to see how these incentives work, and their effects on 
the dynamic of patent settlements, it is necessary to understand three unique features of 
the Act:  a paragraph IV certification, the 30-month stay period, and the 180-day 
marketing exclusivity provision. 
 
The Act establishes a procedure for accelerated FDA approval of generic drugs 
through the use of an “Abbreviated New Drug Application” (ANDA).  The Act requires a 
generic applicant to show that its generic drug is “bioequivalent” to the brand-name drug.  
The generic drug manufacturer does not have to replicate the costly safety and efficacy 
tests for its drug; rather, the Act permits the generic company to rely on the safety and 
efficacy tests of the brand-name drug product. 
One of the most important features of this application process is if the generic 
applicant seeks prompt approval of its generic drug, it must certify that its generic drug 
product does not infringe on the patents claiming the brand-name drug product, or that 
patents claiming the brand-name drug product are invalid.13  The Act names this a 
“paragraph IV” certification.   
A generic applicant that makes a paragraph IV certification must notify the patent 
holder.  If the patent holder does not bring an infringement action against the generic 
applicant within 45 days, the FDA may approve the ANDA, assuming the other 
regulatory requirements are met.  Alternatively, if the brand-name company brings an 
infringement action during the 45-day period after notification, the patent owner is 
                                                 
13  The Act also creates a way for a generic applicant to obtain approval at the expiration of any patent 
claiming the brand-name drug product (a “paragraph III” certification).  The relevant statutory and 
regulatory framework for the ANDA approval process has been described in Eli Lilly and Co. v. Medtronic, 
Inc., 496 U.S. at 676-78; Mova Pharmaceutical Corp. v. Shalala, 140 F.3d 1060, 1063-65, 46 USPQ2d 
1385 (D.C. Cir. 1998); and Bristol-Myers Squibb Company v. Royce Laboratories, Inc., 69 F.3d at 1131-
32, 1135. 
 
 
7
entitled to an automatic stay of FDA approval of the ANDA for 30 months (the 30-month 
stay).  This process provides the brand-name company and the generic applicant an 
opportunity to litigate patent issues before the generic drug has entered the market and 
incurred any damage exposure. 
 
The Act provides that the generic applicant to file the first ANDA containing a 
paragraph IV certification (the “first filer”) for a particular brand-name drug is entitled to 
180-days of marketing exclusivity.  During this period, the Food and Drug 
Administration may not approve a subsequently filed ANDA for the same brand-name 
drug product.  The 180-day period starts once the first filed generic applicant begins 
commercial marketing of its generic drug product.  The real effect of this exclusivity 
period is that the FDA is prohibited from approving any subsequently filed ANDA for the 
same brand-drug product until the first filer’s 180-day period of marketing exclusivity 
expires.  The 180-day exclusivity period is an important incentive Congress provided to 
would-be generic entrants to encourage them to challenge weak or questionable patents 
claiming brand-name drug products or to design around a brand-name drug’s patent. 
 
This regulatory structure can exacerbate the economic incentives underlying 
patent settlements between brand-name companies and generic applicants discussed 
above.  A settlement between the brand-name company and the first filer will avoid the 
brand-name company’s lost profit potential.  In addition, the 180-day marketing 
exclusivity provision blocks entry by subsequently filed generics until 180 days after the 
first filer actually begins commercial marketing.  Unfortunately for consumers, the first 
filer has a powerful incentive to accept a settlement because it will not only get the brand 
name company’s compensation, but it retains its 180-day marketing exclusivity when it 
 
8
does enter at a later date.  Although both the brand-name company and the generic 
company are better off with the settlement, consumers lose the possibility of earlier 
generic entry, either because the generic company would have prevailed in the lawsuit or 
the parties would have negotiated a settlement with an earlier entry date but no payment. 
B. 
These Settlements Are Contrary to the Purpose of the Hatch-Waxman Act. 
The irony, of course, is that the purpose of the ANDA application process was to 
speed the entry of generic drugs.  This policy was reaffirmed in 2003 when Congress 
amended the Hatch-Waxman Act in the Medicare Modernization Act.  As the Senate 
Report explained, those amendments sought in part to stamp out the “abuse” of the 
Hatch-Waxman Act resulting from “pacts between big pharmaceutical firms and makers 
of generic versions of brand name drugs, that are intended to keep lower cost drugs off 
the market.”14  Indeed, Senator Hatch, one of the Act’s co-authors, stated during the 
debate over these amendments that “[a]s a coauthor of the Drug Price Competition and 
Patent Term Restoration Act, I can tell you that I find these types of reverse payment 
collusive arrangements appalling.  I must concede, as a drafter of the law, that we came 
up short in our draftsmanship.  We did not wish to encourage situations where payments 
were made to generic firms not to sell generic drugs and not to allow multi-source 
generic competition.”15   
                                                 
14 S. Rep. No. 167, 107th Cong., 2nd Sess., at 4 (2002). 
 
15 See Statement of Sen. Orrin Hatch, Senate Floor Debates on S. 812, Cong. Rec. at S7567 (July 30, 2002). 
 
 
9
C. 
Experience Shows that Brand-Name Companies and Generic Applicants 
Do Not Need to Use Exclusionary Payments for Delay to Settle Patent 
Litigation. 
 
As noted above, the FTC has reported that these types of patent settlements 
reappeared in 2005 after a six-year hiatus.16  Two observations can be made from this 
fact.  First, public knowledge of the FTC’s investigations into these types of settlement 
arrangements in 1999 effectively ended the use of agreements with these terms.  Second, 
brand-name and generic companies continued to settle patent disputes during this period 
(roughly from 1999 to 2005).  The parties settled their differences on terms that did not 
include an exclusionary payment.  Rather, they settled presumably on the basis of the 
relative strength of their cases.  If they could not settle their differences, a court decided 
the patent issues.  Any contention that exclusionary payments are necessary to settle 
patent litigation is undermined by these two facts.   
Consumers Union believes that in light of the consumer harm that can occur from 
settlements with exclusionary payments, the public interest is served when a court either 
upholds the brand company’s patent rights or resolves the patent issues so that generic 
entry can proceed expeditiously.   
III.  
The Courts are Unlikely to Provide Timely Relief to Consumers.   
 
 
We encourage Congress to act now to end the use of these types of settlement 
agreements because the use of exclusionary payments has upset the delicate balance 
initially struck within the Hatch-Waxman framework.  Moreover, it is unlikely the federal 
courts will provide consumers relief in a timely manner.  Two recent appellate court 
                                                 
16 Bureau of Competition Report, Federal Trade Commission, Agreements Filed with the Federal Trade 
Commission under the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003: 
Summary of Agreements Filed in FY 2005: A Report by the Bureau of Competition (Apr. 2006), available 
at http://www.ftc.gov/os/2006/04/fy2005drugsettlementsrpt.pdf.  See also FTC Senate Judiciary Committee 
Statement at 17.  
 
10
decisions have taken a lenient view of these types of patent settlements, with one of the 
courts rejecting the reasoned antitrust analysis of these settlements put forth by the 
FTC.17  Both courts have, in essence, held that these settlements are legal unless the 
patent was obtained by fraud or that the infringement suit itself was a sham.  These courts 
relied on the presumptive validity of a patent to support the conclusion that any 
settlement which does not exceed the exclusionary scope of a patent also must be valid.  
The upshot of these court rulings is that a patent holder can pay whatever it takes to buy 
off a potential challenger during the life of the patent.  In one sense, court approval of 
these types of payments will convert Hatch-Waxman into a vehicle for facilitating the 
collection of “greenmail” by generic applicants.18
These rulings are based on two faulty premises.  First these courts seem to require 
that unless the patent can be proved to be invalid or not infringed, a court cannot declare 
a settlement illegal.  This test, as the FTC discussed in its Schering opinion, may be good 
in theory but, it is nearly impossible to make work from a practical point of view.19
The second faulty premise is that these courts have elevated the generally held 
principle that public policy favors settlements above the statutory mechanisms that 
Congress put in place to encourage generic applicants to challenge weak patents and, 
hence, speed generic entry.  This reasoning also lacks an appreciation of the view, as 
                                                 
17 Schering-Plough Corp. v. F.T.C., 403 F.3d 1056 (11th Cir. 2005) (cert. denied); In re Tamoxifen Citrate 
Antitrust Litig., 429 F.3d 370 (2d Cir. 2005).  
 
18 See Thomas B. Leary, Antitrust Issues in the Settlement of Pharmaceutical Patent Disputes, Part III, 
Address Before the ABA Spring Meeting (Mar. 29, 2006), at 26, available at 
http://www.hhlaw.com/files/News/05ac8357-7511-43c9-a927-2c7e96a0ecde/Presentation/NewsAttachm 
ent/fd869e0b-b58a-451d-ad8d-2e110dbb796b/LearyABASpringMeetingSpeech.pdf.  
 
19 See Schering-Plough Corp., No. 9297, 2003 WL 22989651 (F.T.C.) (Commission Decision and Final 
Order) at 33-35 (the FTC’s opinion discussing the practical and public policy limitations on the usefulness 
of a “mini patent trial” within the conduct of an antirust case). 
 
 
11
recently articulated by the U.S. Department of Justice Antitrust Division, that public 
policy also strongly favors ridding the economy of invalid patents, which impede 
efficient licensing, hinder competition, and undermine incentives for innovation.20    
Indeed, the industry experience under Hatch-Waxman between 1992 and 2000 
shows that Congress struck the right balance when it established these incentives.  During 
this period, generic challengers that had used paragraph IV certifications won their patent 
challenges in 73% of the cases.21  Indeed, these challenges have resulted in generic entry 
earlier than what otherwise would have occurred absent the generic challenge.  These 
patent challenges and subsequent generic entry have yielded enormous benefits to 
consumers.  
IV. 
Break the Bottleneck on Generic Entry 
Consumers Union also supports the provision in H.R. 1902 that updates the 
regulatory structure governing FDA approval of subsequently-filed generic applications.  
Under current law, there is no way to trigger a forfeiture of the first-filer’s 180-day period 
if a subsequent applicant is not sued, although the FDA may be ready to approve the 
subsequently filed application.  The provision in H.R. 1902 merely updates the regulatory 
conditions under which the FDA can approve the subsequently-filed generic product.  
V.    Other Legislative Suggestions to Help Speed Generic Entry. 
 
Congress also may wish to consider three specific actions so that consumers have 
access to safe and effective generic medicines in a timely manner.  First, there is no clear 
                                                 
20 Brief for the United States As Amicus Curiae Supporting Petitioner, MedImmune, Inc. v. Genentech, Inc., 
et al., No. 05-608 (May 2006) at 2, available at http://www.usdoj.gov/osg/briefs/2005/3mer/1ami/2005-
0608.mer.ami.pdf. 
 
21 Federal Trade Commission, Generic Drug Study Prior to Patent Expiration:  An FTC Study (July 2002) 
at vi, available at http://www.ftc.gov/os/2002/07/genericdrugstudy.pdf. 
 
 
12
law providing for the development of generic versions of complex molecular biologic 
medicines. These new products are the most expensive medicines on the market—some 
costing as much as $100,000 to $250,000 for a course of treatment.  Consumers Union 
believes that biogenerics could provide some savings and can be provided safely, thus 
helping some of our most severely ill patients.22  Existing FDA law should be clarified to 
allow the U.S. to do what the Europeans are doing: bringing some relief to consumers.23  
To this end, Consumers Union supports Chairman Waxman’s legislation, the “Access to 
Life-Saving Medicine Act.”   
We note, however, the possibility of patent settlement agreements that restrict 
generic entry, which are the subject of today’s hearing, are also likely to occur with 
biogeneric drugs.  As a result, we support using the same approach in H.R. 1902 to define 
these types of agreements as “unfair methods of competition.”  We also support requiring 
brand and generic biologic manufacturers to file their patent settlement agreements with 
the Federal Trade Commission and the Antitrust Division of the U.S. Department of 
Justice, similar to the way in which brand and generic pharmaceutical manufacturers file 
their agreements under the MMA.    
Second, we urge Congress to provide the FDA with sufficient resources to 
eliminate the backlog in the approval of generics.24  In a memo to Consumers Union last 
autumn, the FDA reported that an unduplicated count of pending generic applications 
                                                 
22 Tsao, Amy. “Seeking a Prescription for Biogenerics.” Business Week. October 24, 2003. 
 
23 See  Statement of Jim Guest before the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions 
on S. 3807, the Enhancing Drug Safety and Innovation Act of 2006 (Nov. 16, 2006) at 20, available at 
http://help.senate.gov/Hearings/2006_11_16/Guest.pdf. 
 
24 Id. at 19. 
 
 
13
showed a backlog of 394 drugs pending more than 180 days—drugs which could help 
lower costs to consumers if they were approved. 
Third, we urge Congress to stop the use of phony citizen’s petitions to delay 
generic entry.  According to the FDA, only 3 of 42 petitions answered between 2001 and 
2005 raised issues that merited changes in the agency’s policies about a drug.  For 
example, Flonase, a commonly used prescription allergy medication, went off-patent in 
May 2004. But GlaxoSmithKline stretched its monopoly window by almost two years 
with citizen petitions and a legal challenge to the use of generics.25  We recommend 
Congress end this abuse. 
 
Respectfully Submitted, 
Michael Wroblewski 
Project Director, Consumer Education and Outreach 
Consumers Union 
101 Truman Avenue 
Yonkers, New York  10703 
mwroblewski@consumer.org
                                                 
25 Consumer Reports (Nov. 2006) at 5. 
 
14
Our Recommendations
You can save money – in some cases $200 a month or
more – if you need to take a PPI and your doctor pre-
scribes one of the more expensive ones. That's because
all five of the PPIs are quite similar in effectiveness
and safety.
Talk to your doctor about other medicines that may
relieve your heartburn symptoms, either before you
require a PPI or in combination with a PPI. Also talk
with your doctor about the role that dietary and lifestyle
changes can play in alleviating symptoms – such as eat-
ing smaller meals, weight loss and avoiding alcohol.
I If you have no health insurance for prescription
drugs, we have chosen Prilosec OTC 20mg
(omeprazole) as the Consumer Reports Best Buy
Drug. This proven medicine is sold over-the-counter,
without a prescription, and costs 50 to 80 cents a
day. It is as effective for most people as the more
expensive PPIs.
I If you have drug coverage, find out if your health
plan provides a discount coupon for Prilosec OTC.
If not, talk with you doctor about choosing the PPI
that has the lowest out-of-pocket cost, or co-pay,
under your insurance plan.
I If you are one of the 15% of people with GERD who
have moderate to severe erosions in your esopha-
gus, you may need a higher dose of a PPI.
SAFETY NOTE: PPIs interact with some other medi-
cines, such as blood thinners and anti-anxiety drugs.
Tell your doctor about all the drugs you are taking
before you take a PPI. People aged 65 and over, and
people with chronic medical conditions, who take a PPI
should get vaccinated against pneumonia and get a flu
shot every year.
See the cost comparison table on page 2. This infor-
mation was last updated in November 2004. Go to
www.CRBestBuyDrugs.org for the latest news and
information on the drug classes we examine.
© Consumers Union 2005
IF YOU SUFFER from heartburn, ulcers or gastroesophageal
reflux disease (GERD, more commonly known as acid reflux), you
may need treatment with a proton pump inhibitor, or PPI. Five
medicines in this class are available. One is a nonprescription drug.
PPIs range in cost from around $25 to more than $200 a month.
To help you and your doctor choose a PPI, Consumer Reports has
evaluated the drugs in this category based on their effectiveness,
safety, and cost. This 2-page brief is a summary of an in-depth
report you can access on the Internet at www.CRBestBuyDrugs.org.
You can also learn about other drugs we’ve analyzed on this free
Web site. Our independent evaluations are based on scientific
reviews conducted by the Oregon Health and Science University-
based Drug Effectiveness Review Project. Grants from the
Engelberg Foundation and National Library of Medicine help
fund Consumer Reports Best Buy Drugs.
Do You Need a PPI?  
Almost everyone has heartburn once in a while. Periodic bouts
can be treated effectively and safely with over-the-counter
antacids and acid reducers such as Alka Selzer, Maalox, Rolaids,
Tums, cimetidine (Tagamet) or ranitidine (Zantac). But if you
have heartburn or acid reflux more than once a week and your
symptoms are not relieved by these over-the-counter medicines,
you may need a PPI. GERD can be dangerous. If left untreated,
it can cause erosion of the lining of the esophagus.
w w w. C R B e s t B u y D r u g s . o r g
Drugs to Treat Heartburn, Ulcers, and Stomach Acid Reflux: 
The Proton Pump Inhibitors
Comparing Effectiveness, Safety, and Price
Comparative Effectiveness of PPIs1
Generic Name 
with Dose per
Day
Brand Name
Complete 
Symptom
Relief 
(% of
Patients)
Esophageal
Healing 
at 8 Weeks 
(% of
Patients)
Relapse
Prevention 
(% of
Patients)
Esomeprazole
40mg
Nexium
60-70% 
92%
93%
Lansoprazole
30mg
Prevacid
60-70% 
87%
NA
Omeprazole
20mg
Prilosec
60-70% 
86%
86%
Pantoprazole
20mg
Protonix
60-70% 
91%
86%
Rabeprazole
20mg
Aciphex
60-70% 
91%
NA
(1) Effectiveness data presented for those PPI dosage strengths that have been studied and compared to date.
PPI Cost Comparison
Generic Name 
with Dose per Day
Brand Name1
Average 
Monthly Cost2
Esomeprazole 20mg
Nexium
$171
Esomeprazole 40mg
Nexium
$165
Lansoprazole 15mg delayed release lingual tablets 
Prevacid
$133
Lansoprazole 30mg delayed release lingual tablets 
Prevacid
$126
Lansoprazole 15mg sustained release tablets 
Prevacid
$164
Lansoprazole 30mg sustained release tablets 
Prevacid
$169
Lansoprazole 30mg enteric coated capsules 
Prevacid
$159
Lansoprazole 15mg delayed release suspension packets
Prevacid
$172
Lansoprazole 30mg delayed release suspension packets
Prevacid
$162
Omeprazole 20mg 
Prilosec OTC3
$24
Omeprazole 10mg sustained release capsules 
Prilosec
$133
Omeprazole 20mg sustained release capsules 
Prilosec
$154
Omeprazole 40mg sustained release capsules  
Prilosec
$245
Omeprazole 10mg sustained release capsules 
Generic
$120
Omeprazole 20mg sustained release capsules  
Generic
$119
Pantoprazole 20mg delayed release tablets 
Protonix
$145
Pantoprazole 40mg delayed release tablets 
Protonix
$136
Rabeprazole 20mg 
Aciphex
$165
(1) “Generic” indicates drug sold by generic name, omeprazole.
(2) Prices reflect nationwide retail average for September 2004, rounded to nearest dollar; data provided by NDCHealth, a health care information company.
(3) This is a nonprescription (over-the-counter) version of omeprazole.  
UNDERSTANDING GENERICS: A generic drug is one that is sold under its generic name. In this table, only omeprazole is available as a generic.
It is also sold under its brand name, Prilosec. A nonprescription version, Prilosec OTC, is also available. The remaining PPIs are sold only as
brand name drugs, though their generic or chemical names are also given in the first column.       
If you have high cholesterol or are at risk of heart attack
or stroke, your doctor may prescribe a "statin" – the most wide-
ly used type of cholesterol-lowering drug. There are six statins.
Three are now available as less expensive generics – lovastatin,
pravastatin and simvastatin.
One new combination drug –
Vytorin – combines simvastatin with another type of choles-
terol-lowering drug.
To help you and your doctor choose the statin that is right for
you, Consumers Reports has evaluated the drugs in this category
based on their effectiveness, safety, and cost. This 2-page brief is
a summary of an 18-page report you can access on the Internet
at www.CRBestBuyDrugs.org. You can also learn about other
drugs we’ve analyzed on this free Web site. Our independent
evaluations are based on scientific reviews conducted by the
Oregon Health and Science University-based Drug Effectiveness
Review Project. Grants from the Engelberg Foundation and
National Library of Medicine help fund Consumer Reports Best
Buy Drugs.
DO YOU NEED A STATIN?
If your cholesterol is only marginally elevated and you’re not at
risk for heart disease, heart attack, or stroke, dietary and lifestyle
changes may be enough to lower your "bad" (LDL, or Low
Density Lipoprotein) cholesterol to a healthy level.
So you
might try that before taking a medicine. But if your LDL is too
high and/or you are already at risk for heart disease and stroke
(for example, if you smoke, have diabetes, or have coronary
artery disease), your doctor is likely to prescribe a statin.
© Consumers Union 2006
Statins are highly effective and generally safe medi-
cines. In people at risk for heart disease or who have
heart disease, they substantially lower the chances of
a heart attack, stroke, and death. 
The statins differ in their ability to reduce cholesterol
and there is stronger evidence for some when it
comes to reducing your risk of heart attack or death
from heart disease or stroke. The statins also vary
widely in cost – from about $30 a month to $170 a
month. (See page 2) 
Taking the evidence for effectiveness, safety, and cost
into account, we have chosen four statins as
Consumer Reports Best Buy Drugs:
• Generic lovastatin – if you need to lower "bad"
(LDL) cholesterol by less than 30%
• Generic pravastatin – if you need to lower LDL cho-
lesterol by less than 30%
• Generic simvastatin – for some people who need less
than 30% LDL reduction; for people who need 30%
or greater LDL reduction and/or have heart disease
or diabetes; and for some people who have had a
heart attack or have acute coronary syndrome (chest
pain and signs of coronary artery disease)
• Atorvastatin (Lipitor) – for some people who have
had a heart attack or have acute coronary syn-
drome; use for two years
Lovastatin is much less expensive than the other statins.
Pravastatin and simvastatin have only recently become
available as generics. Their cost will decline in the fall of
2006 and in early 2007. Lipitor is not available as a
generic and is more expensive than the three generics. 
Most people who need a statin should take the lowest
dose that reduces their LDL cholesterol to an acceptable
level. High doses of statins pose greater risk of muscle
and liver problems. But some people – such as those
who have had heart attacks – may need higher doses. 
No matter what dose you take, if you have muscle
aches and pains when taking a statin, contact your doc-
tor immediately. Also, ask your doctor about splitting
your statin pills. This can save you money.   
This information was last updated in July 2006.   
Our Recommendations
www.CRBestBuyDrugs.org
Treating Elevated Cholesterol
and Heart Disease
Comparing Effectiveness, Safety, and Price
Risk level and criteria*  
Latest advice on LDL cholesterol reduction
Reduce LDL to:
Low
- No current heart disease 
- No or only one risk factor
Moderate
- No current heart disease
- Two risk factors 
Moderate High
- Two or more risk factors  
High
- Known heart disease
- Diabetes
- Multiple Risk Factors
- Below 160mg/dl
- Below 130mg/dl is better  
- Below 130mg/dl
- Below 100mg/dl is better 
- Below 130mg/dl
- Below 100mg/dl is better
- Below 100mg/dl
- Below 70mg/dl is better
* In addition to having an elevated LDL and/or low HDL, the most
important risk factors for heart disease, heart attack and stroke are
cigarette smoking and having diabetes or high blood pressure.
Other risk factors include being overweight, getting little or no
exercise; having elevated triglycerides or C-reactive protein levels,
and having a family history of heart disease. 
The Statins
Statins – Comparative Effectiveness and Cost1
Generic Name 
And Dose Per Day 
Brand
Name2
Average
Monthly
Cost3
Average Expected 
LDL Reduction
Atorvastatin
Atorvastatin 10mg
Atorvastatin 20mg
Atorvastatin 40mg
Atorvastatin 80mg
Ezetimibe/simvastatin
Ezetimibe/simvastatin 10mg/10mg
Ezetimibe/simvastatin 10mg/20mg
Fluvastatin
Fluvastatin 20mg
Fluvastatin 40mg
Lovastatin  
Lovastatin 10mg
Lovastatin 20mg
Lovastatin 40mg
Lovastatin 10mg
Lovastatin 20mg
Lovastatin 20mg longacting
Lovastatin 40mg longacting
Pravastatin8
Pravastatin 10mg
Pravastatin 20mg
Pravastatin 40mg
Rosuvastatin
Rosuvastatin 10mg
Rosuvastatin 20mg
Simvastatin8
Simvastatin 10mg
Simvastatin 20mg
Simvastatin 40mg
Mortality 
Reduction?  
Reduces the Risk
of Heart Attack?4
Lipitor
Lipitor
Lipitor
Lipitor
Vytorin
Vytorin
Lescol
Lescol
Generic
Generic
Generic
Mevacor
Mevacor
Altoprev
Altoprev
Pravachol
Pravachol
Pravachol
Crestor
Crestor
Zocor
Zocor
Zocor
34-38%
42-46%
47-51%
46-54% 
45%
52%
22%
25%
21%
24-27%
31%
21%
24-27%
30%
36%
18-25%
23-29%
26-34%
43-50% 
52-55%
26-33%
30- 40%
35-45%
$90
$129
$129
$128
$105
$104
$77
$75
$32
$36
$56
$43
$81
$99
$108
$120
$114
$168
$106 
$105
$98
$169
$170
Yes
Yes5
Likely 
Yes
Yes7
Yes
Likely
Yes
Yes 
Yes
Yes5
Likely
Likely6
Likely7
Yes
Likely
Yes
STAT W2 0706
(1) Because of space limitations this table does not contain all dosage forms. For a full list, please see the full 18-page statin report at
www.CRBestBuyDrugs.org.   
(2) "Generic" indicates drug sold by generic name.  
(3) Prices reflect nationwide retail average for April 2006, rounded to nearest dollar; information derived by Consumer Reports Best Buy Drugs from data
provided by Wolters Kluwer Health, Pharmaceutical Audit Suite   
(4) Nonfatal and fatal heart attack plus deaths attributed to heart disease.
(5) The combination of these two drugs has not been proven but simvastatin has. The benefit is assumed for the combination.   
(6) Lovastatin has not been proven to reduce deaths, but the evidence strongly points in that direction. 
(7) Based on the results for shorter-acting versions of the drugs.  
(8) A generic version of pravastatin became available in April 2006.  A generic version of simvastatin became available in June 2006.
Future updates of our statin report and this brief will include the monthly costs for these medicines.  
UNDERSTANDING GENERICS: A generic is a copy of a brand drug whose patent has expired. For example, in this table lovastatin is the generic ver-
sion of the brand name drug Mevacor. As explained on page 1, generic pravastatin and simvastatin only recently became available so we don’t yet
have the monthly costs for those two drugs. The prices given in this table are for the brand versions, Pravachol and Zocor. Generic drugs are less
expensive. If you are prescribed a brand name drug that is available as a generic, ask your doctor or pharmacist why.
