 
OFFICE OF  
THE INSPECTOR GENERAL 
U.S. NUCLEAR  
REGULATORY COMMISSION 
 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications 
Program 
 
OIG-05-A-19      September 30, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
AUDIT REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All publicly available OIG reports (including this report) are accessible through 
NRC’s Web site at:  
http:/www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/insp-gen/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 30, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM TO: 
Luis A. Reyes 
 
 
Executive Director for Operations 
 
 
 
FROM: 
 
Stephen D. Dingbaum/RA/ 
 
 
Assistant Inspector General for Audits 
 
 
SUBJECT: 
 
AUDIT OF NRC’S GENERIC COMMUNICATIONS 
PROGRAM (OIG-05-A-19) 
 
Attached is the Office of the Inspector General’s (OIG) audit report, Audit of 
NRC’s Generic Communications Program.  
 
The audit identified generic communications, specifically, safeguards advisories, 
that are issued outside of NRC's existing regulatory framework.  As a result, the 
agency (1) may be unable to pursue actions requested or required of licensees in 
its generic communications, and (2) compromises its openness policy, thereby 
affecting the public's confidence in NRC's regulatory processes and decision-
making.   
 
Additionally, controls for oversight of licensee actions on generic communications 
are inadequate and NRC did not employ a sound methodology when conducting 
its effectiveness assessment of the Generic Communications Program.  As a 
result, the agency risks the potential loss of safety/regulatory data and lacks 
assurance that its generic communications are effective.   
 
Comments from the September 6, 2005, exit conference and your September 27, 
2005, written comments have been incorporated, as appropriate, in our final 
report.  Appendix B contains the agency’s formal written response in its entirety.  
Appendix C presents OIG’s detailed analysis of the formal comments. 
 
If you have any questions or wish to discuss other issues, please call  
Anthony Lipuma at 415-5910 or me at 415-5915. 
 
Attachment: As stated 
 
 
 
 
Distribution 
 
John T. Larkins, Executive Director, Advisory Committee on Reactor 
 
  Safeguards/Advisory Committee on Nuclear Waste 
 
G. Paul Bollwerk, III, Chief Administrative Judge, Atomic Safety andT 
  Licensing Board Panel 
Karen D. Cyr, General Counsel 
 
John F. Cordes, Jr., Director, Office of Commission Appellate Adjudication   
Jesse L. Funches, Chief Financial Officer 
 
Janice Dunn Lee, Director, Office of International Programs  
 
William N. Outlaw, Director of Communications 
 
William N. Outlaw, Acting Director, Office of Congressional Affairs 
 
Eliot B. Brenner, Director, Office of Public Affairs 
 
Annette Vietti-Cook, Secretary of the Commission 
 
William F. Kane, Deputy Executive Director for Reactor  
   and Preparedness Programs, OEDO 
 
Martin J. Virgilio, Deputy Executive Director for Materials, Research,  
   State and Compliance Programs, OEDO 
 
Jacqueline E. Silber, Deputy Executive Director for Information Services  
    and Administration, and Chief Information Officer, OEDO  
 
William M. Dean, Assistant for Operations, OEDO 
 
Timothy F. Hagan, Director, Office of Administration 
 
Michael R. Johnson, Director, Office of Enforcement 
 
Guy P. Caputo, Director, Office of Investigations  
 
Edward T. Baker, Director, Office of Information Services 
 
James F. McDermott, Director, Office of Human Resources 
 
Corenthis B. Kelley, Director, Office of Small Business and Civil Rights  
 
Jack R. Strosnider, Director, Office of Nuclear Material Safety and Safeguards   
 
James E. Dyer, Director, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation  
 
Carl J. Paperiello, Director, Office of Nuclear Regulatory Research 
 
Paul H. Lohaus, Director, Office of State and Tribal Programs 
 
Roy P. Zimmerman, Director, Office of Nuclear Security and Incident Response  
 
Samuel J. Collins, Regional Administrator, Region I 
 
William D. Travers, Regional Administrator, Region II 
 
James L. Caldwell, Regional Administrator, Region III 
 
Bruce S. Mallett, Regional Administrator, Region IV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
i
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
 
BACKGROUND 
 
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s (NRC) primary method of 
communicating concerns or issues to licensees is through generic 
communications, i.e., transmittals to one or more classes of licensees.  
NRC issues several types of generic documents to its licensees and 
stakeholders in order to communicate significant industry operating 
experience, request action or information on safety concerns, or 
provide guidance on issues of regulatory interest.  NRC encourages 
voluntary industry cooperation and participation in the agency’s 
Generic Communications Program.   
 
 
 
NRC’s Generic Communications Program identifies four 
communication products - bulletins, generic letters, regulatory issue 
summaries, and information notices.  The first three of the four 
communiqués can request actions or require responses from 
licensees; information notices are to simply provide information.  
However, Generic Communications Program products cannot be used 
to impose new requirements or mandatory actions.  The 
communication tool used for imposing mandatory regulatory 
requirements is an NRC Order.    
 
The Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation (NRR) has primary 
responsibility for implementing the agency’s Generic Communications 
Program.  In addition to NRR, the Office of Nuclear Material Safety and 
Safeguards issues generic communications to its materials licensees 
and the Office of Nuclear Security and Incident Response issues 
security-related generic communications to all classes of NRC 
licensees.  After issuance of a generic communication, the applicable 
NRC program office conducts follow-up activities, including monitoring 
and assessing licensees’ performance related to generic 
communications.   
 
 
Prior Agency Assessments 
 
Over the past 10 years, a number of agency self-assessments have 
identified weaknesses in the Generic Communications Program.  In 
response, the agency implemented a number of corrective actions, 
including revisions to internal policies and procedures.   
 
 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
ii
PURPOSE 
 
The purpose of this audit was to assess the effectiveness of the 
Generic Communications Program, specifically:  
 
¾ whether NRC generic communications are issued in accordance 
with the Generic Communications Program and other regulatory 
requirements, and 
 
¾ how NRC tracks licensee actions on generic communications.  
 
RESULTS IN BRIEF 
 
Through its Generic Communications Program, NRC has an 
established framework for developing and issuing certain generic 
communications.  However, OIG identified weaknesses with the 
agency’s internal controls over generic communications.  Specifically,  
 
A. 
safeguards advisories (i.e., a security-related generic 
communication) are issued outside of NRC’s existing 
regulatory framework, 
 
B. 
controls for oversight of licensee actions on generic 
communications are inadequate, and 
 
C. 
NRC’s self-assessment’s conclusion of Generic 
Communications Program effectiveness is not supported. 
 
These issues exist primarily because NRC management has not 
followed existing policies and procedures by developing and issuing 
generic communications outside of the agency’s regulatory framework.  
Without application of adequate internal controls to ensure that agency 
communications are promulgated in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements, the agency may be unable to pursue actions 
requested or required of licensees in its generic communications, and 
may compromise its openness policy, thereby affecting the public’s 
confidence in NRC’s regulatory processes and decision-making.   
 
Furthermore, NRC’s controls for oversight of licensee actions on 
generic communications are inadequate and the agency did not 
employ a sound methodology when conducting its effectiveness 
assessment of the Generic Communications Program.  As a result, 
NRC risks the potential loss of safety/regulatory data and lacks 
assurance that its generic communications are effective.  
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
iii
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
This report makes four recommendations to the Executive Director for 
Operations to strengthen the agency’s oversight and controls of its 
generic communications. 
 
 
OIG ANALYSIS OF AGENCY COMMENTS 
 
At an exit conference with agency senior executives held on 
September 6, 2005, NRC officials generally agreed with most of the 
report’s findings and recommendations.  Subsequent to that meeting, 
NRC provided informal comments on the draft report and OIG met with 
NRR management to address specific issues and concerns needing 
further clarification and/or explanation.  On September 27, 2005, the 
Deputy Executive Director for Reactor and Preparedness Programs, 
Office of the Executive Director for Operations, provided a formal 
response to this report in which the staff generally concurs with the 
report’s findings and recommendations.  The Deputy Executive 
Director’s transmittal letter and specific comments on this report are 
included as Appendix B. 
 
This final report incorporates revisions made, where appropriate, as a 
result of the subsequent meeting and the agency’s informal and formal 
written comments.  Appendix C contains OIG’s specific responses to 
the agency’s comments. 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
iv
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Page intentionally left blank.] 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
v
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS 
 
 
 
ACRS  
 
Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards 
CFR  
 
Code of Federal Regulations 
CRGR 
 
Committee to Review Generic Requirements 
FTE 
 
 
full-time equivalent 
MD 
 
 
Management Directive 
NMSS  
 
Office of Nuclear Material Safety and Safeguards 
NRC  
 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
NRR  
 
Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation 
NSIR  
 
Office of Nuclear Security and Incident Response 
OGC  
 
Office of the General Counsel 
OIG 
 
 
Office of the Inspector General 
OMB  
 
Office of Management and Budget 
Task Force  
Davis-Besse Lessons Learned Task Force 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
vi
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Page intentionally left blank.] 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
vii
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.................................................................................. i 
 
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS ...............................................................v 
 
I. 
BACKGROUND ....................................................................................... 1 
 
II. 
PURPOSE................................................................................................ 4 
 
III. 
FINDINGS................................................................................................ 5 
 
A. 
SAFEGUARDS ADVISORIES ARE ISSUED OUTSIDE OF NRC’S  
 
EXISTING REGULATORY FRAMEWORK................................................ 5 
 
B. 
CONTROLS FOR OVERSIGHT OF LICENSEE ACTIONS ON GENERIC 
COMMUNICATIONS ARE INADEQUATE............................................... 17 
 
C. 
NRC’S SELF-ASSESSMENT’S CONCLUSION OF GENERIC 
COMMUNICATIONS PROGRAM EFFECTIVENESS IS NOT  
 
SUPPORTED .................................................................................. 20 
 
IV. CONSOLIDATED LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS .............................. 23 
 
V. 
AGENCY COMMENTS .......................................................................... 24 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
 
A. 
SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY.................................................. 25 
 
B. 
FORMAL AGENCY COMMENTS ............................................... 27 
 
C. 
DETAILED OIG ANALYSIS OF AGENCY COMMENTS............. 33 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
viii
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Page intentionally left blank.] 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
1
I. 
BACKGROUND 
 
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission’s (NRC) primary method of 
communicating concerns or issues to licensees is through generic 
communications.  The agency defines generic communications as 
“transmittals to one or more classes of licensees.”  NRC issues several 
types of generic documents to its licensees and stakeholders in order 
to communicate significant industry operating experience, request 
action or information on safety concerns, or provide guidance on 
issues of regulatory interest.  NRC encourages voluntary industry 
cooperation and participation in the agency’s Generic Communications 
Program.   
 
 
 
 
NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
The Generic Communications Program identifies four communication 
products - bulletins, generic letters, regulatory issue summaries, and 
information notices.  The first three of the four communiqués can 
request actions or require responses from licensees; information 
notices are to simply provide information.  However, Generic 
Communications Program products cannot be used to impose new 
requirements or mandatory actions.  The communication tool used for 
imposing mandatory regulatory requirements is an NRC Order.1    
 
Table 1 summarizes the intended purpose of each of the four Generic 
Communications Program products.   
                                                
1NRC Orders are regulatory requirements that may modify, suspend, or revoke a license; instruct a licensee to 
cease and desist from a given practice or activity, or to take such other action as may be proper. 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
2
 
Table 1 
 
NRC Generic Communications Program’s 
Officially Recognized Products and Uses 
 
 
Type 
 
Issuance Purpose 
Can Require 
Response or 
Request 
Action 
 
 
Bulletins 
• 
share urgent risk-significant issues 
  
• 
can be issued on an expedited basis without extensive formal interaction with 
industry 
 
 
Yes 
 
 
 
 
Generic 
Letters  
• 
have licensees perform analyses or submit descriptions of proposed 
corrective actions on matters of safety, safeguards, or the environment and 
may request written submittals that they have completed the requests with or 
without prior NRC approval of the action 
 
• 
request technical information that NRC needs to perform its functions 
 
• 
submit proposed changes to technical specifications 
 
Yes 
 
 
 
 
Regulatory 
Issue 
Summaries  
 
• 
document NRC endorsement of the resolution of issues addressed by 
industry-sponsored initiatives  
 
• 
solicit voluntary licensee participation in pilot programs 
 
• 
inform licensee of opportunities for regulatory relief 
 
• 
announce staff technical or policy positions not previously communicated to 
industry or not broadly understood 
 
• 
address matters previously reserved for administrative letters 
 
 
Yes 
(but response is 
strictly voluntary) 
 
 
 
 
Information 
Notices  
 
• 
bring significant, recently identified operating experience about safety, 
safeguards, or environmental issues to the attention of the nuclear industry. 
[Addressees are expected to review the information for applicability to their 
facilities and consider actions, as appropriate, to avoid similar problems.] 
• 
do not convey or imply new requirements or interpretations 
 
No 
 
 
 
Generic Communications Program Responsibilities  
 
The Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation (NRR) has primary 
responsibility for implementing the agency’s Generic Communications 
Program, including providing guidance regarding the development, 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
3
processing, closeout, and follow-up activities.  NRR staff work with 
NRC’s four regions and other program offices to ensure public health 
and safety by systematically monitoring reactor-related events, reports, 
and data to determine the need for a generic communication.    
In addition to NRR, the Office of Nuclear Material Safety and 
Safeguards (NMSS) issues generic communications to its materials 
licensees and the Office of Nuclear Security and Incident Response 
(NSIR) issues security-related generic communications to all classes of 
NRC licensees.  
After issuance, the applicable NRC program office conducts follow-up 
activities, including monitoring and assessing licensees’ performance 
related to generic communications.   
 
Generic Communications Program Budget and Resources 
 
Although NMSS and NSIR each expend resources in the development 
of generic communications, only NRR identifies the budget and 
resources for Generic Communications Program activities.  For  
FY 2005, the agency budgeted $72,000 (including $12,000 of 
carryover funds from FY 2004) for estimated activity within NRR’s 
Generic Communications Program and 8.7 full-time equivalents (FTE) 
for generic communications and compliance activities.  Actual 
expenditures for FY 2004 were $43,000 and 6.06 FTE.   
 
NRR does not budget resources for generic communications 
completed by NMSS or NSIR.  Because these two program offices do 
not specifically identify resources attributed to generic communications 
activities as separate budget line items, the Office of the Inspector 
General (OIG) could not determine the level of actual resources (FTE 
and dollars) expended.   
 
 
Prior Agency Assessments 
 
Over the past 10 years, a number of agency self-assessments2 have 
identified weaknesses in the Generic Communications Program.  In 
response, the agency implemented a number of corrective actions, 
including revisions to internal policies and procedures.   
                                                
2 1995 SECY-95-063, Final Report on NRC Analysis and Response to the Towers Perrin Nuclear Regulatory 
Review Study, dated March 15, 1995; Davis-Besse Reactor Vessel Head Degradation Lessons-Learned Task 
Force Report, dated September 30, 2002; and Effectiveness Review of Lessons Learned Task Force Reports, 
dated August 2, 2004.   
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
4
II. 
PURPOSE 
 
The purpose of this audit was to assess the effectiveness of the 
Generic Communications Program, specifically:  
 
¾ whether NRC generic communications are issued in accordance 
with the Generic Communications Program and other regulatory 
requirements, and 
 
¾ how NRC tracks licensee actions on generic communications.  
 
Appendix A provides a detailed description of the audit’s scope and 
methodology. 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
5
III. 
FINDINGS 
 
Through its Generic Communications Program, NRC has an 
established framework for developing and issuing certain generic 
communications.  However, OIG identified weaknesses with the 
agency’s internal controls over generic communications.  Specifically,  
 
A. 
safeguards advisories (i.e., a security-related generic 
communication) are issued outside of NRC’s existing regulatory 
framework, 
 
B. 
controls for oversight of licensee actions on generic 
communications are inadequate, and 
 
C. 
NRC’s self-assessment’s conclusion of Generic 
Communications Program effectiveness is not supported. 
 
Without adequate internal controls, NRC cannot ensure the proper use 
of, or response to, generic communications.  As a result, the agency 
may not be able to pursue actions requested or required of licensees in 
its generic communications, which could compromise the public’s 
confidence in NRC’s regulatory program.  
 
 
A. Safeguards Advisories are Issued Outside of NRC’s Existing Regulatory 
Framework 
 
NSIR issues security advisories3 that are developed and distributed 
outside of NRC’s Generic Communications Program because NSIR 
managers believe the formal process takes too long.  As a result, the 
advisories, particularly safeguards advisories, are not developed in 
accordance with the agency’s structured review and approval 
practices.  Consequently, safeguards advisories could be issued that 
do not meet regulatory requirements.  The lack of a formal process 
could lead to an absence of necessary reviews and thereby 
compromise NRC’s regulatory process.  Furthermore, the lack of a 
clear, publicly documented process for requesting and disseminating 
information through safeguards advisories compromises NRC's 
openness principle for transparent regulation. 
                                                
3 The generic term “security advisories” denotes threat and safeguards advisories, as well as security letters sent 
to classes of licensees. 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
6
 
Generic Communications Program Process Reviews   
 
All Generic Communications Program products (initiated by NRR, 
NMSS, or NSIR) go through the Program’s disciplined process that 
includes the following controls associated with technical and regulatory 
reviews: 
 
¾ Committee to Review Generic Requirements Review 
 
The Committee to Review Generic Requirements (CRGR) is an 
advisory committee to NRC's Executive Director for Operations and is 
responsible for:  
 
o helping NRC program offices to implement the Commission's 
backfit policy, and  
o ensuring that proposed generic backfits imposed on NRC-
licensed power reactor and selected nuclear materials 
licensees are appropriately justified per NRC regulations.   
 
 Backfit Review  
 
Backfitting is defined as the modification of systems, 
structures, components, or design of a plant or a facility; 
or the design approval or manufacturing license for a 
facility; or the procedures or organization required to 
design, construct, or operate a plant or a facility; any of 
which may result from a new or amended provision in the 
Commission rules or the imposition of a regulatory staff 
position.  
 
NRC’s backfit rules for reactors and materials4 require a 
systematic analysis be satisfied for all backfits the 
agency seeks to impose,5 unless a documented 
evaluation determines that the backfit is necessary for 
either “compliance” or “adequate protection” purposes.  
                                                
4 “Backfitting.” per 10 CFR sections 50.109, 70.76, and 76.76. 
5 Backfits may be imposed if the Commission’s analysis determines that there is a substantial increase in the 
overall protection of the public health and safety or the common defense and security, and that the direct and 
indirect costs of implementation are justified in view of this increased protection [10 CFR 50.109 (a)(3)-(a)(4), 10 
CFR 70.76(a)(2)-(a)(4), and 10 CFR 76.76(a)(2)-(a)(4)]. 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
7
Nonetheless, the regulation requires some form of 
documentation when imposing a backfit under either of 
these standards.6  There are no regulatory exceptions to 
the backfit rule for security issues.   
 
¾ Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards Review 
The Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards (ACRS) is statutorily 
mandated and has three primary purposes: 
o review and report on safety studies and reactor facility 
license and license renewal applications;  
o advise the Commission on the hazards of proposed and 
existing reactor facilities and the adequacy of proposed 
reactor safety standards; and 
o initiate reviews of specific generic matters or nuclear facility 
safety-related items.  
ACRS reviews generic communications, when applicable, before the 
generic communication is issued for public comment.  The Committee 
can defer its response until after public comments are received and 
reviewed.  Additionally, ACRS should receive copies of all generic 
letters and bulletins and selected regulatory issue summaries 
forwarded for CRGR review. 
 
¾ Paperwork Reduction Act Compliance Review 
 
The Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Act), as revised in 1995, 
governs Federal requests for information collections and stipulates that 
independent regulatory agencies (such as NRC) must justify to the 
Office of Management and Budget (OMB) their information collection 
requests.   
 
The Paperwork Reduction Act is intended to: 
 
o minimize the burden for respondents,  
o minimize information collection-related costs to the Federal 
government, and  
                                                
6 If immediately effective regulatory action is required, a provision at 10 CFR 50.109(a)(6), 10 CFR 70.76(a)(6), 
and 10 CFR 76.76(a)(6), allows for the documented evaluation to follow, rather than precede, the regulatory 
action. 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
8
o improve the responsibility and accountability of Federal 
agencies to Congress and to the public for implementing the 
information collection review process and information 
management.  
 
 
Corporations and businesses (such as NRC licensees) are covered by 
the Act’s definition of persons or public entities that may be affected by 
an agency’s “collection of information” activities.   
 
The Act also requires that Federal agencies obtain and display a valid 
OMB clearance (control) number for all information requests submitted 
to 10 or more non-Federal entities or individuals.7  Each part of the 
Code of Federal Regulations applicable to NRC contains an OMB 
clearance number for NRC generic communication use.   
 
Evolution of Security Advisories in View of September 11, 2001 
 
Prior to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the agency 
dispatched only threat advisories.  NRC threat advisories were issued 
infrequently and were informational only in nature, primarily 
communicating threat environment information to licensees.  
Immediately following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the 
agency quickly issued threat advisories to its licensee community.  
This was an effective and efficient use of agency resources and 
allowed the licensee community to be quickly apprised of changing 
threat information.   
 
In the weeks that followed, NRC continued to use threat advisories to 
communicate information to licensees.  In October 2001, the agency 
issued a threat advisory which stated that additional details would be 
provided in an upcoming “safeguards” advisory.  From that time 
forward, threat advisories continued to primarily fulfill their original 
function of communicating information regarding changing threat 
environments while the agency’s uses of the newly-created safeguards 
advisories evolved over time.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
7 Information collection requests addressed to all or a substantial majority of an industry is presumed to involve 
10 or more persons. 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
9
Change in Uses of Safeguards Advisories 
 
According to NSIR documents, safeguards advisories are defined as a 
communication of information from the NRC to licensees, where the 
nature of the information provided involves:   
 
¾ an identified vulnerability or potential vulnerability;  
¾ protection of the national infrastructure;  
¾ or any other information that requires immediate or prompt attention 
that would not be timely if other generic communication procedures 
were utilized. 
 
In the months following September 11, 2001, the pattern of use of 
threat advisories continued as described above, while the issuance 
rate was understandably less than that in the immediate aftermath of 
the attacks.  Similarly, safeguards advisories were also seen as a 
quick method to work in cooperation with the licensee community in 
response to the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.  However, in 
contrast to threat advisories, safeguards advisories began to be used 
more frequently to achieve a number of purposes other than sharing 
information.  For example, some safeguards advisories communicated 
information, requested information, requested action, and provided 
regulatory interpretations.   
 
NSIR’s Organizational Development 
In April 2002, NRC consolidated staff members experienced in 
safeguards, security, and incident response functions into the new 
NSIR office, in order to improve timeliness and consistency of 
communications among NRC’s employees and external stakeholders.  
To meet the urgent security needs of the agency after the terrorist 
events of September 11, 2001, this newly formed program office 
became operationally functional in advance of developing its 
organizational framework, policies, and procedures.  Consequently, 
NSIR-issued safeguards advisories were developed and distributed 
outside of the agency’s established regulatory framework.   
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
10
NSIR managers acknowledge that safeguards advisories are a form of 
generic communication being developed and issued beyond the 
established regulatory framework.  To date, NSIR has not finalized any 
internal office policies or procedures to address the selection, 
development, or issuance of safeguards advisories.8  Furthermore, the 
agency provides guidance and procedures intended to ensure that 
generic communications are justified and comply with regulatory 
requirements.  However, safeguards advisories are not discussed in 
any of the agency’s existing procedures or directives.   
¾ NSIR Perceives the Generic Communications Program as 
Untimely 
 
NSIR justifies issuing safeguards advisories outside of any established 
processes on two grounds:  first, that security issues require quick 
notification to the licensee community; and second, the perception that 
the agency’s Generic Communications Program is not efficient enough 
to meet the timeliness needs of safeguards advisories. 
 
o Examples of Generic Communications Processing Times  
 
Shortly after September 11, 2001, agency managers from offices 
responsible for safeguards and security issues created the new 
security-related generic communications vehicle called “safeguards 
advisory” because they felt the bureaucratic nature of the Generic 
Communications Program would impede the timeliness of issuing 
important security communications.  In fact, the agency defines 
safeguards advisories as a type of communication to use for 
information that “[r]equires immediate or prompt attention that 
would not be timely if other generic communication procedures 
were utilized.”  Specifically, NRC managers understood that it 
generally takes at least several months to issue a generic 
communication through the Generic Communications Program.  
Although not typical, Table 2 shows that generic communications 
can be issued in as little as one day, when in response to a 
significant event.  
 
 
                                                
8 During this audit, NSIR began drafting procedures to address safeguards advisories. However, NSIR said due 
to other priorities and the additional consideration of whether advisories should be recognized and incorporated 
in NRC’s formal Generic Communications Program, the formal procedures have not been finalized.  NSIR stated 
that it has an informal process for management review and approval of safeguards advisories. 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
11
Table 2 
 
 
Issue Times for Sample of Generic Communications Program Products 
 
Example 
No. 
Description 
Date 
Elapsed Time from 
Discovery9 
Discovery of cavity in 
Davis-Besse Vessel Head 
March 7, 2002 
-- 
Information Notice 02-11  
March 12, 2002 
5 days 
 
1 
Bulletin 2002-01  
March 18, 2002 
11 days 
 
 
 
 
Death of oncology patient 
attributed at least in part to 
radiation overdose 
November 21, 1992 
-- 
Second source separation 
reported to the NRC 
December 7, 1992 
-- 
 
 
2 
Bulletin 92-03 Issued 
December 8, 1992 
1 day/17 days 
 
 
 
 
Discovery of inadequate 
fire barrier in seismic gaps 
January 27, 2005 
-- 
 
3 
Information Notice 05-04 
February 14, 2005 
18 days 
  
 
The above examples show that generic communications dealing with 
significant issues, such as the Davis-Besse vessel head problems, can 
be issued in a timely manner.  In fact, as reflected in bold in Table 2, 
the agency developed and issued two bulletins (i.e., the Generic 
Communications Program product designed to share urgent risk-
significant issues) in about two weeks ⎯ a time frame considered by 
an NSIR senior executive as a “reasonable way to proceed.”   
 
In addition, NSIR at times chose the Generic Communications 
Program (see Table 3) to convey security matters of similar substance 
to those found in safeguards advisories.  Specifically, NSIR issued 18 
regulatory issue summaries (a recognized Generic Communications 
Program product), during the same time frame where NSIR issued 6510 
threat and safeguards advisories (unrecognized generic  
                                                
9The time used is very conservative because it is based on discovery or notification of the issue until issuance 
date of the generic communication.  This includes preparation time, review time, process reviews and 
concurrence. 
 
10 NSIR provided information regarding the issuance of 65 security advisories during the reference period.  
However, this number may be conservative because NSIR had not maintained a comprehensive log of the 
issued advisories. 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
12
communications products).  Yet, in these cases, NSIR has no 
documented rationale for selecting a recognized generic 
communications product versus using security advisories. 
 
 
Table 3 
 
NRC/NSIR Security-Related Generic Communications Issued 
September 11, 2001 through January 26, 2005 
 
Type 
Number 
Security Advisories*  
65 
Regulatory Issue Summaries** 
18 
Orders*** 
10 
Total 
93 
 
   
   *Threat and safeguards advisories - not recognized by the Generic Communications Program 
 
  **Official Generic Communications Program product 
***Orders meet the generic communication definition when issued to one or more classes of licensees 
 
¾ Lack of Technical and Regulatory Reviews Compromises 
NRC’s Regulatory Processes 
 
The agency’s use of advisories significantly increased after September 
11, 2001.  Agency managers and staff, as well as industry 
representatives have more and more often questioned the regulatory 
authority for issuing advisories.  Of particular concern are the 
safeguards advisories primarily because, as stated by a senior Nuclear 
Energy Institute representative, NRC is using many safeguards 
advisories “to establish new requirements without going through the 
required agency review process.”  
 
By developing and issuing generic communications outside of the 
established Generic Communications Program, NRC compromises its 
regulatory processes.  For example, OIG determined that safeguards 
advisories have no documented regulatory foundation for 
communicating to licensees anything other than information.  However, 
as shown in Figure 1 below, the majority of advisories served purposes 
beyond simply conveying information.   
 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
13
 
  
Figure 1* 
 
Purposes Served by Advisories Issued from  
September 11, 2001 through January 26, 2005 
 
 
 
*OIG notes that the percentages in the above chart exceed 100% because several 
advisories served multiple purposes other than providing information only. 
 
 
OIG’s Technical Review of NRC/NSIR-Issued Generic 
Communications 
 
As discussed in Table 3, NRC/NSIR issued 93 security-related generic 
communications from September 11, 2001 to January 26, 2005.  OIG 
determined that 65 of the communiqués were security-related 
advisories, of which 38 percent (or 25 advisories) provided information 
only.  However, the remaining 62 percent (or 40 advisories) were used 
for other purposes, such as requesting or requiring information or 
licensee action, containing regulatory guidance, and conveying 
apparent requirements.  Figure 1 represents the purposes served by 
the 65 security-related advisories.   
 
Request Action, 
40%
Contains Reg. 
Guidance, 12%
Request 
Information, 25%
    Apparent 
Requirements,
14%
Provide Info Only, 
42%
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
14
The agency is obligated to follow appropriate regulatory requirements 
for its generic communications.  However, because advisories are 
issued outside of the Generic Communications Program, the required 
regulatory reviews were not performed.  As a result, though 
appropriate in some cases, safeguards advisories did not receive: 
 
¾ CRGR backfit review although this committee has a defined role 
in reviewing generic communications to make sure NRC stays 
within its backfit authorities.  Without CRGR review, NRC could 
impose an improper backfit on its licensees. 
 
¾ ACRS technical review although this committee has a defined 
role in reviewing any generic communication that conveys 
requirements on licensees.  Without ACRS review, NRC could 
impose unjustified requirements on its licensees. 
 
¾ Paperwork Reduction Act review to ensure proper citing of 
either the applicable OMB control (clearance) number for 
information requests, or an exemption clause, where 
appropriate.   
 
o The Act states that the NRC “may not conduct or 
sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a 
request for information or an information collection unless 
the requesting document displays a currently valid OMB 
control number.”   
 
None of the safeguards advisories issued from September 11, 
2001 until mid-May 2005 displayed an OMB control number nor 
contained a statement that the provisions of the Paperwork 
Reduction Act do not apply (i.e., NRC review determined that 
OMB clearance was not required). 
 
Because NRC did not satisfy Paperwork Reduction Act 
requirements regarding control numbers, licensees have a basis 
to ignore requests or suggestions contained in NRC safeguards 
advisories.  This brings into question the agency’s ability to 
pursue actions requested or required of licensees as contained 
in any of these advisories.  
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
15
 
¾ NRC’s Openness Principle Is Compromised 
 
According to NRC’s Strategic Plan, the agency has a goal to 
“ensure openness in our regulatory process.”  
 
o The Openness goal further states that the NRC “views 
nuclear regulation as the public’s business and, as such, 
it should be transacted openly and candidly in order to 
maintain the public’s confidence.  The goal to ensure 
openness explicitly recognizes that the public must be 
informed about, and have a reasonable opportunity to 
participate meaningfully in, the NRC’s regulatory 
process.”  
 
o The Strategic Outcome that supports the goal of 
openness is, “Stakeholders are informed and involved in 
NRC processes as appropriate.”   
 
However, there is no clear, publicly documented process for 
disseminating and requesting information through safeguards 
advisories.  In addition, safeguards advisories do not have a 
consistent, formally-defined concurrence process.  This lack of an 
identified, transparent agency process compromises NRC's principle of 
open regulation.   
 
While NSIR senior managers acknowledge that there should be a 
clear, formal process for the development and issuance of safeguards 
advisories, they expressed a need for balance between protecting 
public openness (an agency goal) and common defense and security 
(the agency’s mission).  Currently there are differing opinions among 
NRC senior managers regarding the public’s right to know about the 
information contained in the advisories.  As of the date of this report, 
the public may still not know of the existence of specific safeguards 
advisories because they are not made publicly available even though 
many do not contain information actually designated by the agency as 
“Safeguards Information.”11  
 
                                                
11 The title “safeguards advisories” is misleading in that many do not contain Safeguards-classified information.   
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
16
Summary 
 
Through its Generic Communications Program, NRC has an 
established framework for developing and issuing certain generic 
communications.  However, NRC management has not followed 
existing policies and procedures by developing and issuing safeguards 
advisories outside of the agency’s regulatory framework.  Without 
application of adequate controls to ensure that agency 
communications are promulgated in accordance with applicable 
regulatory requirements, the agency may -- 
 
¾ 
Be unable to pursue actions requested or required of licensees 
in its generic communications, 
 
¾ 
Compromise its openness policy, thereby affecting the public’s 
confidence in NRC’s regulatory processes and decision-making, 
and  
 
¾ 
Lack assurance that its generic communications are effective.  
 
To date, NSIR has not finalized any policies or procedures for 
developing and issuing safeguards advisories. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
OIG recommends that the Executive Director for Operations: 
 
1. Include safeguards advisories, as well as any other agency 
communication tool that meets the definition of a generic 
communication, in the formal Generic Communications Program to 
ensure compliance with regulatory requirements. 
 
2. Pursue immediately the applicability of including appropriate Office 
of Management and Budget control numbers in safeguards 
advisories. 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
17
B. Controls for Oversight of Licensee Actions on Generic Communications 
are Inadequate 
 
NRC’s oversight of licensee actions on generic communications is 
inadequate because the program lacks the controls for an agency-wide 
systematic follow-up methodology.  Instead, the follow-up process is 
left to the discretion of the project managers responsible for each site.  
Without a systematic process to ensure that a generic communication 
is consistently monitored through its lifecycle (from initiation to 
closure), the agency could lose track of requests to licensees, 
responses from licensees, and important operating experience data 
that might identify potential safety and regulatory issues.  
 
Internal Controls for Generic Communications are 
Lacking  
 
The Generic Communications Program lacks standards for following 
the full lifecycle of an agency generic communication because the 
Program’s responsibilities end at issuance.   
 
OMB Circular A-123, Management Accountability and Control, dictates 
that agency internal controls include “the plan of organization, methods 
and procedures adopted by management to ensure its goals are met.”  
In addition, other Federal internal control standards reference a need 
for agencies to maintain clearly documented, readily available 
information on the full lifecycle of all agency communications.  
Therefore, NRC should have procedures in place to facilitate 
systematic tracking of generic communications from initiation to 
closure. 
 
Generic Communications Program Tracking Ends at Issuance 
 
The Generic Communications Program’s controls are not adequate 
because the Program only tracks part of the lifecycle of a generic 
communication.  Specifically, the Program’s procedures address 
following a generic communication from the proposal stage, through 
development of the chosen product, but ends at document issuance. 
As a result, the Program does not track NRC or licensee actions 
related to the matter once the document is issued.  Such subsequent 
actions include coordinating licensee responses, agency review of 
those responses, and any resulting inspections.   
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
18
Upon issuance of a generic communication, individual NRC project 
managers or organizational groups assume tracking responsibilities.  
At this point, the process relies on the diligence of individuals rather 
than a consistent, systematic tracking process.  If agency management 
desires the status of licensees’ actions on a particular generic 
communication, the data is not available through the Generic 
Communications Program.  Instead, the data must be compiled from a 
variety of sources, such as the project managers responsible for each 
site.   
 
The inherent risk in relying on individuals to track NRC or licensees 
actions subsequent to issuance is that individuals may choose differing 
tracking strategies (which may or may not be effective) or may fail to 
track at all.  NRC project managers have several information systems 
at their disposal for tracking data on generic communications.  
According to NRR staff, these systems include the Operating 
Experience Section Task Tracking Database; the Multi-Plant Actions 
system; the Time, Resource, Information, and Management system; 
and the Reactor Program System.  Each of these identified systems is 
a standalone system and contains different, as well as duplicative, 
generic communications information.  
 
 
Internal Guidance on Processing Generic Communications 
 
NRR Office Instruction LIC-503, Generic Communications Affecting 
Nuclear Reactor Licensees, and NRC Inspection Manual Chapter 
0730, Generic Communications Regarding Materials and Fuel Cycle 
Issues, both provide guidance and procedures for the preparation, 
distribution, follow-up, and closeout of generic communications.   
 
However, the internal guidance provides no agency-wide policies or 
procedures regarding the systematic tracking of generic 
communication follow-on activities performed by NRC or its licensees.  
In other words, the guidance discusses ‘what’ needs to occur for 
closing out a generic communication, but not ‘how’ or ‘where’ to record 
the information.  For example, the guidance discusses how to evaluate 
responses, but does not address how to track responses. 
 
Potential Loss of Safety/Regulatory Data  
 
NRC issues generic communications to provide guidance, common 
approaches to resolve issues, and to share industry’s operating 
experiences.  Therefore, it is vital that agency management has  
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
19
assurance that licensees take actions as expected.  As previously 
stated, basic tenets of management controls include methods and 
procedures adopted by management to ensure its goals are met. 
 
When the agency must rely on the diligence of individuals to track 
actions related to generic communications, it cannot have the 
programmatic assurance that its goals are met and risks the loss of 
significant operational data needed for regulatory and/or reactor safety 
decisions. 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
OIG recommends that the Executive Director for Operations: 
 
3. Implement controls to ensure a systematic, consistent tracking 
methodology from initiation to closure for each agency-issued 
generic communication. 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
20
C. NRC’s Self-Assessment’s Conclusion of Generic Communications 
Program Effectiveness is Not Supported 
 
Based on NRC’s Commission direction, NRR conducted an 
effectiveness study of Generic Communications Program products.  
Although that study concluded that generic communications were 
effective, the review lacked an adequate sample or scientific basis for 
the conclusion.  The limited sample chosen by NRR resulted from an 
inability to reach consensus on a sample selection and because of a 
preconception that the Generic Communications Program was 
effective.  As a result of such a limited review, the conclusion that the 
Generic Communications Program products are effective is not 
supported. 
 
Background 
 
In March 2004, based on findings by the Davis-Besse Lessons 
Learned Task Force (Task Force),12 the Commission directed staff to 
evaluate whether generic communications accomplish their intent to 
inform licensees and collect information on licensee actions in 
response to serious incidents.  The Task Force recommended that 
staff assess the effectiveness of clear communication to licensees and 
licensee follow-up activities.  The agency’s definition of “Effectiveness” 
was defined as the achievement of a desired outcome from a program, 
process, or activity in an efficient, realistic, and timely manner.  
 
Prior to the Task Force report, NRR conducted an effort to identify the 
five highest priority NRC-issued generic communications by requesting 
technical assistance from staff members in NRR, the Office of Nuclear 
Regulatory Research, and NRC’s four regions.  The highest priority 
generic communications would then be reviewed for verification of 
continued licensee support and commitment.  Agency staff was asked 
to use their expertise to prioritize from a list of 104 pre-screened 
Generic Communications Program products, consisting of 36 bulletins 
and 68 generic letters.   
 
 
                                                
12 Davis-Besse Reactor Vessel Head Degradation Lessons-Learned Task Force Report, dated September 30, 
2002. 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
21
Agency’s Self-Assessment Methodology Was Not Statistically Sound 
 
An NRC statistician advised OIG that the agency could not adequately 
assess the effectiveness of Generic Communications Program 
products based on a review of the small, biased sample size proposed 
by NRR (i.e., 6-10 bulletins/generic letters) or from the actual sample 
(i.e., two generic communications).  Nonetheless, NRR’s self-
assessment concluded that licensees had adequately responded to 
generic letters and bulletins.  The results communicated to the 
Commission further stated that generic communications accomplish 
their intent to inform licensees and collect information on licensee 
actions in response to significant issues.  The self-assessment staff 
reported that the Generic Communications Program products are 
effective.  
 
¾ NRR's proposed methodology for the effectiveness self-
assessment was to sample 6-10 bulletins and generic letters from 
the aforementioned prioritized list.  The review would include 
inspecting for follow-up activities at 8-10 reactor sites.  Although the 
initial methodology was not sound, NRR management and the 
Commission approved this proposal.  
 
According to the NRC statistician, in order to effectively assess the 
Generic Communications Program, a significantly larger sampling of 
products would have been needed than that proposed by the staff.  
The statistician did not provide a specific sample size because such a 
decision requires greater insights into how statistical parameters affect 
the program (e.g., classifying results by bulletin or generic letter).    
 
Moreover, NRR did not conduct the proposed review previously 
described.  In actuality, the review consisted of only two generic 
communications; one generic letter and one regulatory issue summary 
– a category not even identified in the initial screening.  Staff reported 
that verification of the two generic communications was conducted at 
12 plants; three in each of the four regions which OIG notes exceeds 
the number originally proposed.  However, this review approach, like 
the proposed one, was not based on a sound methodology. 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
22
 
¾ 
Preconceptions Influenced the Prioritization Exercise 
The agency did not conduct or provide a documented, scientific 
basis for either the proposed or completed sample because staff 
could not reach consensus on the priority of the “most 
significant” generic communications.  As a result, the staff 
decided to reduce the sample for review from the proposed 6-10 
high-level generic communications, to just two, including one 
lower-level priority communiqué.  
 
According to those directly involved in sample selection, staff biases 
clouded the sample prioritization decisions.  In addition, the majority of 
those interviewed for this audit, including those directly involved in the 
sample selection, are generally satisfied that the agency’s Generic 
Communications Program is effective.  One senior agency executive 
stated that his confidence in the effectiveness of the Generic 
Communications Program stems from many years of experience using 
NRC’s generic communications process.  Such a preconception 
contributed to the agency’s acceptance of the projection of program 
effectiveness, regardless of sample size.   
 
In discussions on this finding, NRC staff said this effort was never 
intended to be a statistical evaluation of the effectiveness of the 
Generic Communications Program but rather to be a case study 
involving selected communications.  Though not intended, the 
agency’s reported results implied that the whole Generic 
Communications Program, and not just the selected communiqués, is 
effective.  However, as a result of the inadequate sample size and 
selection process, there is no scientific/statistical basis to conclude, or 
imply, that the program and its associated products are effective.    
 
RECOMMENDATION 
 
OIG recommends that the Executive Director for Operations: 
 
4. Direct the development of a methodology that will allow the staff to 
gauge the effectiveness of agency-issued generic communications. 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
23
IV. 
CONSOLIDATED LIST OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
OIG recommends that the Executive Director for Operations: 
 
1. Include safeguards advisories, as well as any other agency 
communication tool that meets the definition of a generic 
communication, in the formal Generic Communications Program to 
ensure compliance with regulatory requirements. 
 
2. Pursue immediately the applicability of including appropriate Office 
of Management and Budget control numbers in safeguards 
advisories. 
 
3. Implement controls to ensure a systematic, consistent tracking 
methodology from initiation to closure for each agency-issued 
generic communication. 
 
4. Direct the development of a methodology that will allow the staff to 
gauge the effectiveness of agency-issued generic communications. 
 
 
 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
24
V. 
AGENCY COMMENTS 
 
On September 6, 2005, OIG discussed its draft report with agency 
senior executives.  Subsequent to that meeting, NRC provided informal 
comments on the draft report and OIG met with NRR management to 
address specific issues and concerns needing further clarification 
and/or explanation.  On September 27, 2005, the Deputy Executive 
Director for Reactor and Preparedness Programs, Office of the 
Executive Director for Operations, provided a formal response to this 
report in which the staff generally concurs with the report’s findings and 
recommendations.  The agency’s transmittal letter and specific 
comments on this report are included as Appendix B. 
 
This final report incorporates revisions made, where appropriate, as a 
result of the subsequent meeting and the agency’s informal and formal 
written comments.  Appendix C contains OIG’s specific responses to 
the agency’s comments. 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
25
Appendix A  
SCOPE AND METHODOLOGY 
 
NRC’s Generic Communications Program products are the primary 
means for communicating with agency licensees.  Therefore, all 
elements of the Program must be effective and efficient in order for 
generic communications to accomplish their intent.    
 
The purpose of this audit was to assess the effectiveness of the 
Generic Communications Program, specifically:   
 
¾ whether NRC generic communications are issued in accordance 
with the Generic Communications Program and other regulatory 
requirements, and 
 
¾ how NRC tracks licensee actions on generic communications.  
 
To address the audit objectives, OIG reviewed relevant management 
controls, related documentation, and Federal statutes, including 
reviews of: 
 
¾ Management Directives 3.54, 3.57, and 3.53 
¾ NRC Inspection Manual Chapter 0730 
¾ NRR Office Instructions LIC-503 and LIC-401 
¾ NSIR’s Office Instruction COM-201, Security Advisories, and 
Emergent Work Process 
¾ NRC’s Backfit Rule 
¾ OMB’s Paperwork Reduction Act 
¾ GAO’s Internal Control Standards 
¾ CRGR’s Charter 
¾ NRC’s Davis-Besse Lessons Learned Task Force Report 
¾ NRC’s Effectiveness Review of Lessons Learned Task Forces 
¾ Code of Federal Regulations, Title 10, Parts 50.54(f), 50.71, 
50.109, 70.76, and 76.76 
¾ NRR, NMSS, and NSIR Operating Plans and Budget Documents 
 
Auditors conducted interviews and discussions with agency and 
industry individuals, including: 
 
¾ Headquarters’ senior managers from the Offices of: 
¾  
o the Executive Director for Operations, the General Counsel, 
NRR, NMSS, NSIR, Information Services, and Nuclear 
Regulatory Research 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
26
 
¾ Representatives from CRGR  
¾ Representatives from ACRS 
¾ Representatives from the Nuclear Energy Institute 
¾ NRC’s statistician 
 
OIG conducted this audit between September 2004 and June 2005 in 
accordance with generally accepted Government auditing standards 
and included a review of management controls related to the 
objectives of this audit.  The major contributors to this report were 
Anthony Lipuma, Team Leader; Catherine Colleli, Audit Manager; 
Yvette Russell, Senior Auditor; and Michael Cash, Technical Advisor. 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
27
Appendix B 
FORMAL AGENCY COMMENTS 
 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
28
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
29
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
30
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
31
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
32
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Page intentionally left blank.] 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
33
Appendix C 
 
DETAILED OIG ANALYSIS OF AGENCY COMMENTS 
 
On September 6, 2005, OIG discussed its draft report with agency 
senior executives.  Subsequent to that meeting, NRC provided informal 
comments on the draft report and OIG met with NRR management to 
address specific issues and concerns needing further clarification 
and/or explanation.  On September 27, 2005, the Deputy Executive 
Director for Reactor and Preparedness Programs, Office of the 
Executive Director for Operations, transmitted a memorandum with 
formal comments on this report (see Appendix B). 
 
Below is OIG’s analysis of the agency’s formal comments. 
 
NRC Comment 1  
 
1. 
At the end of the "Findings" section starting on the bottom of 
page 6, and also text on page 25, the draft report states that as 
a result of failure to apply internal control mechanisms, "the 
agency may not be able to enforce actions requested or 
required of licensees."  The staff believes that the report 
continues with an erroneous premise in its findings that a 
generic communication can "require" actions that may be 
enforced.  Generic communications do not impose enforceable 
requirements to perform actions. 
 
OIG Response 
OIG recognizes that generic communications (other than NRC Orders) are not a 
recognized vehicle for communicating regulatory requirements.  However, some 
safeguards advisories contain ambiguous language that could reasonably be 
interpreted as a mandate for licensee action or providing information.  As such, 
the point remains that the failure to follow appropriate regulatory processes 
brings into question the agency’s ability to pursue any actions based on these 
advisories.  Nonetheless, OIG recognizes that use of the word “enforce” in close 
conjunction with “require actions” may be misperceived and warrants a change.   
 
The word “enforce” has been changed in the report to “pursue.” 
 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
34
 
NRC Comment 2 
2. On page 7 of the draft report, the following changes should be 
considered: 
 
"A. Safeguards Advisories Are Issued Outside of NRC’s Existing 
Regulatory Framework 
 
NSIR issues security advisories that are developed and distributed 
outside of NRC’s Generic Communications Program because NSIR 
managers believe the formal process takes too long.  As a result, 
the advisories, particularly safeguards advisories, are not 
developed in accordance with the agency’s structured review and 
approval practices. Consequently, safeguards advisories could be 
issued that do not meet regulatory requirements.  The lack of a 
formal process could lead to an absence of necessary reviews and 
thereby compromises NRC’s regulatory process.  Furthermore, the 
lack of a clear, publicly documented process for requesting and 
disseminating information through safeguards advisories 
compromises NRC's openness principle for transparent regulation." 
 
 
OIG Response 
The subtle word change does not alter the sentence’s main point that the 
agency’s regulatory process is comprised when appropriate reviews are omitted. 
 
OIG revised the report to reflect the requested change in language. 
 
NRC Comment 3 
 
3. 
On page 16 of the draft report, the following changes should be 
 
considered: 
 
"Although not typical, Table 2 shows that generic communications 
can be issued in as little as one day,  when necessary. ,when in 
response to a significant event." 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
35
 
OIG Response 
The requested word change is subtle and does not alter the sentence’s main 
point. 
 
OIG revised the report to reflect the requested change in language. 
 
NRC Comment 4 
 
4. 
 On page 17 of the draft report, the following changes should b 
 
 considered: 
 
"In addition, contrary to perceived inefficiencies with the 
process, NSIR at times chose the Generic Communications 
Program (see Table 3) to convey security matters of similar 
substance to those found in safeguards advisories. Specifically, 
NSIR issued 18 regulatory issue summaries (a recognized 
Generic Communications Program product), during the same 
period when NSIR issued 65 threat and safeguards advisories 
(unrecognized generic communications products).  Yet, in these 
cases, NSIR has no documented rationale for selecting a 
recognized generic communications product versus using 
security advisories." 
 
Additionally, the staff believes that improvements have been 
realized since the "ad hoc days" just after 9/11.  Recent SAs 
have been focused on the following criteria, which is being 
formalized in an NSIR procedure.  The following are considered 
to be appropriate content of security advisories: 
 
• Notification that the Homeland Security Threat 
Advisory System threat level has been elevated 
• Notification of National Special Security Events 
• Recommended compensatory measures and 
suggested actions for rapidly emerging safeguard 
and security-related issues 
• Requests for security or safeguards information 
from licensees related to an imminent vulnerability 
or condition 
• Guidance on implementing existing security and/or 
safeguards regulatory requirements related to an 
imminent vulnerability or condition 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
36
OIG Response 
OIG recognizes that NSIR has been working towards formalizing the use of 
safeguards advisories, such as employing specific criteria to remove the ad hoc 
nature.  Deletion of the identified phrase does not change the point of this 
paragraph which says that NSIR, at times, used recognized generic 
communications products to transmit similar type information as found in the 
unrecognized safeguards advisories.     
 
OIG deleted the phrase as requested. 
 
NRC Comment 5 
 
 
 
5. 
On page 19, the draft report states: 
 
"Lack of Technical and Regulatory Reviews Compromises 
NRC’s Regulatory Processes 
 
The agency’s use of advisories significantly increased after 
September 11, 2001.  Agency managers and staff, as well as 
industry representatives have more and more often questioned 
the regulatory authority for issuing advisories.  Of particular 
concern are the safeguards advisories primarily because, as 
stated by a senior Nuclear Energy Institute representative, NRC 
is using many safeguards advisories ‘to establish new 
requirements without going through the required agency review 
process.’" 
 
Although not formalized, Safeguards Advisories (at least since 
2003) have been reviewed by the Office of General Counsel to 
ensure that new requirements are not set and NSIR is unaware 
of "new requirements" having been issued, via SAs. 
 
 
 
OIG Response 
The agency states that safeguards advisories have been reviewed by the Office 
of the General Counsel (OGC), at least since 2003, to ensure new requirements 
are not set.  However, as stated in the report, OIG conducted a technical review 
of the 65 security advisories identified by NSIR and found that 14% were used for 
communicating apparent requirements, including a safeguards advisory dated 
June 2004.   
 
Throughout this audit, NSIR could not identify a comprehensive list of safeguards 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
37
advisories issued for the period under consideration nor could NSIR staff provide 
assurance that all safeguards advisories received an OGC review.  In fact, 
according to NSIR and OGC staff, because the agency was usually anxious to 
issue the safeguards advisories, they did not always receive an OGC review.    
 
No change made to the report. 
 
NRC Comment 6 
6.  On page 20 of the draft report, Figure 1 groups all advisories 
(Safeguards and Threat Advisories) issued since 9/11 together.  
This grouping should be reconsidered and the report should focus 
on more recently developed SAs.  This would focus the information 
on current practices and would aid the staff’s understanding of 
current program needs. 
 
   
OIG Response 
OIG acknowledges that the agency has shown increased interest in the 
development and issuance of safeguards advisories since the start of this audit.  
However, as stated in the response to agency comment 5, NSIR was not able to 
provide OIG with a complete listing or copies of all issued safeguards advisories 
because of a lack of a standard process, including the absence of a numbering 
system.  While OIG acknowledges that threat advisories have a different use and 
follow a different internal process, neither of the advisories receives a formal 
regulatory review to ensure proper use.  Therefore, information provided in 
Figure 1 regarding multiple uses of advisories appropriately applies to both types. 
 
No change made to the report. 
 
NRC Comment 7 
 
7. 
Page 21 of the draft report states: 
 
"As a result, safeguards advisories did not receive . . . ACRS 
technical review although this committee has a defined role in 
reviewing any generic communication that conveys 
requirements on licensees.  Without ACRS review, NRC could 
impose unjustified requirements on its licensees." 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
38
Please note that SAs do not impose requirements, and based 
on the above statement, an ACRS review is not required. 
 
OIG Response 
OIG acknowledges the possibility that not all of the safeguards advisories issued 
during the period reviewed would have required an ACRS review.  However, 
because OIG’s technical review identified a number of advisories which 
conveyed apparent requirements, the likelihood exists that in some instances an 
ACRS review would have been appropriate.  Without the benefit of formal 
processing, the agency has no assurance that safeguards advisories would 
receive an ACRS review where necessary.  
 
No change made to the report. 
 
NRC Comment 8 
 
8. 
On page 24 of the draft report, the following changes should be 
 
considered: 
 
"While NSIR senior managers acknowledge that there should be 
a clear, formal process for the development and issuance of 
safeguards advisories, they expressed a need for balance 
between protecting public openness (an agency goal) and 
common defense and security (the agency’s mission).  Currently 
there are differing opinions among NRC senior managers 
regarding the public’s right to know about the information 
contained in the advisories.  As of the date of this report, the 
public may still not know of the specific existence of specific 
safeguards advisories because they are not made publicly 
available even though many do not contain information actually 
designated classified by the agency as "Safeguards 
Information." 
 
The content of SAs can be classified as:  National Security 
Information (i.e., Top Secret, Secret, Confidential); Safeguards 
Information; Exempt from Public Disclosure in Accordance with 
10 CFR 2.390; or a variety of federal agency sensitive 
unclassified information processes (see SECY-04-0191, dated 
October 19, 2004).  These processes are defined and 
implemented.  The above statement (without suggested 
changes) is somewhat misleading in that the information in the 
SAs is classified and protected in accordance with defined and 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
39
formal NRC and federal government processes, and therefore 
"... differing opinions among NRC senior managers regarding 
the public’s right to know about the information contained in the 
advisories" is irrelevant.  Additionally, the idea that the public 
may, or may not, be aware of safeguard advisories is valid.  
However, the concept that ".... they are not made publicly 
available even though many do not contain information actually 
classified by the agency as "Safeguards Information" does not 
follow because containing "Safeguards Information" is only one 
of many very valid reasons the content of an SA is not released 
to the public. 
 
OIG Response 
(Agency comment, paragraph 1)  
The requested rewording does not alter the intent of the paragraph. 
 
(Agency comment, paragraph 2)  
OIG recognizes that there are many bases for withholding safeguards advisories 
from public disclosure.  However, to date, all safeguards advisories have been 
withheld from public disclosure, including some that do not have a clear basis for 
withholding.   
 
OIG made the requested revisions. 
 
NRC Comment 9 
9. On page 24, the statement about the Paperwork Reduction Act 
incorrectly implies that an exemption clause is required if a 
document is not an information request.  An exemption clause is 
required only if the document is an information request, but is 
exempt from the requirement for an OMB control number. 
 
 
OIG Response 
OIG concurs with the nuance of this comment.   
 
The statement was revised to accurately reflect the Paperwork Reduction Act 
requirements. 
 
Audit of NRC’s Generic Communications Program 
 
 
40
 
NRC Comment 10 
10. 
On page 29, in the first paragraph under "Internal Guidance on 
Processing Generic Communications," the first sentence 
through "For example" should be deleted and the paragraph 
should be started from "NRR Office . . ." 
 
OIG Response 
The requested deletion does not impact the point of the paragraph. 
 
OIG deleted the language as requested. 
 
