Beginning January 1, 2009 there will be two changes to the prescription drug 
benefit that is available in each of the three TVA medical plan options. And, 
the Consumer-Directed Health Plan medical plan will change. Read on to 
learn about these changes and watch for more communications in the future. 
Learning about these changes is another step in becoming a more informed 
healthcare consumer. When you make informed healthcare decisions, you 
can impact your physical health as well as your financial health. 
You will pay less for generic drugs.
You will pay more for using a brand drug if a generic equivalent is available. 
Important Benefit Plan Changes 
Starting January 1, 2009
Changes to your prescription drug plan in 2009
1
2
How will the prescription drug plan change on January 1, 2009? 
Prescription Drugs	
Copayment PPO and 80% PPO Plans	
Consumer-Directed Health Plan (CDHP)
	
2008	
2009	
2008	
2009
Generic – purchased 	
You pay a $12 copay	
You pay a $10 copay	
You pay 20% after deductible; 	
You pay 20% after deductible;
at retail pharmacy	
	
	
$12 min; $100 max	
$10 min; $100 max
Generic – purchased 	
You pay a $24 copay	
You pay a $20 copay	
You pay 20% after deductible; 	
You pay 20% after deductible;
at mail order pharmacy	
	
	
$24 min; $100 max	
$20 min; $100 max
	
Have you tried a generic prescription drug yet? In 2007 alone, 
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved 99 
new generic drugs to be introduced into the marketplace. 
More than 50 generics have already been approved in 2008. 
Two changes will be made to TVA’s prescription drug plan 
beginning January 1, 2009, concerning the use of generic 
drugs. Read on to learn how you can save money by choosing 
generic drugs.
Today, if you request a brand drug when a generic equivalent 
is available, you pay the brand copay, plus the difference in 
cost between the brand and the generic. However, if your 
doctor has indicated DAW (dispense as written) on your 
prescription, you pay the brand copay but not the additional 
cost difference between the brand and generic.
Beginning January 1, 2009, if you choose a brand drug instead 
of its generic equivalent you will be responsible for paying 
the difference in the cost between the brand and the generic 
regardless of what your doctor writes on the prescription. So, 
if you are taking a brand drug and there is a generic equivalent 
available you will have to make a choice. You can take the 
generic or take the brand. 
Prescription Drug	
Copay	
Drug Cost
Generic	
$10	
$40
Non-Preferred Brand	
$43	
$135
Choosing the brand drug over generic means you will pay more. Here’s an example:
In this example (even if the doctor writes DAW on the prescription):
• If you take the generic, your cost will be $10 (the copay).
• If you continue to use a brand drug, your cost will be $138. You 
will pay the difference in cost between the generic and the brand 
($135-$40) plus the $43 brand copay.
What if you don’t want a generic?
If you prefer a brand drug you can still get that drug but you 
will have to pay the difference for your choice as explained 
above. Some brand drugs don’t have a generic equivalent. 
If that is the case, you only pay the copay (or if enrolled in 
the CDHP, the coinsurance) for the brand drug. 
What is the difference between brand name and generic 
drugs?
A pharmaceutical company markets a new drug under a 
brand name that is a registered trademark and protected by 
patent. The company has exclusive rights to manufacture 
and sell that drug.
The generic name of a drug describes the active chemical 
ingredient of the product. This name is available for anyone to 
use. When the drug patent expires, other companies can begin 
to make generic equivalents of the drug and sell them under 
the drug’s generic name or under a different brand name. 
The only differences between a brand drug and a generic 
equivalent drug may be the color, flavor, shape, or certain 
inactive ingredients, such as fillers and dyes – and the lower 
price of the generic.
Are generic drugs safe and effective?
Yes, generic drugs are as safe and effective as their brand 
drug equivalents. The FDA requires that generic drugs meet 
the same standards as their brand drug counterparts. When 
compared to their brand drug equivalents, generic equiva-
lent drugs must do the following:
• Meet the same federal standards for quality, strength, 
purity and potency. 
• Contain the same active chemical ingredients and produce 
the same effect on the body. 
• Have the same dosage form (e.g., tablets, patches, etc.) 
and be administered the same way (e.g., swallowed, 
injected, etc.). 
• Be “bioequivalent,” meaning the generic drug must be 
absorbed into the blood at a rate similar to that of the 
brand drug equivalent. 
Since generics use the same active ingredients and are shown 
to work the same way in the body, they have the same risks 
and benefits as their brand name counterparts.
Note: In rare situations your doctor may decide that due to certain 
clinical or therapeutic reasons a generic equivalent is not appropriate for 
you. If such a situation occurs, you can submit an appeal to the appro-
priate TVA Healthcare Committee requesting that you not be required to 
pay the cost difference between the brand and generic. The Healthcare 
Committee will review the information your doctor provides and, based 
on clinical guidelines, decide if the appeal should be upheld. Appeals 
can be submitted prior to January 1, 2009, or anytime thereafter.
How do you know if a generic drug is available?
There are several ways to find out if a generic drug is available 
for the brand drug you may be taking:
Informational letter. If you or a family member are currently 
taking a brand drug that has a generic equivalent, you will 
receive a letter from Medco, TVA’s pharmacy benefit manager, 
in October. This letter will list possible generic equivalents 
for the brand drug currently being taken.
Ask Medco. Call Medco customer service at 800-818-0890 or 
visit its web site at www.medcohealth.com, where you’ll find 
extensive information about generic and preferred brand drugs. 
The site includes the tool My Rx Choices, which offers informa-
tion about different medications that may save you money. To 
get started, enter your login information or register. Then click 
on “My Rx Choices” and follow the easy steps provided.
Ask your doctor. Contact your doctor to see if a generic is 
available and appropriate for you for any new or current 
medication you may be taking. See the Medco web site for 
questions you may want to ask your doctor about generics. 
You may even ask for a prescription for only a few generic 
pills so you can try them first to judge their effectiveness 
compared to the brand drug you are currently taking. 
Ask your pharmacist. Talk to your pharmacist about your 
medications and see if a generic is available for your current 
or new prescriptions. 
Beginning January 1, 2009, a Health Savings Account, or HSA, 
will be available to employees and retirees who are enrolled 
in TVA’s Consumer-Directed Health Plan (CDHP). The CDHP, 
first offered in 2005, is a high-deductible medical plan in 
which you assume more control of your healthcare spending 
and more financial responsibility in exchange for lower 
premiums. The HSA will replace the Health Reimbursement 
Account (HRA) currently associated with the CDHP, giving 
you, the consumer, more control over how and when you 
spend your healthcare resources. 
An HSA is a tax-exempt account owned by you in which 
you and TVA can make contributions to pay for qualified 
medical expenses. Since HSAs were first established in the 
U.S. in 2003, more than six million people have enrolled in 
HSA-qualified health plans. And, it’s not simply a passing 
trend: the U.S. Treasury Department estimates that 25 to 30 
million Americans will use HSAs by 2010. 
The HSA and your medical plan 
An HSA works in conjunction with a high-deductible health 
plan (HDHP). 
High-deductible health plan
An HDHP is a health plan with a deductible amount that 
qualifies you to open a Health Savings Account.  
• To participate in an HSA, a person must be enrolled in an 
HDHP. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) provides HDHP 
deductibles, HDHP maximum out-of-pocket spending 
amounts, and annual HSA contribution limits each year 
and adjusts for inflation. 
• TVA’s CDHP option will be changed January 1, 2009, in 
order to meet IRS mandates for a high-deductible health 
plan. Specifically, annual deductibles will be increased 
to $1,150/individual and $2,300/family from the current 
$1,000/individual and $2,000/family. The IRS indexes the 
deductible amounts yearly.  
Health Savings Account
An HSA is a tax-exempt account that you can use to pay 
for current qualified medical expenses or to save for future 
qualified medical and retiree health care expenses. 
• How do consumers manage the responsibility of a higher 
deductible? That’s where the HSA comes into play: Funds 
in an HSA can be used to pay for out-of-pocket medical 
expenses until the deductible has been met. In this manner, 
the CDHP and HSA work together to help you manage 
healthcare costs  more carefully and cost-effectively.
• You decide whether or not you want to make contributions 
to your HSA. TVA will make a contribution of $500/individual 
or $1,000/family after you open your HSA account. These 
are the same as the current HRA annual amounts. The 
maximum HSA contribution from all sources for 2009 is 
$3,000/individual and $5,950/family. 
What are the benefits?
There are many important benefits to an HSA:
Portability
Unlike an HRA, HSAs are owned by the individual. Funds 
in an HSA belong to you for life – even if you switch jobs, 
change insurance plans, or retire. 
Savings vehicle
With an HSA, unused money rolls over year-to-year, earning 
interest tax-free. There is no “use it or lose it” rule, because 
the money belongs to the individual who owns the account. 
As a result, an HSA is more than just a tool to manage health-
care expenses – it’s also a valuable savings vehicle. 
Tax advantages
HSAs provide triple tax savings through tax-deductible con-
tributions (even for individuals who do not itemize deduc-
tions), tax-free earnings on investments, and tax-free with-
drawals for qualified medical expenses. 
Choice and control 
Your HSA belongs to you, so you can choose if and when 
to contribute to your account, how to invest your contribu-
tions, and when and how to use your HSA funds. You do 
not have to have distributions pre-qualified or approved by 
an employer, and you always have access to the funds in 
your HSA with debit cards and checks. 
Flexibility
Funds in your HSA can be used to pay for a variety of 
medical expenses and treatment options, including many 
not typically covered by a traditional health insurance plan. 
For example, you can withdraw money tax-free to pay for 
deductibles, coinsurance, contact lenses, prescription medi-
cines, certain over-the-counter drugs, vision care, and dental 
treatment. 
A new way to plan and pay for your healthcare 
TVA Benefits
Tennessee Valley Authority
400 W. Summit Hill Drive
Knoxville, Tennessee 37902
Presorted 
first-class mail
U.S. POSTAGE 
PAID
knoxville, tn
Permit No. 900
How does an HSA work?
Is an HSA right for you? Here are answers to some frequently asked 
questions about choosing and using an HSA:  
Who can open an HSA? 
To be eligible for an HSA, you must meet the following requirements:
• Must be covered by a qualified HDHP. The CDHP option will be the 
only TVA medical plan that will qualify as an HDHP.
• Cannot be enrolled in Medicare
• Cannot be claimed as a dependent on someone else’s tax return
• Cannot be covered by another health plan that is not HSA-qualified 
(with some exceptions, including vision coverage, dental coverage, 
accident and disability coverage, and employee assistance programs)
How do I use my HSA to pay for healthcare services? 
Until you meet your deductible, you will usually pay for services when 
you receive them. You can withdraw HSA funds from an ATM, or pay 
at the point of service using an HSA debit card or checks. Essentially, 
an HSA works just like a regular checking account.
Will the CDHP cover anything before I meet my deductible? 
Yes. The CDHP will continue to have the preventive care benefit for 
you and each of your covered dependents.
Who monitors how I use the funds in my HSA, and who determines 
what qualifies as an eligible medical expense? 
The IRS specifies which medical expenses qualify for tax-free HSA dis-
tributions. See Publication 502 on the IRS web site at www.irs.gov for 
a comprehensive list. You do not have to obtain pre-approval for HSA 
distributions; however, it is important to keep track of all receipts as 
proof of payment for qualified medical expenses. 
If I pay for a qualified medical expense out-of-pocket, can I reimburse 
myself later using funds from my HSA? 
Yes. You can pay for expenses out-of-pocket and reimburse yourself 
later; either by using your HSA debit card to withdraw cash from an ATM, 
or by writing yourself a check. Regardless of how you pay for qualified 
medical expenses, be sure to retain your receipts as proof of payment. 
Can I get an HSA for my family? 
HSAs are individually owned, so there is no such thing as a “family” 
account. However, you can use HSA funds to pay for the medical 
expenses of your spouse or dependent children, even if they are not 
covered under the CDHP. If your family is covered under the CDHP, 
you also benefit from higher HSA contribution limits. 
What happens to my HSA when I retire? 
Funds in an HSA are yours for life, and can be used throughout retirement. 
After age 65, HSA funds can be withdrawn penalty-free for non-medical 
expenses. You will pay only ordinary income tax on nonqualified distributions.
Stay tuned 
In the following months, watch for more details in these sources: 
Inside TVA, tva.com, eBenefits on TVA’s InsideNet, and TVA Today. 
You can also learn more about HSAs at www.treasury.gov.
