 
 
 
 
United States 
Department of 
Agriculture 
 
Food Safety 
and Inspection 
Service 
 
September 1999 
Revision 1 
 
HACCP-5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Generic HACCP 
Model for 
Poultry 
Slaughter  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Additional copies of the Guidebook for the Preparation 
of HACCP Plans and the Generic HACCP Models are 
available from: 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) 
Office of Policy, Program Development,  
and Evaluation (OPPDE) 
Inspection Systems Development Division 
Room 202, Cotton Annex Building 
300 12th Street SW 
Washington, D.C. 20250-3700 
Phone: (202) 720-3219 
Fax: 
(202) 690-0824 
This material is also available on the FSIS Homepage: 
http://www.fsis.usda.gov/index.htm 
United States 
Food Safety 
Washington, D.C. 
Department of 
and Inspection 
20250 
Agriculture 
Service 
September 8, 1999 
TO THE USERS OF THESE VOLUMES 
As some of you may know, the Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) received a substantial 
package of comments on its Guidebook for Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point 
(HACCP) Plan Development and the 13 Generic HACCP models, from a coalition of industry 
and trade associations. This package represents a large and thoughtful effort on the part of these 
organizations. FSIS intends to give it the careful attention and response that it deserves. 
The comments included many technical suggestions for improvements in the FSIS documents. It 
also included reiteration of longstanding differing policy viewpoints that have been frequently 
discussed by the Agency and the regulated industry. For the first time, the comments revealed 
substantially differing expectations on the part of these organizations and FSIS with respect to 
the purpose of the FSIS documents and their intended use. We want to address some aspects of 
this latter point. 
When the Pathogen Reduction/Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point systems (PR/HACCP) 
final regulation was published on July 25, 1996, the DRAFT Guidebook was included as an 
appendix. The Generic Models, developed for FSIS under contract, were available shortly 
thereafter in April 1997. It was probably inevitable that there were significant differences 
between the final regulatory language of CFR Part 417 and the DRAFT Generic Models as they 
were developed independently. It would have been inappropriate for FSIS to discuss its final 
regulatory language with any outside group. The contractor was appropriately proceeding from 
what it knew best, the National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods 
(NACMCF) documents on the subject of HACCP. Therefore, FSIS accepted that work product 
with full knowledge that significant revisions would be necessary. 
As time passed, FSIS managers became increasingly uncomfortable with the situation in which 
its major technical assistance documents did not appropriately and completely inform the 
regulated industry of Agency expectations regarding regulatory compliance. Because the 
intended audience for these technical assistance materials was primarily the very small 
establishments, which the Agency believed to have the least HACCP-experience, the Agency 
began the systematic revision of the documents to overcome this problem. We targeted the 
summer of 1999 as the completion date for this effort. 
FSIS now believes that others had very different ideas about the purpose and use of the 
documents than it did. As is consistently reiterated in the documents themselves, they are not 
designed to be used "as is." That is, they cannot be copied and used by an establishment to meet 
all the regulatory requirements of 9 CFR Part 417. Nor were they designed to be the ultimate 
teaching and training materials, as some would suggest. The development of ideal generic 
models is left to others who may have an interest in doing so. The generic models are not 
FSIS Form 2630-9 (6/86) 
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY IN EMPLOYMENT AND SERVICES 
2 
designed to extend or further interpret existing regulations; rather, they are designed to send the 
user back to the regulations so he/she can become familiar with the requirements as well as the 
flexibility they permit. The generic models are not designed to present new or alternative 
methods of producing and processing meat and poultry products. That is also left to others with 
an interest in doing so. 
FSIS envisioned that the generic models might be used in the following way: Suppose a HACCP 
team leader of a three-person HACCP team in a very small establishment attended a training 
course, but the others on his/her team were not able to do so. Suppose the HACCP training 
course met all the requirements of 417.7 but did not provide participants with much in the way of 
"take away materials" like workbooks, practical questions and answers, access to follow-up 
resources, etc., which the Research Triangle Institute (RTI) needs assessment indicated were so 
important to these establishments. The trained HACCP team leader returns to the establishment 
and begins the process of attempting to develop HACCP plans for the company's products and 
processes. He/she is quite confident that he/she has grasped the material presented in the training 
course and begins to work with this team immediately, while the concepts are fresh in his/her 
mind. 
First, he/she has the rest of the team review the Canadian video and the Guidebook from FSIS so 
that all members of his team have a basic level of information. 
The team members begin their work, and as they proceed, some questions arise as to whether 
what they have developed is appropriate. This is the point when FSIS expects the team to pick up 
the appropriate generic model and get a sense of whether they are on the right track. They should 
be able to determine whether the forms that they have developed, while different from the 
various ones in the generic models and not the same as what other companies use, are acceptable 
because they include the required information. They will also be able to discover what are some 
typical food safety hazards that are reasonably likely to occur, as explicitly defined in 417.2, and 
how to think through the problems that these hazards represent for their own products. They can 
see how critical limits might arise from existing regulatory requirements like the ones for rapid 
chilling of poultry products. They can also see that in the absence of settled regulatory 
requirements, there may be several sources of scientific expertise, and they can choose to make a 
conservative decision to provide a good margin of safety. They can find out the essential 
differences between monitoring and verification and have a basis for making their choices about 
verification activities and their frequencies. FSIS believes that these are useful, beneficial and 
worthwhile functions for which its generic models can be used. 
FSIS is publishing these updated revisions of the generic models, beginning with the Guidebook 
and the Generic Model for Raw, Ground Product, because a large backlog of requests exists for 
these two documents. FSIS intends to publish revisions of all the generic models no later than 
September 30, 1999. Moreover, as a result of public consultation, it may publish an additional 
revision of some of these models, but given the backlog and the impending HACCP 
implementation date, we considered it important to get a version of these documents out now. 
We hope that these documents are helpful. 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
Table of Contents 
Introduction……………………………………………………………………………..…. 3 
Using This Generic Model……………………………………………………………..….. 5 
Process Flow Diagram and Product Description………………………………………..…. 6 
Hazard Analysis………………………………………………………………….…………7 
Developing Your HACCP Plan……………………………………………………..…….. 9 
Identifying CCPs………………………………………………………………..…………. 11 
Appendix A 
References for HACCP Teams………………………………….…………………..17 
References for Poultry Slaughter (Broiler Carcass & Turkey Carcass)..…...……… 
19 
Appendix B 
Process Flow Diagram (Figure 1)…………………………………………………. 23 
Product Description Form (Figure 2)……………………………………………… 24 
Hazard Analysis Form (Figure 3)…………………………………………………. 25 
HACCP Plan Form (Figure 4)…………………………………………………..… 30 
Reprocessing Inspection Log……………………………………………………… 35 
Chilling Log……………………………………………………………………….. 36 
Thermometer Calibration Log…………………………………………………….. 37 
Generic Establishment X: Room Temperature Log ………………………………. 38 
Antimicrobial Intervention Monitoring Log ………………………………………. 39 
1 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
Corrective Actions Log……………………………………………………………. 40 
Pre-Shipment Review Log………………………………………………………… 41 
2 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
GENERIC HACCP MODEL 
FOR 
POULTRY SLAUGHTER 
Introduction 
The Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) system  is a scientific approach to process 
control. It is designed to prevent the occurrence of problems by assuring that controls are 
applied at any point in a food production system where hazardous or critical situations could 
occur. Hazards include biological, chemical, or physical contamination of food products. 
The Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) published a final rule in July 1996 mandating 
that HACCP be implemented as the system of process control in all inspected meat and poultry 
plants. As part of its efforts to assist establishments in the preparation of plant-specific HACCP 
plans, FSIS determined that a generic model for each process defined in the regulation would be 
made available for use on a voluntary basis by inspected establishments.  
The generic models have been revised since their initial publication and distribution as 
DRAFTS. The most important change in the revised versions is to make certain that these 
models are  
fully consistent with the features of the final regulation. Also, other technical and editorial 
improvements have been made. 
Throughout this generic model, FSIS discusses a HACCP team with members from different 
departments. In many very small establishments, there will not be separate departments with 
different employees. But, there will be employees who perform these different functions – often 
several of them. For purposes of explaining concepts, it is easier to speak as if these were 
different people, even though in many cases, they may be the same person carrying out more 
than one responsibility. 
Each generic model can be used as a starting point for the development of plant-specific plan(s) 
reflecting actual plant environments and the processes conducted. The generic model is not 
intended to be used “as is” for plant specific HACCP plans. 
The generic models are designed for use in conjunction with the list of process categories found 
in the HACCP regulations in section 417.2(b)(1).  
(b)  The HACCP plan. (1)  Every establishment shall develop and implement a written 
3 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
HACCP plan covering each product produced by that establishment whenever a hazard 
analysis reveals one or more food safety hazards that are reasonably likely to occur, 
based on the hazard analysis conducted in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section, 
including products in the following processing categories: 
(i)  Slaughter--all species. 
(ii)  Raw product--ground. 
(iii)  Raw product--not ground. 
(iv)  Thermally processed--commercially sterile. 
(v)  Not heat treated--shelf stable. 
(vi)  Heat treated--shelf stable. 
(vii)  Fully cooked--not shelf stable. 
(viii)  Heat treated but not fully cooked--not shelf stable. 
(ix)  Product with secondary inhibitors--not shelf stable. 
This generic model is designed for use with the first process category: Slaughter. 
The purpose of the process category listing in 417.2 is to set out the circumstances under which a 
HACCP team may develop a single HACCP plan for multiple products. This may be done when 
products are in the same process category, and food safety hazards, critical control points, and 
other features are essentially the same. There is a generic model for each process category, plus 
two for subcategories which present special issues: irradiated products and mechanically 
separated products. 
In order to select the model or models that will be most useful for the activities performed in any 
specific plant, the following steps should be taken: 
1) For slaughtering operations, select the model for the appropriate species. 
2) For processed products, make a list of all products produced in the plant. 
3) Examine the list and group like products, considering common processing steps and 
equipment used. 
4 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
4) Compare the grouped products with the list of processes in the regulations; this step should 
reveal how many and which of the generic models might be useful. 
Deciding on a generic model and which products can be covered by a single plan is an important 
achievement. If the team does it well, it can save a lot of unnecessary effort and paperwork. 
Selecting an inappropriate generic model reduces its potential benefits. However, often the 
HACCP team will discover they have made this error when they develop their process flow 
diagram or during their hazard analysis. These are early stages in the process when it is 
relatively easy to make changes. 
In any case, establishments must meet all regulatory requirements for their products. 
Using This Generic Model 
This generic model is designed to be used by establishments that slaughter, the first process 
category. The model can be used for all establishments that slaughter, but would be most useful 
to establishments that slaughter young chickens. The generic model is not suitable for products 
that fall into any of the other process categories. 
The model will be most useful to a HACCP team that includes access to one trained individual, 
as specified in 417.7(b). 
(b)The individual performing the functions listed in paragraph (a) of this section shall 
have successfully completed a course of instruction in the application of the seven 
HACCP principles to meat or poultry product processing, including a segment on the 
development of a HACCP plan for a specific product and on record review. 
It would be beneficial for other team members to have reviewed any of the various guidance 
materials available on how to develop a HACCP plan for your company, including several useful 
videos, handbooks, or computer programs. Once the HACCP team has prepared itself as 
thoroughly as possible in general HACCP principles and how to use them, this model should be 
helpful. 
Note: This generic model includes a number of forms that can be used to record various types of 
required information. The forms themselves are samples; a company HACCP team can develop 
whatever forms it finds most useful. All the forms mentioned in this document are included in 
Appendix B; they appear in the order in which they are discussed in the text. 
All FSIS generic models are designed to assist establishments in applying the seven HACCP 
principles to their meat and poultry processing operations AND to meet the regulatory 
5 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
requirements of Part 417. Therefore, the definitions used in this and all other FSIS generic 
models are those found in 417.1: 
§ 417.1 Definitions. 
For purposes of this part, the following shall apply: 
Corrective action. Procedures to be followed when a deviation occurs. 
Critical control point. A point, step, or procedure in a food process at which control can 
be applied and, as a result, a food safety hazard can be prevented, eliminated, or reduced 
to acceptable levels. 
Critical limit. The maximum or minimum value to which a physical, biological, or 
chemical hazard must be controlled at a critical control point to prevent, eliminate, or 
reduce to an acceptable level the occurrence of the identified food safety hazard. 
Food safety hazard. Any biological, chemical, or physical property that may cause a 
food to be unsafe for human consumption. 
HACCP System. The HACCP plan in operation, including the HACCP plan itself. 
Hazard. SEE Food Safety Hazard. 
Preventive measure. Physical, chemical, or other means that can be used to control an 
identified food safety hazard. 
Process-monitoring instrument. An instrument or device used to indicate conditions 
during processing at a critical control point. 
Responsible establishment official. The individual with overall authority on-site or a 
higher level official of the establishment. 
Process Flow Diagram and Product Description 
To begin using this model, the company's HACCP team should first describe the product(s) 
which are part of this process category and covered by this HACCP plan. The product(s) should 
be described in two ways: 
(1) by a simple diagram which shows the steps the company uses when it produces the product, 
6 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
and 
(2) in a brief written description which provides key facts about the product and its use. 
In this generic model, there is an example for young chicken slaughter, one of the species in this 
process category. FSIS has developed certain forms as part of the examples in the generic 
models; company HACCP teams are not required to use these forms. 
Figure 1 is an example of a PROCESS FLOW DIAGRAM for the young chicken slaughter 
process in generic establishment X. Figure 2 is an example of a PRODUCT DESCRIPTION 
for the young chickens slaughtered by generic establishment X. 
Once the company HACCP team in your establishment has prepared your Process Flow 
Diagram, they should verify it by walking through the establishment following the flow of 
product and making sure that all the steps of the process are included in the flow diagram.  The 
team should also review the information provided on the Product Description to make sure all 
the key facts are included, such as identifying consumers, especially those with particular health 
problems or known to be at risk. 
Note: If you are slaughtering young chickens and your process includes steps not included in this 
example, such as pre-evisceration spray or bacterial spray, those steps should be added. Also, if 
your process does not include all the steps identified in this example, those steps would be 
omitted when conducting the hazard analysis. That is generally, how you use these generic 
model examples--just omit the features which do not apply to your operation or if your operation 
includes features not included in this example, they should be added. 
By completing a Process Flow Diagram and a Product Description, you have met the 
requirements of 417.2(a)(2). You can use the Process Flow Diagram in particular to help you 
complete the rest of the hazard analysis. Use the flow diagram to systematically review each 
step in the process and ask the question, "Is there a food safety hazard which is reasonably likely 
to occur which may be introduced at this step?"  In answering the question, your HACCP team 
needs to consider biological (including microbiological), chemical, and physical hazards. 
Hazard Analysis 
Once your product(s) are accurately described through the flow diagram and product description, 
the HACCP team should begin work on the HAZARD ANALYSIS. The hazard analysis is 
fundamental to developing a good HACCP plan and one that meets regulatory requirements. 
The regulatory requirements for a hazard analysis are found at 417.2(a). 
§ 417.2 Hazard Analysis and HACCP Plan. 
7 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
(a)  Hazard analysis. (1)  Every official establishment shall conduct, or have conducted 
for it, a hazard analysis to determine the food safety hazards reasonably likely to occur 
in the production process and identify the preventive measures the establishment can 
apply to control those hazards. The hazard analysis shall include food safety hazards 
that can occur before, during, and after entry into the establishment. A food safety 
hazard that is reasonably likely to occur is one for which a prudent establishment would 
establish controls because it historically has occurred, or because there is a reasonable 
possibility that it will occur in the particular type of product being processed, in the 
absence of those controls. 
(2)  A flow chart describing the steps of each process and product flow in the 
establishment shall be prepared, and the intended use or consumers of the finished 
product shall be identified. 
Generic establishment X, which we are using for our example, is capturing these regulatory 
requirements on a 6-column Hazard Analysis Form (See Figure 3). A good way to use a form 
like this is to create the first column by using the Process Flow Diagram and the second by 
answering the question. Once the HACCP team has considered all the steps in the flow diagram 
and determined if a food safety hazard could be introduced, it needs to consider whether the 
hazard is "reasonably likely to occur", using the meaning of this phrase included in 417.2(a). On 
the 6-column form used by generic establishment X, the third and fourth columns address this 
issue. If the establishment's HACCP team has decided that the hazard is not reasonably likely to 
occur, they enter "No" in column three, explain the basis for their determination in column four, 
and do not need to further consider activity to address this hazard. 
If, however, the team has determined there is a "food safety hazard reasonably likely to occur" 
introduced at a certain point in the process, column five is used to describe a measure which 
could be applied to "prevent, eliminate, or reduce to acceptable levels" the food safety hazard 
identified in column three. Column six is used when a critical control point (CCP) is identified 
based upon the decision made in the hazard analysis. Each CCP has a number – the order 
corresponds to steps in the process. For example, 1 is the first CCP in the process flow, 2 the 
next, etc. The letter indicates whether the hazard is biological – B; chemical – C; or physical – 
P. 
Look at the entries for “Receiving – Nonmeat Ingredients/Packaging Materials” on the first page 
of the six column form; the HACCP team has determined that chemical and physical hazards 
may be associated with the nonmeat ingredients or packaging materials when they are received, 
but it put a “No” in the third column. Column four explains the basis for the team’s 
determination. 
You will notice that on our generic hazard analysis for poultry slaughter, there are four instances 
8 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
in which the HACCP team has identified a point in the process at which a food safety hazard is 
reasonably likely to occur. For each one of these they have identified a measure which can be 
used to control the hazard. 
When your HACCP team has completed their hazard analysis (whether they use this format or 
not), it is a good idea to review the flow diagram, the product description and the hazard analysis 
itself to make sure they are complete. Part 417.2(a)(3) includes a list of sources from which food 
safety hazards might be expected to arise. Reviewing that list could help the HACCP team 
check for completeness. 
Note: If you are using this generic model and slaughter a different species or if you use a 
different process flow, you may have different hazards which are reasonably likely to occur. For 
these different hazards, there may be different measures which could be used for control 
purposes. 
This, and all other FSIS generic models, contains a list of references which can help your 
HACCP team in making sure the hazard analysis is complete. The references for poultry 
slaughter are found in Appendix A. A member of your HACCP team might want to review at 
least some of the references to make sure hazards have not been omitted from the hazard 
analysis. 
Completing the hazard analysis is a very significant and important element in developing your 
HACCP system. Your HACCP team should feel a real sense of accomplishment when they get 
this far; this is like completing the foundation of a house. 
Developing Your HACCP Plan 
The company HACCP team can now take the materials it developed while doing the hazard 
analysis and use them to build the HACCP Plan. Remember that one of the important 
objectives of the FSIS generic models is to provide examples which illustrate how to meet the 
regulatory requirements of Part 417, as well as to correctly apply the principles of HACCP. 
Part 417.2 (c) and (d) are the regulatory requirements: 
(c) The contents of the HACCP plan. The HACCP plan shall, at a minimum: 
(1) List the food safety hazards identified in accordance with paragraph (a) of this 
section, which must be controlled for each process. 
(2) List the critical control points for each of the identified food safety hazards, 
including, as appropriate: 
9 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
(i)  Critical control points designed to control food safety hazards that could be 
introduced in the establishment, and 
(ii)  Critical control points designed to control food safety hazards introduced outside the 
establishment, including food safety hazards that occur before, during, and after entry 
into the establishment; 
(3)  List the critical limits that must be met at each of the critical control points. Critical 
limits shall, at a minimum, be designed to ensure that applicable targets or performance 
standards established by FSIS, and any other requirement set forth in this chapter 
pertaining to the specific process or product, are met; 
(4)  List the procedures, and the frequency with which those procedures will be 
performed, that will be used to monitor each of the critical control points to ensure 
compliance with the critical limits; 
(5)  Include all corrective actions that have been developed in accordance with §417.3(a) 
of this part, to be followed in response to any deviation from a critical limit at a critical 
control point; and 
(6)  Provide for a recordkeeping system that documents the monitoring of the critical 
control points. The records shall contain the actual values and observations obtained 
during monitoring. 
(7)  List the verification procedures, and the frequency with which those procedures will 
be performed, that the establishment will use in accordance with § 417.4 of this part. 
(d)  Signing and dating the HACCP plan. (1)  The HACCP plan shall be signed and 
dated by the responsible establishment individual. This signature shall signify that the 
establishment accepts and will implement the HACCP plan. 
(2)  The HACCP plan shall be dated and signed: 
(i)  Upon initial acceptance; 
(ii)  Upon any modification; and 
(iii)  At least annually, upon reassessment, as required under § 417.4(a)(3) of this part. 
Generic establishment X has prepared its HACCP plan for young chicken slaughter on a six 
column form (See Figure 4). You do not need to use this form, although some kind of a form is 
probably the easiest way to present your HACCP plan. 
10 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
Identifying CCPs 
The first column on this particular form is used to enter information developed and contained on 
the hazard analysis form. Part 417.2(c)(1) and (2) require that the food safety hazards identified 
in the hazard analysis be listed on the HACCP plan and that there be a CCP for each identified 
hazard. You will notice the hazard analysis form identified four points at which food safety 
hazards were reasonably likely to occur: physical contamination with fecal material and potential 
pathogen contamination at evisceration/presentation, pathogen contamination at reprocessing, 
pathogen cross-contamination and proliferation at chilling, and pathogen proliferation at finished 
products storage (cold). The establishment HACCP team has chosen to have four CCPs to 
address these four hazards: proper evisceration/presentation, proper reprocessing, proper chilling 
of product, and proper maintenance of finished product temperatures during storage. 
After identifying its CCPs, the HACCP team proceeded to consider critical limits, monitoring 
procedures and their frequencies, and verification procedures and their frequencies, and HACCP 
records. 
In deciding what would be the critical limits, the HACCP team first considered whether there 
were any regulatory requirements which had to be met and would function as critical limits. 
They found some regulatory requirements for chilling (§381.66), and realized that if the proper 
chiller procedures were not followed pathogen proliferation was possible. The HACCP team 
knew that the chilling process should start as soon as possible, so they set the critical limit for the 
temperature of product to reach 40° F or less within four hours from the stunning/killing step. 
Once they had decided on their critical limits, they needed to identify how the monitoring 
procedures would be carried out and at what frequency. 
For their chilling step, the establishment had the QA technician do a product temperature check 
at the end of the chilling procedure every hour of production. At the chilling step the carcass 
chiller and neck/giblet chiller temperatures are monitored continuously with recording charts. 
These decisions by the HACCP team regarding critical limits, plus monitoring procedures and 
their frequencies are written up in columns two and three of the HACCP Plan. 
The team then went on to consider appropriate verification procedures; the team knew that there 
were different types of verification and that Part 417.4(a)(2) included specific regulatory 
requirements for each. The regulatory requirements for ongoing verification are: 
(2) Ongoing verification activities. Ongoing verification activities include, but are not 
limited to: 
11 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
(i) The calibration of process-monitoring instruments; 
(ii) Direct observations of monitoring activities and corrective actions; and 
(iii) The review of records generated and maintained in accordance with §417.5(a)(3) of 
this part. 
The HACCP team decided they could verify the chilling of product by checking the Chilling Log 
once per shift. The team also had the maintenance supervisor verify the accuracy of the carcass 
chiller and necks/giblets chiller temperature recording charts once per shift. 
There is a regulatory requirement (Part 417.4(a)(2)(i)) for including as a verification, the 
calibration of process-monitoring instruments. Each day QA checks the hand-held thermometers 
for accuracy in slush ice water and calibrates them to within 2° F accuracy. 
The HACCP team described the verification procedures and their frequencies in the fifth column 
of their HACCP plan. 
The HACCP team for generic establishment X knew that their HACCP Plan needed to provide 
for a recordkeeping system. They wanted their records to be easy to create and understand. 
They wanted to be sure their records met regulatory requirements, so they reviewed part 417.5(a) 
and (b): 
§ 417.5 Records. 
(a)  The establishment shall maintain the following records documenting the 
establishment's HACCP plan: 
(1)  The written hazard analysis prescribed in § 417.2(a) of this part, including all 
supporting documentation; 
(2)  The written HACCP plan, including decision making documents associated with the 
selection and development of CCP's and critical limits, and documents supporting both 
the monitoring and verification procedures selected and the frequency of those 
procedures. 
(3)  Records documenting the monitoring of CCP's and their critical limits, including the 
recording of actual times, temperatures, or other quantifiable values, as prescribed in the 
establishment's HACCP plan; the calibration of process-monitoring instruments; 
corrective actions, including all actions taken in response to a deviation; verification 
procedures and results; product code(s), product name or identity, or slaughter 
12 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
production lot. Each of these records shall include the date the record was made. 
(b)  Each entry on a record maintained under the HACCP plan shall be made at the time 
the specific event occurs and include the date and time recorded, and shall be signed or 
initialed by the establishment employee making the entry. 
The HACCP team decided that their records would be kept on some simple forms, some of 
which the team itself devised. 
The HACCP team decided that since QA had a form that they had been using for measuring 
chilling temperatures, that they would modify that form. The form was modified to provide 
spaces for all entries necessary for the monitoring and verification activities at the product 
handling step. 
The Temperature Recording Chart for the carcass chill was already in use and the team knew 
that they needed to do some personnel training to ensure that all recordkeeping requirements are 
included on the recording chart. 
QA already had a Thermometer Calibration Log and this form was modified to meet the HACCP 
regulatory recordkeeping requirements. The HACCP team decided that this form could be used 
by QA for more than one day because there are very limited numbers of thermometers issued for 
product temperature measurements. If at any time during the shift a thermometer is dropped or if 
the employee questions the accuracy of the thermometer he is to immediately take the 
thermometer to the QA lab for an accuracy check. 
On its HACCP Plan, generic establishment X has listed the names of the forms it will be using 
for monitoring and verification records. The team also devised the antimicrobial intervention log 
to record monitoring results for pressure and antimicrobial concentrations. 
There is one other form included in column four, where the establishment has described its 
recordkeeping system. That is the Corrective Actions Log; it is used to create the records of any 
corrective actions taken because of deviations from critical limits at CCPs. Column six 
references the planned corrective actions for each CCP. The HACCP team carefully reviewed 
the regulatory requirements for planned corrective actions found at 417.3(a): 
13 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
§ 417.3 Corrective actions. 
(a)  The written HACCP plan shall identify the corrective action to be followed in 
response to a deviation from a critical limit. The HACCP plan shall describe the 
corrective action to be taken, and assign responsibility for taking corrective action, to 
ensure: 
(1)  The cause of the deviation is identified and eliminated; 
(2)  The CCP will be under control after the corrective action is taken; 
(3)  Measures to prevent recurrence are established; and 
(4)  No product that is injurious to health or otherwise adulterated as a result of the 
deviation enters commerce. 
The HACCP team has developed a specific corrective action plan which will be followed 
whenever there is a deviation from a critical limit at a CCP; each of the planned corrective 
actions meets the four regulatory requirements of 417.3(a). 
Planned Corrective Actions for CCP 3 
1. QA will reject or hold product until temperature is achieved dependent on time and 
temperature deviation. For example, the ARS cooling program can be used to make a 
determination. 
2. QA will identify the cause of the deviation and prevent reoccurrence by reassessment of the 
HACCP plan and review of the cause of the deviation. Monitoring will be more frequent to 
assure the process is in control. 
3. QA will assure that no adulterated product has been shipped. 
The HACCP team also develops planned corrective actions for each of the other CCPs and 
attaches them to the HACCP plan. Whenever a deviation from a critical limit occurs, company 
employees follow the corrective action plan and use the Corrective Action Log to create a record 
of their actions. The Corrective Action Log forms are available at CCPs, so they can be used 
immediately when an employee performing a monitoring check discovers and records a 
deviation. All Corrective Action Logs, which have been used during the day, are turned in to the 
HACCP coordinator. 
There is one final verification/recordkeeping requirement which the company must perform; it is 
found at 417.5(c): 
14 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
(c)  Prior to shipping product, the establishment shall review the records associated with 
the production of that product, documented in accordance with this section, to ensure 
completeness, including the determination that all critical limits were met and, if 
appropriate, corrective actions were taken, including the proper disposition of product. 
Where practicable, this review shall be conducted, dated, and signed by an individual 
who did not produce the record(s), preferably by someone trained in accordance with § 
417.7 of this part, or the responsible establishment official. 
In generic establishment X, product is shipped out, often in small lots, throughout the day. This 
means that pre-shipment verification checks must be as complete as possible when finished 
product is in storage, so that a shipment can be made up quickly and moved into distribution 
channels. 
The establishment uses a half day lotting system and a midshift clean-up. While the midshift 
clean-up is being performed, QA personnel or the HACCP coordinator review results of 
monitoring and verification checks applied to that lot; if there were deviations from critical 
limits, they review the Corrective Action Logs to make sure all appropriate planned responses 
were carried out. If everything is in order and there are complete records showing that the 
establishment has controlled production of this product through its HACCP system, the HACCP 
coordinator will sign the pre-shipment review form which the HACCP team devised for this 
purpose. 
Note: It is not a regulatory requirement that a separate form be used for pre-shipment review; in 
addition, FSIS has indicated that it will be very flexible in accepting a variety of arrangements 
for accomplishing pre-shipment review to reflect the variety of commercial practices which it 
has encountered in the industry. It is, however, important to remember that pre-shipment review 
is a regulatory requirement that must be met, as it indicates that the establishment is taking full 
responsibility for the product having been produced under a well-functioning HACCP system. 
The HACCP team believes it has now completed preparation of the documents which are 
necessary to meet regulatory requirements for a Hazard Analysis and a HACCP Plan for their 
poultry slaughter production process. They have secured a copy of FSIS Directive 5000.1, 
Enforcement of Regulatory Requirements in Establishments Subject to HACCP System 
Requirements, the HACCP Basic Compliance Checklist which will be used by inspection 
program personnel. The HACCP team has modified the inspection form to make the statements 
into positives, and now has a checklist for its own use to make sure they have not omitted 
anything in their plan development and preparation. When they are confident that they have 
done what is necessary, they will turn their Hazard Analysis and HACCP Plan over to the 
establishment owner for decisions about implementation. 
15 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
APPENDIX A 
16 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
References for HACCP Teams 
1. Agriculture Canada. Food Safety Enhancement Program – HACCP Implementation Manual. 
Camelot Drive, Nepean, Ontario, Canada, 1996. 
2. American Meat Institute Foundation. HACCP: The Hazard Analysis and Critical Control 
Point System in the Meat and poultry Industry.  Washington, D.C., 1994. 
Useful sections in particular are: 
Chapter 3 – microbiological hazards, pp. 15-26 
Chapter 4 – chemical hazards, pp. 27-32 
Chapter 5 – physical hazards, pp. 33-35 
Appendix A – NACMCF HACCP 
Appendix C – Model HACCP plans 
3. Baker, D.A. Application of Modeling in HACCP Plan Development.  Int. J. Food Microbiol. 
25:251-261, 1995. 
4. Corlett, D.A., Jr. and Stier, R.F. Risk Assessment within the HACCP System.  Food Control 
2:71-72, 1991. 
5. Council for Agriculture Science and Technology. Risks Associated with Foodborne 
Pathogens.  February 1993. 
6. Easter, M.C., et al. The Role of HACCP in the Management of Food Safety and Quality. J. 
Soc. Dairy Technol. 47:42-43, 1994. 
7. Environmental Protection Agency. Tolerances for Pesticides in Foods.  Title 40, Code of 
Federal Regulations, Part 185. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C., 1998. 
8. Food and Drug Administration. The Food Defect Action Levels. FDA/CFSAN. 
Washington, D.C., 1998. 
9. Food and Drug Administration. Fish and Fishery Products Hazards and Control Guide --
Get Hooked on Seafood Safety. Office of Seafood. Washington, D.C., 1994. 
10. International Commission on Microbiological Specification for Foods. HACCP in 
Microbiological Safety and Quality.  Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, 1988. 
17 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
Useful sections in particular are: 
Chapter 10 – raw meat and poultry, pp. 176-193 
Chapter 11 – roast beef, pp. 234-238 
Chapter 11 – canned ham, pp. 238-242 
11. International Commission on Microbiological Specification for Foods. Microorganisms in 
Foods 4. Application of Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) Systems to 
Ensure Microbiological Safety and Quality. Blackwell Scientific Publications, Boston, 1989 
12. National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods. March 20, 1992 --
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point System. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 16: 1-23, 1993. 
13. National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods. Adopted August 14, 
1997-- Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point Principles and Application Guidelines. J. 
Food Protect. 61(9): 1246-1259, 1998. 
14. National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods. DRAFT document -
FSIS Microbiological Hazard Identification Guide for Meat and Poultry Components of 
Products Produced by Very Small Plants. 1-22, August 1999. 
15. National Advisory Committee on Microbiological Criteria for Foods. June 1993 -- Report 
on Generic HACCP for Raw Beef. Food Microbiol. 10: 449-488, 1994. 
16. National Research Council. An Evaluation of the Role of Microbiological Criteria for Foods 
and Food Ingredients.  National Academy Press, Washington, D.C., 1985. 
Useful sections in particular are: 
Chapter 4 – microbiological hazards, pp. 72-103 
Chapter 9 – raw meat, pp. 193-199 
Chapter 9 – processed meats, pp. 199-216 
17. Notermans, S., et al. The HACCP Concept: Identification of Potentially Hazardous 
Microorganisms.  Food Microbiol. 11:203-214, 1994. 
18. Pierson M.D. and Dutson, T. Editors. HACCP in Meat, Poultry, and Fish Processing. 
Blackie Academic & Professional. Glasgow, 1995. 
Useful sections in particular are: 
Chapter 4 – meat and poultry slaughter, pp. 58-71 
Chapter 5 – processed meats, pp. 72-107 
Chapter 7 – risk analysis, pp. 134-154 
Chapter 13 – predictive modeling, pp. 330-354 
18 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
19. Pierson, M.D. and Corlett, D.A., Jr. Editors. HACCP Principles and Applications. Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, New York, 1992. 
20. Stevenson, K.E. and Bernard, D.T. Editors. HACCP: Establishing Hazard Analysis Critical 
Control Point Programs, A Workshop Manual.  The Food Processors Institute, Washington, 
D.C., 1995. 
Useful sections in particular are: 
Chapter 11 – forms for hazard analysis, CCPs, critical limits, HACCP master 
sheet, example HACCP for breaded chicken 
21. Stevenson, K.E. and Bernard, D.T. Editors. HACCP: A Systematic Approach to Food 
Safety. 3rd Edition. The Food Processors Institute, Washington, D.C., 1999. 
22. Tompkin, R.B. The Use of HACCP in the Production of Meat and Poultry Products. 
J. Food Protect. 53(9): 795-803, 1990. 
23. Tompkin, R.B. The Use of HACCP for Producing and Distributing Processed Poultry 
Products. In Advances in Meat Research. Vol. 10. Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point in 
Meat, Poultry and Seafoods. Chapman & Hall, 1995. 
References for Poultry Slaughter (Broiler Carcass & Turkey Carcass) 
1. Baily, J. Stan. Control of Salmonella and Campylobacter in Poultry Production. A 
Summary of Work at Russell Research Center. Poult. Sci. 72: 1169–1173, 1993. 
2. Benedict, R.C., et al. Attachment and Removal of Salmonella spp. On Meat and Poultry 
Tissues. J. Food Safety. 11: 135–148, 1991. 
3. Blank, Greg, et al. Microbiological and Hydraulic Evaluation of Immersion Chilling for 
Poultry.  J. Food Protect. 58: 1386–1388, 1995. 
4. Carpenter, Sandra L., et al. Survival of Listeria monocytogenes on Processed Poultry. J. 
Food Sci. 54: 556–557, 1989. 
5. Cherrington, Christina A., et al. Persistence of Escherichia coli in a Poultry Processing 
Plant. Letters Appl. Microbiol. 7: 141–143, 1988. 
6. Clouser, C.S., et al. The Role of Defeathering in the Contamination of Turkey Skin by 
Salmonella species and Listeria monocytogenes. Poult. Sci. 74: 723–731, 1995. 
19 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
7. Clouser. C.S. et al. Effect of Type of Defeathering System on Salmonella Cross-
Contamination During Commercial Processing. Poult. Sci. 74: 732–741, 1995. 
8. Dickens, J.A., et al. The Effect of Air-Scrubbing on Moisture Pickup, Aerobic Plate Counts, 
Enterobacteriaceae, and the Incidence of Salmonella on Artificially Inoculated Broiler 
Carcasses. Poult. Sci. 71: 560–564, 1992. 
9. Franco, C.M., et al. Determination of the Principal Sources of Listeria spp. Contamination 
in Poultry Meat and Poultry Processing Plant. J. Food Protect. 58: 1320–1325, 1995. 
10. Genigeorgis, Constantin A., et al. Prevalence of Listeria spp. in Poultry Meat at the 
Supermarket and Slaughterhouse Level. J. Food Protect. 52: 618–624, 1989. 
11. Izat, A.L., et al. Incidence and Level of Campylobacter jejuni in Broiler Processing. Poult. 
Sci. 67: 1568–1572, 1988. 
12. James, William O, et al. Cost-Effective Techniques to Control Human Enteropathogens on 
Fresh Poultry.  Poult. Sci. 72: 1174–1176, 1993. 
13. James, William O., et al. Profile of Selected Bacterial Counts and Salmonella Prevalence on 
Raw Poultry in a Poultry Slaughter Establishment. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc. 200: 57–59, 
1992. 
14. Kim, Jeong–Weon, et al. Attachment of Salmonella typhimurium to Skins of Turkey that had 
been Defeathered through Three Different Systems: Scanning Electron Microscopic 
Examination.  J. Food Protect. 56: 395–400, 1993. 
15. Kotula, Kathryn L., et al. Bacterial Contamination of Broiler Chickens before Scalding. J. 
Food Protect. 58: 1386–1388, 1995. 
16. Lawrence, Lorna M., et al. Incidence of Listeria spp. and Listeria monocytogens in a Poultry 
Processing Environment and in Poultry Products and Their Rapid Confirmation by 
Multiplex PCR..  Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 4600– 4604, December 1994. 
17. Lawrence, Lorna M., et al. Characterization of Listeria monocytogenes Isolated from Poultry 
Products and from the Poultry-Processing Environment by Random amplification of 
Polymorphic DNA and Multilocus Enzyme Electrophoresis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
2139–2144, June 1995. 
18. Li, Yanbin, et al. Electrical Treatment of Poultry Chiller Water to Destroy Campylobacter 
jejuni.  J. Food Protect. 58: 1330–1334, 1995. 
20 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
19. Lillard, H.S. Factors Affecting the Persistence of Salmonella during the Processing of 
Poultry. J. Food Protect. 52: 829–832, 1989. 
20. Lillard, H.S. Incidence and Recovery of Salmonella and Other Bacteria from Commercially 
Processed Poultry Carcasses at Selected Pre- and Post-Evisceration Steps. J. Food Protect. 
52: 88–91, 1989. 
21. Mead G.C., et al. Microbiological Survey of Five Poultry Processing Plants in the UK. Brit. 
Poult. Sci. 34: 497–503, 1993. 
22. Mead, G.C., et al. Use of a marker organism in poultry processing to identify sites of cross-
contamination and evaluate possible control measures. Brit. Poult. Sci. 35: 354, 1994. 
23. Moye, C.J., et al. Poultry Processing, An Innovative Technology for Salmonella Control and 
Shelf Life Extension.  Food Aust. 43: 246–249, 1991. 
24. Raj, Mohan. Poultry Slaughter. Meat Focus International. Marck 1995:113-118, 1995. 
25. Renwick, Shane A., et al. Variability and Determinants of Carcass Bacterial Load at a 
Poultry Abattoir.  J. Food Protect. 56: 694-699, 1993. 
26. Russell, S. M. The Effect of Refrigerated and Frozen Storage on Populations of Mesophilic 
and Coliform Bacteria on Fresh Broiler Chicken Carcasses. Poultry Sci. 75: 2057-2060, 
1996. 
27. Russell, S. M., et al. Spoilage Bacteria of Fresh Broiler Chicken Carcasses. Poultry Sci. 
75:2041-2047, 1996. 
28. Thayer, Stephan G., et al. Evaluation of Cross-Contamination on Automatic Viscera 
Removal Equipment.  Poult. Sci. 72:741-746, 1993. 
29. Tokumaru, Masakazu, et al. Rates of Detection of Salmonella and Campylobacter in Meats 
in Response to the Sample Size and the Infection Level of each Species. Int. J. Food 
Microbiol. 13: 41-46, 1990. 
30. Villarreal, Mario E., et al. The Incidence of Salmonella on Poultry Carcasses Following the 
Use of Slow Release Chlorine Dioxide (Alcide). J. Food Protect. 53: 465–467, 1990. 
31. Waldroup, A.L. Summary of Work to Control Pathogens in Poultry Processing. Poult. Sci. 
72: 1177–1179, 1993. 
21 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
APPENDIX B 
22 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
PROCESS FLOW DIAGRAM 
Figure 1 
PROCESS CATEGORY: SLAUGHTER 
PRODUCT: YOUNG CHICKEN 
Process Fl
ow Diagram
 for Proce
ss Category: Slaug
hter - Produc
t: Young Chicken * Steps in the process where nonmeat ingredients (e.g., antimicrobials) are added to or comes in contact with product. 
23 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION 
Figure 2 Product Description for Process Category: Slaughter - Product: Young Chicken
PROCESS CATEGORY: SLAUGHTER 
PRODUCT: YOUNG CHICKEN 
1. COMMON NAME? 
CHICKEN 
2. HOW IS IT TO BE USED? 
READY TO COOK 
CARCASSES/PARTS 
3. TYPE OF PACKAGE? 
CARCASSES – VACUUM 
PACKAGED INDIVIDUALLY; 
PARTS – VACUUM PACKAGED, 
TRAY PACKS 
4. LENGTH OF SHELF LIFE, 
3-6 MONTHS AT 0° F OR 
AT WHAT TEMPERATURE? 
BELOW;7 DAYS AT 40° F 
5. WHERE WILL IT BE SOLD? 
WHOLESALE TO DISTRIBUTORS; 
CONSUMERS? 
RETAIL TO CONSUMERS 
INTENDED USE? 
6. LABELING INSTRUCTIONS? 
SAFE FOOD HANDLING LABELS; 
KEEP REFRIGERATED OR KEEP 
FROZEN; COOKING LABEL 
7. IS SPECIAL DISTRIBUTION 
KEEP REFRIGERATED OR KEEP 
CONTROL NEEDED? 
FROZEN 
24 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
HAZARD ANALYSIS – YOUNG CHICKEN SLAUGHTER Table for Hazard Analysis - Young Chicken Slaughter
Process Step 
Food Safety 
Hazard 
Reasonably 
Likely to 
Occur? 
Basis 
If Yes in Column 3, 
What Measures Could 
be Applied to Prevent, 
Eliminate, or Reduce 
the Hazard to an 
Acceptable Level? 
Critical Control 
Point 
Receiving/Holding – 
Live Poultry 
Biological – None 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
Receiving – Packaging 
Materials 
Biological – None 
Chemical – Not 
acceptable for 
intended use 
No 
Letters of guaranty are 
received from all suppliers 
and packaging materials. 
Physical – Foreign 
materials 
No 
Plant records demonstrate 
that foreign material 
contamination has not 
occurred during the past 
several years. 
Storage– Nonmeat 
Ingredients/Packaging 
Materials 
Biological – None 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
Figure 3 
25 
HAZARD ANALYSIS – YOUNG CHICKEN SLAUGHTER 
 
Process Step 
Food Safety 
Hazard 
Reasonably 
Likely to 
Occur? 
Basis 
If Yes in Column 3, 
What Measures Could 
be Applied to Prevent, 
Eliminate, or Reduce 
the Hazard to an 
Acceptable Level? 
Critical Control 
Point 
Biological – None 
 
 
 
 
Chemical – None 
 
 
 
 
Unloading/Hanging/ 
Stunning/Killing/ 
Bleeding 
Physical – None 
 
 
 
 
Biological – None 
 
 
 
 
Chemical – None 
 
 
 
 
Scalding/Picking/Head 
Removal/Singeing/ 
Washing/Hock cutter 
/Transfer/Rehang / 
Pinning 
Physical – None 
 
 
 
 
Biological – None 
 
 
 
 
Chemical – None 
 
 
 
 
Oil Gland Removal/Neck 
Breaking/Venting/ 
Opening 
Physical – None 
 
 
 
 
Biological  
 
Pathogens (fecal and 
ingesta contamination 
from gut breakage).* 
Yes 
Significant contamination
can occur from leakage of 
gut material, which may be 
associated with pathogens. 
 
Proper adjustment of 
evisceration equipment and 
presentation training of 
employees will reduce the level 
of contamination. Visual 
inspection of carcasses for 
fecal contamination. 
1B 
Chemical – None 
 
 
 
 
Evisceration/ 
Presentation 
Physical – None* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 
* Revised April 2006 
HAZARD ANALYSIS – YOUNG CHICKEN SLAUGHTER 
 
Process Step 
Food Safety 
Hazard 
Reasonably 
Likely to 
Occur? 
Basis 
If Yes in Column 3, 
What Measures Could 
be Applied to Prevent, 
Eliminate, or Reduce 
the Hazard to an 
Acceptable Level? 
Critical Control 
Point 
Biological – None 
 
 
 
 
Chemical – None 
 
 
 
 
Unloading/Hanging/ 
Stunning/Killing/ 
Bleeding 
Physical – None 
 
 
 
 
Biological – None 
 
 
 
 
Chemical – None 
 
 
 
 
Scalding/Picking/Head 
Removal/Singeing/ 
Washing/Hock cutter 
/Transfer/Rehang / 
Pinning 
Physical – None 
 
 
 
 
Biological – None 
 
 
 
 
Chemical – None 
 
 
 
 
Oil Gland Removal/Neck 
Breaking/Venting/ 
Opening 
Physical – None 
 
 
 
 
Biological  
 
Pathogens (fecal and 
ingesta contamination 
from gut breakage).* 
Yes 
Significant contamination
can occur from leakage of 
gut material, which may be 
associated with pathogens. 
 
Proper adjustment of 
evisceration equipment and 
presentation training of 
employees will reduce the level 
of contamination. Visual 
inspection of carcasses for 
fecal contamination. 
1B 
Chemical – None 
 
 
 
 
Evisceration/ 
Presentation 
Physical – None* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 
* Revised April 2006 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
HAZARD ANALYSIS – YOUNG CHICKEN SLAUGHTER Table for Hazard Analysis - Young Chicken Slaughter
Process Step 
Food Safety 
Hazard 
Reasonably 
Likely to 
Occur? 
Basis 
If Yes in Column 3, 
What Measures Could 
be Applied to Prevent, 
Eliminate, or Reduce 
the Hazard to an 
Acceptable Level? 
Critical Control 
Point 
Lung/Crop Removal 
Neck Removal/Harvest 
Biological – None 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
House Inspection/Trim 
Biological – None 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
Reprocessing 
Biological – Pathogens 
Salmonella 
Generic E.coli 
Yes 
Potential for contamination 
and pathogen proliferation. 
Subsequent chilling will 
help reduce the risk of 
pathogen growth. 
Proper washing (use of an 
antimicrobial), trimming, 
and temperature control 
will reduce the numbers 
and limit the growth of 
pathogens. 
2B 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
Figure 3 
27 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
HAZARD ANALYSIS – YOUNG CHICKEN SLAUGHTER Table for Hazard Analysis - Young Chicken Slaughter
Process Step 
Food Safety 
Hazard 
Reasonably 
Likely to 
Occur? 
Basis 
If Yes in Column 3, 
What Measures Could 
be Applied to Prevent, 
Eliminate, or Reduce 
the Hazard to an 
Acceptable Level? 
Critical Control 
Point 
Salvage 
Biological – Sep/Tox 
No 
Young chickens historically 
have a low incidence of 
sep/tox the only poultry 
disease of public health 
significance. 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
Final Wash 
Biological – None 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
Liver/Heart Harvest 
Gizzard Harvest/Peel 
Biological – None 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
Chilling – 
Carcass/Necks/Giblets 
Biological 
cross-contamination 
Salmonella 
Yes 
Product to product contact. 
Literature indicates that 
improperly controlled chill-
ing systems can result in 
higher prevalence of pathog-
ens in the final product. FSIS 
performance standard for 
Salmonella can be met using 
an antimicrobial intervention 
at this process step. 
Product will be chilled 
properly to prevent pathogen 
growth. 
Chlorine dioxide use can 
prevent further growth of 
Salmonella. 
3B 
Chemical – None 
Physical - None 
Figure 3 
28 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
HAZARD ANALYSIS – YOUNG CHICKEN SLAUGHTER Table for Hazard Analysis - Young Chicken Slaughter
Process Step 
Food Safety 
Hazard 
Reasonably 
Likely to 
Occur? 
Basis 
If Yes in Column 3, 
What Measures Could 
be Applied to Prevent, 
Eliminate, or Reduce 
the Hazard to an 
Acceptable Level? 
Critical Control 
Point 
Packaging/Labeling 
Biological – None 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
Finished Product 
Storage (Cold) 
Biological – Pathogens 
Yes 
Pathogens are reasonably 
likely to grow if 
temperature is not 
maintained at or below a 
level sufficient to preclude 
their growth. 
Maintain product 
temperature at or below a 
level sufficient to preclude 
pathogen growth. 
4B 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
Shipping 
Biological - None 
Chemical – None 
Physical – None 
Figure 3 
29 
Poultry Slaughter Model Table for HACCP Plan - Process Category: Slaughter - Product Example: Young Chicken
HACCP PLAN 
PROCESS CATEGORY: SLAUGHTER 
PRODUCT EXAMPLE: YOUNG CHICKEN 
CCP# and 
Location 
Critical 
Limits 
Monitoring 
Procedures and 
Frequency 
HACCP Records 
Verification Procedures and 
Frequency 
Corrective Actions 
1P/B 
Evisceration/ 
Presentation 
Zero visible 
fecal 
contamina­
tion after 
processing; 
equipment 
kept properly 
adjusted; no 
gut breakage 
due to 
improper 
equipment 
adjustment; 
range of 20-
50 ppm 
chlorine or 
other 
approved 
antimicrobial 
rinse on 
equipment 
and product. 
Visible check (at 
least once per hour 
of production); 
check chlorine or 
other approved 
antimicrobial rinse 
at start up and 
every 2 hours using 
documented 
random sampling 
procedures to 
demonstrate 
control. Designated 
Quality Assurance 
employee will 
record results in 
appropriate Log. 
Equipment 
adjustment will be 
checked at start of 
each shift. 
Plant Finished 
Product Standards 
Form 
Antimicrobial Log 
Equipment 
Maintenance Log 
Corrective Action 
Log 
Once per shift the QA supervisor 
will review the Plant Antimicrobial 
Log and observe chlorine level 
testing. 
Twice per shift Maintenance 
Supervisor will review Equipment 
Maintenance Log 
QA will reject or hold product until zero 
fecal tolerance is achieved. 
Equipment will be properly adjusted to 
assure contamination is not occurring after 
line is stopped. All suspect product will be 
visually examined between evisceration 
and after final wash. Contaminated 
product will be condemned or 
reconditioned. Equipment maintenance 
and adjustments will be reviewed and 
compared to flock size and manufacturers 
specs. 
QA will identify the cause of the deviation 
and prevent reoccurrence. 
Signature: __________________________________ 
Date: __________________________ 
Figure 4 
30 
Poultry Slaughter Model Table for HACCP Plan - Process Category: Slaughter - Product Example: Young Chicken
HACCP PLAN 
PROCESS CATEGORY: SLAUGHTER 
PRODUCT EXAMPLE: YOUNG CHICKEN 
CCP# and 
Location 
Critical 
Limits 
Monitoring 
Procedures and 
Frequency 
HACCP Records 
Verification Procedures and 
Frequency 
Corrective Actions 
2P/B 
Reprocessing 
Zero visible 
fecal 
contamina­
tion after re-
processing; 
equipment 
kept properly 
adjusted; 
range of 20-
50 ppm 
chlorine or 
other 
approved 
antimicrobial 
rinse on 
equipment 
and product. 
Visible check on 
each lot (at least 
once per hour of 
production); 
check chlorine or 
other approved 
antimicrobial 
rinse at start up 
and every 2 hours 
using documented 
random sampling 
procedures to 
demonstrate 
control. 
Designated 
Quality Assurance 
employee will 
record results in 
appropriate Log. 
Reprocessing Log 
(using Plant 
Finished Product 
Standards) 
Antimicrobial Log 
Equipment 
Maintenance Log 
Corrective Action 
Log 
Once per shift the QA supervisor 
will review the Reprocessing Log 
and Antimicrobial Log. 
Twice per shift Maintenance 
Supervisor will review Equipment 
Maintenance Log 
QA will reject or hold product until zero 
fecal tolerance is achieved. 
Product will be reworked and reinspected 
by QA for fecal contamination. 
Any equipment adjustments will be made. 
Frequency of monitoring will be reassessed 
and CCP will be monitored once per hour 
to assure it is under control. 
QA will identify the cause of the deviation 
and prevent reoccurrence. 
Signature: __________________________________ 
Date: __________________________ 
Figure 4 
31 
Poultry Slaughter Model Table for HACCP Plan - Process Category: Slaughter - Product Example: Young Chicken
HACCP PLAN 
PROCESS CATEGORY: SLAUGHTER 
PRODUCT EXAMPLE: YOUNG CHICKEN 
CCP# and 
Location 
Critical 
Limits 
Monitoring 
Procedures and 
Frequency 
HACCP Records 
Verification Procedures and 
Frequency 
Corrective Actions 
3B 
Chilling (All 
Products) 
Temperature 
of 40° F or 
less will be 
reached 
within 4 
hours on all 
product. 
Chlorine 
dioxide level 
in chiller will 
be maintained 
at > 20 ppm. 
Product 
temperature check 
monitored by QA 
technician at end of 
chilling procedure 
(every hour of 
production). 
Chill water will be 
tested for Chlorine 
level every 2 hours 
by QA. 
Chilling Log 
Carcass Chiller 
Recording Chart 
Neck/Giblet Chiller 
Recording Chart 
Thermometer 
Calibration Log 
Corrective Action 
Log 
Antimicrobial Log 
Once per shift the QA supervisor 
will review the Chilling Log, Plant 
Post Chill Product Standards Form, 
and Antimicrobial Log. 
Maintenance supervisor will verify 
accuracy of the carcass chiller and 
neck/giblet chiller temperature 
recording charts once per shift. 
QA will verify the chlorine 
concentration in the chiller once per 
week. 
QA will check all thermometers 
used for monitoring and verification 
for accuracy daily and calibrate to 
within 2° F accuracy as necessary. 
QA will reject or hold product dependent 
on time, temperature and or antimicrobial 
level deviation. 
QA will identify the cause of the deviation 
and prevent reoccurrence. 
Maintenance will check chiller circulation 
and water exchange rate and make 
adjustments as required. Any necessary 
repairs will be made. 
QA will monitor temperature and 
antimicrobial level in chiller every 2 hours 
until assured that process step is under 
control. 
Signature: __________________________________ 
Date: __________________________ 
Figure 4 
32 
Poultry Slaughter Model Table for HACCP Plan - Process Category: Slaughter - Product Example: Young Chicken
HACCP PLAN 
PROCESS CATEGORY: SLAUGHTER 
PRODUCT EXAMPLE: YOUNG CHICKEN 
CCP# and 
Location 
Critical 
Limits 
Monitoring 
Procedures and 
Frequency 
HACCP Records 
Verification Procedures and 
Frequency 
Corrective Actions 
4B 
Finished 
Product 
Storage 
(Cold) 
(Continued 
on next 
page.) 
Finished 
product will 
not exceed 
40° F. 
Maintenance 
personnel will 
check product 
temperature on 
carcasses every 
two hours. 
Chilling Log 
Thermometer 
Calibration Log 
Corrective Action 
Log 
Maintenance supervisor will verify 
the accuracy of the product 
temperature log once per shift. 
QA will check all thermometers 
used for monitoring and verification 
activities for accuracy daily and 
calibrate to within 2° F accuracy as 
necessary. 
QA will observe maintenance 
personnel check finished product 
storage area once per shift. 
If a deviation from a critical limit occurs, 
the following corrective actions will be 
taken: 
1. 
The cause of the temperature 
exceeding 40° F will be identified and 
eliminated. 
2. 
The CCP will be monitored hourly 
after the corrective action is taken to 
ensure that it is under control. 
3. 
When the cause of the deviation is 
identified, measures will be taken to 
prevent it from recurring e.g., if the 
cause is equipment failure, preventive 
maintenance program will be reviewed 
and revised, if necessary. 
Signature: __________________________________ 
Date: __________________________ 
Figure 4 
33 
Poultry Slaughter Model Table for HACCP Plan - Process Category: Slaughter - Product Example: Young Chicken
HACCP PLAN 
PROCESS CATEGORY: SLAUGHTER 
PRODUCT EXAMPLE: YOUNG CHICKEN 
CCP# and 
Location 
Critical 
Limits 
Monitoring 
Procedures and 
Frequency 
HACCP Records 
Verification Procedures and 
Frequency 
Corrective Actions 
4B 
Finished 
Product 
Storage 
(Cold) 
4. 
If product temperature exceeds the 
critical limit, the processing authority 
will evaluate the product 
time/temperature deviation before 
release for shipment. If 
time/temperature is not sufficient, 
product will be cooked in the 
establishment to ensure destruction of 
pathogens or condemned. 
Signature: __________________________________ 
Date: __________________________ 
Figure 4 
34 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
REPROCESSING INSPECTION LOG 
Date: _________________ 
Critical Limit: No visible fecal contamination entering 
chiller Blank Form for Reprocessing Inspection Log
Time 
Product ID 
Results of Inspection 
Monitor 
Initials 
Verification 
Initials 
Corrective Actions and/or Comments 
Reviewed by: __________________________________ 
Date: ______________________ 
35 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
CHILLING LOG 
Date: _________________ 
Critical Limit: Internal temperature of ≤400 F when product exits chiller Blank Form for Chilling Log
Time 
Product ID 
Internal 
Temperature 
Monitor 
Initials 
Verification 
Initials 
Corrective Actions and/or Comments 
Reviewed by: __________________________________ 
Date: ______________________ 
36 
Poultry Slaughter Model Blank Form for Thermometer Calibration Log
THERMOMETER CALIBRATION LOG 
Calibrate to 320 F while thermometer is in slush ice water 
Date 
Time 
Department or 
Area 
Thermometer ID# Personal 
Thermometer 
Reading 
Adjustment 
Required 
(Yes or No) 
Initials 
Comments * 
6/15 
1:00 PM Carcass 
Chilling 
2A 
32°F 
No 
HK 
* If a thermometer is broken or taken out of service, document this in the comment column. 
Reviewed by: _______________________ 
Date: _______________________ 
37 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
Blank Form for Generic Es
tablishment X: R oom Temperature
 Log 38 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
Blank Form for Es
tabli
shment
 X: A
ntimicrob
ial Interventi
on Monito
ring Log 39 
Poultry Slaughter Model Blank Form for Corrective Actions Log
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS LOG 
Product: ___________________________________________ 
Lot # ______________________ 
CCP 
Deviation/ 
Problem 
Corrective Action 
Procedures/Explain 
Disposition of 
Product 
Responsible 
Person 
Date/Time 
SIGNATURE: __________________________ 
DATE: ______________________ 
40 
Poultry Slaughter Model 
Blank Form fo
r Pre-Shipment Revie
w Log *Monitoring frequency as per plan; Critical limits met; Certification (if applicable) as per plan; Deviations if occurred were reviewed 
for appropriate corrective actions; Records complete and accurate. 
41 
