-----Original Message----
From: Wegner, Harold C. 
Sent: Tuesday, September 04, 2007 6:53 PM 
To: Markush.Comments 
Subject: Harold C. Wegner - testimony attached 
 
markush.comments@uspto.gov 
Testimony of 
Harold C. Wegner 
responsive to Proposed Rulemaking 
Examination of Patent Applications that Include  
Claims Containing Alternative Language  
72 Federal Register 44992 
August 10, 2007 
The Director is respectfully requested to reconsider the proposed rulemaking 
in light of the statutory right to present a generic claim. He is also respectfully 
requested to reconsider the denial of an appeal to any such denial as contrary to 
controlling precedent.  Above all, the proposed rulemaking unduly complicates 
and frustrates biotechnology and pharmaceutical applicants from obtaining fair 
coverage for their pioneer innovations. 
The basis for the position of undersigned is spelled out in detail in a 
forthcoming article, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection, which is incorporated 
herein by reference and provided as an attachment as part of this testimony. 
These remarks are pro bono and as explained in The Eagle Right…, p. 1, n.*; 
professional affiliations are explained, id., p. 1, n.**. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Harold C. Wegner 
 
hwegner@foley.com 
hwegner@gmail.com
THE EAGLE RIGHT TO GENERIC PROTECTION* 
Harold C. Wegner** 
I. OVERVIEW 
The United States Patent and Trademark Office (PTO) has published a 
proposed Generic Claim Rulemaking that, if adopted, would fundamentally 
restructure the examination of generic inventions, going so far as to empower an 
Examiner a right to deny examination of any claim “difficult to construe”.1  The 
rules package would substantively deny patent applicants the right to generic 
protection for some inventions and procedurally proscribe a merits appeal of such 
denial. 
This paper explores the role of the generic claim and considers how the 
Generic Claim Rulemaking fits within the statutory patent landscape.  Generic 
patent protection provides a unique form of protection particularly for the pioneer 
inventor, including those in universities and startup research organizations.  See 
§ II, The Role of the Generic Invention. For the past 137 years, there has been a 
right to examination of a generic claim that reads on an elected species invention – 
even though the genus includes other nonelected, independent and distinct species. 
See § II-A, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection. The practice first arose in late 
nineteenth century mechanical practice.  See § II-A-1, The Right to a Mechanical 
Genus. Contemporaneously, German dyestuff chemists introduced what is today 
classic Markush practice by defining a new core molecule which could have 
optional substituents designated by the “R” group; this practice migrated from the 
dyestuff laboratories on the Rhine and elsewhere to the Kaiserliches Patentamt in 
* This paper represents the views of the author and does not necessarily reflect the views of any 
colleague, organization or client thereof.  The author acknowledges involvement in several cases cited 
in this paper, either for a party or an amicus bar association, In re Haas, 486 F.2d 1053 (CCPA 
1973)(“Haas I”); In re Weber, 580 F.2d 455 (CCPA 1978); In re Haas, 580 F.2d 461 (CCPA
1978)(“Haas II”); Ex parte Hozumi, 3 USPQ2d 1059 (Bd. Pat. App. & Int. 1984).  
**Former Director of the Intellectual Property Law Program and Professor of Law, George 
Washington University Law School.  Partner, Foley & Lardner LLP.  [hwegner@foley.com]
1This coined abbreviation is more formally styled as Examination of Patent Applications that Include 
Claims Containing Alternative Language, 72 Federal Register 44992 (August 10, 2007)(notice of 
proposed rulemaking)(quoting proposed 37 CFR § 1.75(j)(1)). 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
Berlin; English language translations from the original German found their way to 
Washington, D.C., as U.S. counterpart patent applications, the true birth of the “R” 
group Markush practice. See § II-A-2, From 19th Century German Dye Labs to 
the U.S. Patent Office. 
From the earliest days of generic claiming there has all too often been a 
difficulty grasping the concept that one generic invention may include several 
species embodiments which, when separately claimed, are also individual 
inventions. All too often, it was also thought – erroneously – that if there are, say, 
five species within a genus, the grant of a generic patent is substantively identical 
to five separate species patents. See § II-B, Generic Protection may be the 
Pioneer’s Sole Protection. 
While derived from generic practice in the mechanical arts, by the time of 
the 1952 Patent Act, generic or Markush practice was an essential integer of 
chemical practice with a well-defined set of rules for how to claim a generic 
chemical invention. See § II-C, Pre-1952 Patent Act Definition of Markush 
Groups. If anything, the past generation has seen a growing importance of generic 
protection for universities and smaller research organizations, often comprised of 
professors and other entrepreneurs who have migrated out of the academic 
community.  These scientific pioneers often have only generic protection for 
commercial reward versus the species protection granted to multinational research 
organization who perfect species innovations based upon the earlier pioneer 
disclosures. See § II-D, Pioneer Research Organizations Need Generic Protection. 
More than fifty years ago with the implementation of the 1952 Patent Act, 
“division” practice that had been appealable as a substantive matter was converted 
into the wholly procedural world of “restriction” practice, thanks to the statutory 
safeguard of 35 USC § 121. See § III, 35 USC § 121 under the 1952 Patent Act. 
By the 1970’s, however, attempts were made to twist this statutory provision to 
deny single claims because they embrace plural, patentably distinct species. It 
became clear that there was no statutory basis in the new law to deny a generic 
claim under the procedural basis of 35 USC § 121. See § III-A, The Weber 
Restriction of § 121 to Restriction Between Claims. Yet, attempts were then made 
to resurrect a case law “improper Markush” rejection from before the 1952 Patent 
2  
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
Act. While dicta has suggested the possibility for such a rejection, the test case 
that sought to resurrect an “improper Markush” rejection was met with a holding 
that reversed the PTO. See § III-B, Harnisch Underscores the Correctness of 
Weber. The Federal Circuit, too, has endorsed CCPA precedent excluding a 
statutory basis for denying a Markush claim. See § III-C, The Federal Circuit 
Explanation in Watkinson. 
Most recently, the PTO has proposed new rules that would repudiate much 
of the established practice. See § IV, Generic Claim Rulemaking. The new rules 
would exclude the right to examine certain generic claims.  See § IV-A, The 
Proposed Rules. In contravention of established precedent, withdrawal of claims 
as not meeting the proper definition of a generic invention would exclude the right 
to appeal. See § IV-B, Right to Appeal Denial of Examination of a Genus. 
Clearly, even though there will be challenges to any proposed rulemaking as 
exceeding the rulemaking authority of the PTO, there clearly is an “anti-Markush” 
climate at the PTO today.  Patent applicants are well advised to choose true generic 
terminology whenever possible and to avoid enumerative Markush expressions that 
actually provide narrower protection but seemingly a broader search challenge. See 
§ V, Adapting to an Anti-Markush Climate at the PTO. 
II. THE ROLE OF THE GENERIC INVENTION 
A.  The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
1. The Right to a Mechanical Genus 
While it is the obligation of the Examiner to determine whether a claimed 
invention passes patentability muster, it is the burden of the applicant to define 
what he regards as his invention: His “specification shall conclude with… claims 
particularly pointing out and distinctly claiming the subject matter which the 
applicant regards as his invention.”2  Thus, “[a]n applicant is given, by the statute, 
the right to claim his invention with the limitations he regards as necessary to 
circumscribe that invention[.]”3  The statute “allows the inventor to claim the 
2 35 USC § 112, ¶ 2. 
3 In re Weber, 580 F.2d 455, 458 (CCPA 1978)(Baldwin, J.)(emphasis added). 
3 
 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
invention as he contemplates it.”4  This requirement is not new; it may be traced 
back 137 years to the Patent Act of 1870 that for the first time included the 
obligation on the part of the inventor to provide a specification that “particularly 
point[s] outs and distinctly claim[s] the part, improvement, or combination which 
he claims as his invention or discovery.”5 
Insofar as there is an enabled disclosure of a broad invention that neither 
reads directly on the prior art nor on an embodiment rendered obvious by the prior 
art, the applicant generally will seek a generic claim that may, within its scope, 
include mutually patentably independent and distinct species.  The right to claim a 
generic invention including independent and distinct species was established by 
Commissioner Fisher in 1870 in the Eagle case6 – contemporaneously with the 
introduction of the forerunner to the second paragraph of 35 USC § 112, ¶ 2. 
Mr. Eagle invented a patentable box combination invention.  The patentable 
genus was illustrated by plural drawing figures; each was also individually claimed 
as a species.  The plural species were independent and distinct from each other.  It 
was clear that in the absence of an allowable genus, a “division” requirement to 
restrict the patent application of Mr. Eagle to one of the plural independent and 
distinct inventions was entirely proper under the practice of 1870.  Yet, Mr. Eagle 
also presented a generic claim to the patentable box, per se, without restriction to 
any of the species shown in the drawing figures. 
In Eagle, Commissioner Fisher expressly approved the presentation of a 
generic claim readable on an elected species:   The patentee “may fairly describe 
several species of this genus, and may make any claim that is generic in its 
4 Id. (discussing 35 USC § 112, ¶ 2)(citing In re Wolfrum, 486 F.2d 588 (CCPA 1973)). 
5 D. Chisum, Chisum on Patents, § 8.02[2](2007)(quoting Act. of July 8, 1870, ch. 230, § 26, 16 Stat. 
198)(“The Patent Act of 1870 further formalized the requirement of claims by providing … that the 
inventor ‘shall particularly point out and distinctly claim the part, improvement, or combination
which he claims as his invention or discovery.’”)(original emphasis). 
6 Ex parte Eagle, 1870 C.D. 137 (Comm'r dec. 1870). 
4 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
character and includes them all [in his generic claim].”7 Eagle became ensconced 
as bedrock practice of the Office to the point that at the dawn of the twentieth 
century that generic protection is permitted while “[i]t [became] one of the best-
settled rules of the Office that alternative forms of an invention cannot be 
specifically claimed in one application ....''8
 2. From 19th Century German Dye Labs to the U.S. Patent Office 
Markush chemical practice was born on the Continent in dyestuff 
laboratories where chemists used the “R” group – or some other arbitrary letter 
designation – to define an optional substituent on newly created aromatic dyestuff 
ring structures. From dyestuff laboratories on the Rhine and elsewhere patent 
applications were drafted and filed at the Kaiserliches Patentamt in Berlin using 
this same terminology, whereupon United States counterpart applications were 
filed using the very same “R” and related arbitrary letter designations in what were 
later termed to be “Markush” claims.  (The “R” designation may have been 
shorthand for Rest – or “group”.) 
Typically, a dyestuff laboratory would create a novel complex ring structure, 
and then describe that structure and derivative structures comprising a family of 
compounds.  In the basic embodiment, the ring carbon atom was unsubstituted, i.e., 
it possessed a bond to a hydrogen atom.  Or, a substituted form could be created 
designated by “R”. The German dyestuff chemists developed the “R” definition 
for ring carbon atom substituents which would be defined as hydrogen (“H”) for 
7 Eagle, 1870 C.D. at 138.  But, at the time, the patentee was limited to one species claim falling 
under the genus:  “ In addition to this, as the genus can only be illustrated by at least one of its 
species, he may select one of the embodiments of his invention for specific claims; but he cannot
found one claim on one species, and a second on another, a third on another, and so on.'' Id. 
8 D. Chisum, Chisum on Patents, § 12.02[2][e] n.56 (2007)(quoting  Ex parte Burmeister, 1902 C.D.
364 (Comm'r Pat. 1902)(emphasis added)).  Also cited are Ex parte Butcher, 1904 C.D. 60 (Comm'r 
Pat. 1904); Ex parte Brown, 1904 C.D. 50 (Comm'r Pat. 1903); Ex parte Dallas, 1903 C.D. 325
(Comm'r Pat. 1903); Ex parte Welch, 1900 C.D. 190 (Comm'r Pat. 1900); Ex parte Smith, 1888 C.D. 
131 (Comm'r Pat. 1888); Ex parte McDougall, 1880 C.D. 147 (Comm'r Pat. 1880); Ex parte Smith,
1879 C.D. 216 (Comm'r Pat. 1879); Ex parte Stown, 1873 C.D. 30 (Comm'r Pat. 1873);  Ex parte 
Herreshoff, 1903 C.D. 376 (Comm'r Pat. 1903); Ex parte Nash, 1903 C.D. 181 (Comm'r Pat. 1903); Ex 
parte Plumley, 1902 C.D. 353 (Comm'r Pat. 1902).  Id. 
5  
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
the unsubstituted form or by a variety of optional groups.  Already in the 
nineteenth century, German dyestuff terminology was translated into English for 
American patent applications that resulted in early United States patents long 
antedating the difficulties faced much later by Mr. Markush in securing generic 
protection.9 
B.  Generic Protection may be the Pioneer’s Sole Protection 
At first blush, it may seem that there is no difference in substance between 
the grant of a single patent with a generic claim versus plural patents to various 
subgenera or species. But, the whole of the genus is greater than the sum of its 
individual parts. Generally, there is no way that the grant of splinters of a genus 
through restriction practice will equal the protection granted by a genus.   
First, if there are subgenera or species A, B, C…, X, Y and Z within a genus, 
it will rarely be the case that all of the subgenera or species A, B, C…, X, Y and Z 
will be specifically disclosed or otherwise separately supported.  Thus, if species 
“M” or “N” within the genus is not expressly named or otherwise specifically 
supported, then there will be no way that any protection will be available for “M” 
or “N” if the generic claim is denied.  While the Examiner may very well say that 
M” and “N” are patentably independent and distinct from other species for 
purposes of safeguarding the patent applicant from a double patenting rejection 
under 35 USC § 121, the Examiner cannot provide missing specific support under 
35 USC § 112, ¶ 1, for such subgenera or species.  This problem is not new; it has 
been expressly recognized in the judicial literature:  
As explained in Weber “[a]s a general proposition, an applicant has a right to 
have each claim examined on the merits. If an applicant submits a number of 
claims, it may well be that pursuant to a proper restriction requirement, those 
9 Harold C. Wegner, The Right to Generic Chemical Coverage, 6 AM. INTEL. PROP. L. ASS'N. Q. J. 257,
262‐63 (1978)(identifying three German‐origin United States patents using Markush “R”‐group type of
claiming). There are also early twentieth century pre‐Markush examples of Markush claiming 
including one where “R” is defined as either a methyl or carboxylic acid group. In re Harnisch, 631
F.2d 716, 720 n.4 (1980)(quoting Ex parte Markush, 1925 CD 126 (Com.Pat.1924)(Kinnan, Ass’t
Comm’r))(“U.S. Patent No. 901,675 [which] contained claims in which ‘the letter R is used in a 
chemical formula as standing for CH3 or COOH’…”). 
6  
 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
claims will be dispersed to a number of applications. Such action would not affect 
the right of the applicant eventually to have each of the claims examined in the 
form he considers to best define his invention. If, however, a single claim is 
required to be divided up and presented in several applications, that claim would 
never be considered on its merits. The totality of the resulting fragmentary claims 
would not necessarily be the equivalent of the original claim. Further, since the 
subgenera would be defined by the examiner rather than by the applicant, it is not 
inconceivable that a number of the fragments would not be described in the 
specification.”10  The problem is exemplified by Fields “wherein a subgenus was 
not described”11 and Ruschig “wherein a species of a properly described genus was 
found not to be described.”12 
Even if there are properly supported subgeneric or species embodiments for, 
say, species “C”, the filing of a divisional application to a fully supported species 
“C” may not provide any coverage if a competitor has filed a patent application to 
the same species “C” that is senior to the applicant’s invention of species “C”, but 
where the applicant has plural species far senior in date to species “C”.  Assuming 
that species “C” is separately patentable, the only protection that the inventor will 
have for “C” is through his generic claim:  Losing that generic claim, the inventor 
has no protection at all for species “C”. 
C. Pre-1952 Patent Act Definition of Markush Groups 
The right to generic coverage under the case law up until the 1952 Patent 
Act followed the Eagle practice, permitting a generic expression to claim a family 
of products having a common element and a common utility, even though portions 
of the compounds may differ from each other.  The case law running up until the 
1952 Patent Act expressly permitted claiming a generic invention where ““the 
court found all of the compounds included in the claims … hav[e] a common 
function. The court noted [in Jones] that in any Markush group the compounds 
‘will differ from each other in certain respects.’ It laid down the proposition… that 
10 In re Weber, 580 F.2d 455, 458 (CCPA 1978)(Baldwin, J.)(footnote omitted). 
11 Weber, 580 F.2d at 458 n. 7 (citing Fields v. Conover, 443 F.2d 1386 (CCPA 1971)). 
12 Id. (citing In re Ruschig, 379 F.2d 990 (CCPA 1967)). 
7 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
in determining the propriety of a Markush grouping the compounds must be 
considered as wholes and not broken down into elements or other components.”13 
D.  Pioneer Research Organizations Need Generic Protection 
Generic protection for a basic invention is fundamental for universities and 
small research organizations which need to obtain broad patents for their 
discoveries to obtain financial return for their fundamental discoveries.  If all 
patent protection were reduced to species protection, a university or small research 
organization that owned basic technology patent rights would not only be forced to 
file numerous divisional applications, but, more importantly, they would be limited 
to protection for the actual species that they disclose in their patent applications – 
generally only a minute fraction of the literally millions of variables possible 
within the scope of many generic claims, particularly in the area of pharmaceutical 
and biotechnology research.   
The pharmaceutical research regime typically operates with a university or 
small research organization discovering a breakthrough molecule; a patent 
application is filed with broad claims and a handful of working examples.  Based 
upon publication of the disclosure in the patent application of a very basic 
invention, the largest pharmaceutical concerns then collectively focus the efforts of 
sometimes literally thousands of Ph.D. scientists to create literally tens of 
thousands of new molecules within the penumbra of the original generic patent 
disclosure. It is generally one or several of these new compounds that is the home 
run cancer cure or other life-saving therapy.  The major pharmaceutical company 
obtains a strong species patent to this breakthrough medication, while taking a 
license from the university or small research organization under that organization’s 
generic patent. 
13 In re Harnisch, 631 F.2d 716, 721‐22 (CCPA 1980)( construing In re Jones, 162 F.2d 479 (CCPA
1947) (“[T]he court found all of the compounds included in the claims were plant growth 
stimulants, thus having a common function. The court noted that
compounds ‘will differ from each other in certain respects.’ It l
 in any Markush group the 
aid down the proposition, with which 
the PTO agrees in its MPEP, that in determining the propriety of a Markush grouping the 
compounds must be considered as wholes and not broken down into elements or other 
components.”). 
8  
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
If generic coverage is denied to the university or small research organization 
then it effectively dedicates to the public all rights to the millions of compound 
falling under its original genus, and receives no reward at all. 
III. 35 USC § 121 UNDER THE 1952 PATENT ACT 
A.  The Weber Restriction of § 121 to Restriction Between Claims 
The 1952 Patent Act introduced for the first time a statutory proscription on 
double patenting in the event that the Examiner made a mistake in issuing a 
“division” requirement – or, a “restriction” requirement under the modern wording 
since the 1952 Patent Act. Prior to the 1952 Patent Act, a faulty division 
requirement could end up with a holding of double patenting of patentably 
indistinct claims in a later proceeding despite the fact that plural patents were 
obtained because of an Examiner’s requirement for a “division”.  The statutory 
safeguard against double patenting following a restriction requirement was 
introduced into the law in 1952 precisely to eliminate a right to appeal a restriction 
requirement and to make the matter of restriction practice entirely procedural. 
The statutory safeguard has absolutely nothing to do with unity of invention 
within a claim, but everything to do with restriction between claims.14 
In Weber, the court “h[e]ld that a rejection under [35 USC §] 121 violates 
the basic right of the applicant to claim his invention as he chooses.”15 Clearly, 
§ 121 has nothing to do with denial of a single claim.16 
14 Weber, 580 F.2d at 459 (Rich, J., concurring) (citing P. J. Federico, Commentary on the New Patent 
Act, 35 U.S.C.A. p. 1, at p. 34 (1954))(“[35 USC § 121 gave “the Commissioner a discretionary,  
unappealable power to restrict an application to one of several claimed i 
inventions were found to be ‘independent and distinct.’ 35 U.S.C. § 12 1
nventions when those  
emphasis). 
, first sentence[.]”)(original 
15 Weber, 580 F.2d at 459. 
16 Weber, 580 F.2dd at 460 (Rich, J., concurring)(citing Federico, supra at p. 34; 
1.144)(“Dealing, as it does, with requirements for restriction, [35 USC] § 1 21
37 CFR §  
about the rejection of claims, a matter entirely separate from rest
 says nothing whatever  
are appealable to the board and restriction requirements are not.”)  
riction. For one thing, rejections  
9 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
Eagle is cited as authority for the proposition that since 1870 “at least, the 
expression used in [35 USC] § 121, ‘two or more * * * inventions are claimed,’ 
has connoted separate claims to separate inventions. It has no reference to generic 
or broad claims which ‘embrace’ (the term used by the examiner and the board 
herein) or ‘cover’ (the term used in the solicitor's brief in support of the board) two 
or more inventions. Section 121 nowhere uses the words ‘embraced’ or ‘covered.’ 
It says ‘claimed,’ and that I take to mean what it has always referred to in the 
terminology of the patent law, a ‘claim’ or definitional paragraph which, in the 
words of [35 USC]§ 112, second paragraph, is ‘particularly pointing out and 
distinctly claiming the subject matter the applicant regards as his invention.’”17 
“There is nothing [in 35 USC § 121] to excuse a refusal to examine an 
elected invention or an applicant's generic (broad) claim reading thereon, 
notwithstanding the generic claim reads on nonelected inventions and possibly 
many others, all potentially separately patentable. … It is elementary patent law 
that the number of ‘species’ ‘covered’ by a patent having a generic claim is 
virtually without limit notwithstanding the limitation of Rule 141 to five species 
‘specifically claimed.’ So the discretionary power to limit one application to one 
invention is no excuse at all for refusing to examine a broad generic claim no 
matter how broad, which means no matter how many independently patentable 
inventions may fall within it.”18
 B. Harnisch Underscores the Correctness of Weber 
The holdings of the CCPA in the wake of the 1952 Patent Act concerning 
attempts to deny generic Markush protection to applicants have supported the 
Jones view of the law that a Markush claim is proper where all of the embraced 
compounds have a common structural feature and share a common utility.  There is 
nothing from the judiciary in the wake of Weber or Haas II to the contrary. 
17 Weber, 580 F.2d at 459‐60 (Rich, J., concurring)(citing Ex parte Eagle, 1870 C.D. 137 (Com'r.
Pats.1870).
18 Weber, 580 F.2d at 460‐61 (Rich, J., concurring). 
10 
 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
Indeed, Harnisch – a case often cited for the contrary proposition by the 
PTO – has a holding that the contested Markush group is proper under the pre­
1952 case law. 
Insofar as any PTO argument is made keyed to Harnisch that Weber and 
Haas II may be incorrect in their interpretation of 35 USC § 121, such an argument 
flies directly in the face of the statement found in Harnisch itself that “[i]t should 
… be clear … that we adhere to our holdings in In re Weber[, 580 F.2d 455 (CCPA 
1978)]. and In re Haas (Haas II)[, 580 F.2d 461 (CCPA 1978)].  Nothing we have 
said [in Harnisch] is intended to change or modify them in any way; nor do we 
think anything said could be reasonably construed to have such an effect.”19 
C. The Federal Circuit Explanation in Watkinson 
As explained by the Federal Circuit in the Watkinson case:  “Under … 
Weber… and [Haas II], it is never proper for an examiner to reject a Markush 
claim under 35 U.S.C. § 121. Section 121 simply does not authorize such a 
rejection.” 20 
IV. GENERIC CLAIM RULEMAKING 
A. The Proposed Rules 
The Generic Claim Rulemaking package prescribes the form of generic 
claims that are permitted and, absent meeting the rules, the claims would be 
withdrawn from consideration without a right of appeal to the Board (or the 
court). Thus, proposed Rule 14021  rewrites restriction practice by saying that a 
19 Harnisch, 631 F.2d at 722. 
20 In re Watkinson, 900 F.2d 230 (Fed. Cir. 1990) (Baldwin, J.)(original emphasis) (citing Weber, 
Haas II). 
21 “[Proposed 37 CFR ]§ 1.140. Requirement for a claim to be limited to a single invention in an  
application filed under 35 U.S.C. 111(a).  
“(a) Two or more independent and distinct inventions may not be claimed in a single claim. See §  
1.75(a). A claim that reads on multiple species using alternative language is limited to a single  
invention wh 
conditions: 
en all the species encompassed by the claim meet at least one of the following two 
“(1) The species share a substantial feature essential for a common utility, or  
“(2) The species are prima facie obvious over each other.  
11 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
single claim may cover plural inventions, instead of one generic invention as in 
Eagle and 137 years of progeny. Thus, it is stated that “[a] claim that reads on 
multiple species using alternative language is limited to a single invention when all 
the species encompassed by the claim …share a substantial feature essential for a 
common utility[.]”.22 
(To be sure, the applicant can alternatively admit unpatentability of all 
members of the genus if any one is found unpatentable;23 such an admission would 
be foolish and contrary to the established principle that the equivalency of the 
Markush members is part of the applicant’s discovery.24) 
Proposed Rule 142(b) permits restriction between inventions within a claim: 
“The propriety of a requirement for restriction shall be determined without regard 
to whether the plural inventions are recited in separate claims or as alternatives 
within a single claim.”25   Proposed Rule 75(j) would provide strict formal 
“(b) The presentation of a claim that reads on multiple species using alternative language (§ 
1.75(j)) may be accompanied by a statement explaining why th
filed by the applicant at
invention. Such a statement shall be considered by the Office i f 
e claim is limited to a single 
the same 
time as the presentation of such a claim and may be considered by the Office if filed by the applicant
after the presentation of such a claim but before the mailing date of any restriction requirement or 
action on the merits.” 
22 Proposed Rule 140(a)(1).
23 Thus, under proposed  Rule 140(a)(2) there is one single invention if “[t]he species are prima 
facie obvious over each other.” 
24 In re Dillon, 919 F.2d 688, 694 (Fed. Cir. 1990)(en banc)(Lourie, J.)(“caution[ing] against [the] 
practice [of using an applicant’s own showing of equivalence against her in violation of the rule of In 
re Ruff, 256 F.2d 590, 596 (CCPA 1958)]”); see also In re Lam, 35 Fed.Appx. 889, 897‐98 (Fed. Cir. 
2002)(“ In In re Ruff, our predecessor court reversed an obviousness rejection based on an
applicant's own disclosure that two classes of organic compounds (amino and mercapto
compounds) were both effective tarnish inhibitors. 256 F.2d at 595. Though the amino compounds 
were known in the art, the applicant himself invented and taught the use of the mercapto 
compounds. Id. The Board in the Ruff case mistakenly interpreted several earlier cases to hold that
such a disclosure by an applicant could support a finding of equivalency. The court disabused the
Board of that notion and squarely held that the applicant's own teaching of the tarnish‐fighting 
mercapto compounds, the utility of which he himself discovered, could not be used to show 
equivalence even though the applicant also disclosed that the prior art amino compounds
performed a similar function. [256 F.2d] at 597.”). 
25 Proposed 37 CFR § 1.142(b). 
12 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
guidance on how a generic claim could be drafted; failure to meet the strict 
guidance would result in an objection and presumably a petitionable but not 
appealable matter.26 
The arbitrary nature of the Generic Claim Rulemaking package is manifested 
by the right of the Examiner to deny consideration of a claim where “[t]he number 
and presentation of alternatives in the claim …make[s] the claim difficult to 
construe[.]”27 
Clearly, there is nothing in 35 USC § 121 that has anything to do with 
restriction within a claim. If the PTO considers a claim to be an “improper” 
Markush or other type of generic claim, then a statutory basis should be found for 
such a rejection. There clearly is no holding in Harnisch that in any way supports 
a rejection of a Markush or other claim:  The holding in Harnisch was, to the 
contrary, a determination that the claimed invention was proper: The rejection in 
Harnisch was reversed. 
B.  Right to Appeal Denial of Examination of a Genus 
The Generic Claim Rulemaking would take away the right of an appeal for a 
violation of the PTO’s new rules on generic claiming. But, the right to appeal a 
restriction requirement or other “procedural” withdrawal of a generic claim was 
established in Haas I.28 
26 Proposed 37 CFR 1.75(j) “A claim that reads on multiple species by using alternative language 
must meet the following conditions: 
“(1) The number and presentation of alternatives in the claim does not make the claim difficult to 
construe; 
“(2) No alternative is defined as a set of further alternatives within the claim; and 
“(3) No 
n 
e is encompassed by any other alternative within a list of alternatives, unless 
there is no other practical way to define the invention. 
“(4) Each alternative within a list of alternatives must be substitutable one for another.”  
27 Proposed 37 CFR § 1.75(j)(1). 
28 In re Haas, 486 F.2d 1053, 1055 (CCPA 1973)(“Haas I”). 
13 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
As explained in Digital Equipment, “in determining whether a particular 
PTO action is appealable to the Board (and hence reviewable either by the Court of 
Customs and Patent Appeals or by the district court in a civil action instituted 
pursuant to [35 USC §] 145), one must ‘look both to the language employed (by 
the agency in taking the action) and the effect thereof,’ and consider ‘both form 
and substance.’”29  Thus, “[i]n Haas,  the court held that the Board had jurisdiction 
to review an examiner's ‘withdrawal’ of claims, which ‘amount[ed] to a rejection’ 
because it precluded further consideration of the claims ‘not only in this 
application but prospectively in any subsequent application because of their 
content.’”30 
The label of a “rejection” clearly is not necessary for an appeal:  “[T]he 
PTO's failure to label its present action in terms of "rejection" may have little 
practical significance other than to purportedly insulate from the [appellate] review 
mechanism mandated by Congress a decision that is highly factual and substantive 
in nature, and thus particularly appropriate for such review.”31 
V. ADAPTING TO AN ANTI-MARKUSH CLIMATE AT THE PTO 
Although it is unlikely that any anti-Markush rulemaking that may be issued in 
final form would become effective until some point well into 2008, it is important 
as a matter of daily practice to adapt to the realities of everyday patent practice that 
Examiners do not like lengthy, multi-page Markush claims. 
There is much that can be done without compromising the applicant’s 
substantive right of protection for his genus: 
29Digital Equipment Corp. v. Diamond, 653 F.2d 701, 713 (1st Cir. 1981)(quoting Haas I, 486 F.2d at 
1055). 
30 Id., quoting Haas I, 486 F.2d at 1056.  
31Digital Equipment, 653 F.2d at 713.  
14  
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
A.  Generic Expressions without Markush Symbols 
Markush practice has been used far too often as a shortcut to avoid devising 
a true generic expression that may provide broader coverage and avoid the 
complexities of Markush practice.  Even if there is no art-recognized generic term 
nor a generic term which clearly defines precisely the genus the applicant has in 
mind in drafting the application, nevertheless the applicant is free to be his own 
lexicographer and provide a specific definition for a generic term that will control 
its meaning both before the PTO and in enforcement proceedings.32 
B. Enumerative Markush Definitions Should be Avoided 
Consider the situation where a novel and unobvious core compound may be 
optionally substituted by phenyl or any substituted phenyl group. 
Applicants unduly complicate their prosecution when they attempt to 
enumerate every possible substituent on an aromatic ring.  For example, if an “R” 
group is defined as being “a substituted phenyl group” this can be written quite 
simply in the claim, making it easy to understand and examine.   
But, if there is an enumeration of the possible substituents in the claim, the 
definition for what “substituted phenyl” may run over a page or two which – 
together with other variables similarly defined – can lead to a “claim 1” running 
ten or more pages, to the frustration of everyone.  “Substituted phenyl” represents a 
relatively easy challenge, yet an attempt to enumerate all the variables in the 
specification can produce a definition several pages long.33  Yet, when one has an 
32 Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2005)(en banc)(Bryson, J.)(“[T]he 
specification may reveal a special definition given to a claim term by the patentee that differs from 
the meaning it would otherwise possess. In such cases, the inventor's lexicography 
governs.”)(citation omitted) .
33 For example, for exemplification of “substituted phenyl”, see Rawson et al., U.S. 7,250,447 (2007)
(“‘[S]ubstituted phenyl’ is a phenyl group substituted with one, two, three, four or five substituents
chosen from halogen (F, Cl, Br, I), hydroxy, protected hydroxy, cyano, nitro, alkyl (e.g. C1‐C6 alkyl), 
alkoxy (e.g. C1‐C6 alkoxy), benzyloxy, carboxy, protected carboxy, carboxymethyl, protected 
carboxymethyl, hydroxymethyl, protected hydroxymethyl, aminomethyl, protected aminomethyl, 
trifluoromethyl, alkylsulfonylamino, arylsulfonylamino, heterocyclylsulfonylamino, heterocyclic, 
aryl, or other groups specified. Examples of the term ‘substituted phenyl’ includes but is not limited 
15 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
enumerative Markush definition in the claim it is likely that some possible variable 
will be omitted, which manifests the fact that a ten-plus page enumerative Markush 
claim may provide coverage far narrower than a simple, one paragraph claim that 
recites “R” as being “substituted phenyl”. 
C. A Common Utility Statement for All Members 
Particularly where a generic definition of products is provided for a claim, it 
is important to repeat that same definition in the specification, followed by a 
statement of the common utility shared by all of the products within that definition: 
Where all the compounds share a common utility and have a common structural 
to a mono‐ or di(halo)phenyl group such as 4‐chlorophenyl, 2,6‐dichlorophenyl, 2,5
dichlorophenyl, 3,4­dichlorophenyl, 3­chlorophenyl, 3­bromophenyl, 4­bromophenyl, 3,4
dibromophenyl, 3‐chloro‐4‐fluorophenyl, 2‐fluorophenyl and the like; a mono‐ or
di(hydroxy)phenyl group such as 4‐hydroxyphenyl, 3‐hydroxyphenyl, 2,4‐dihydroxyphenyl, the
protected‐hydroxy derivatives thereof and the like; a nitrophenyl group such as 3‐ or 4
nitrophenyl; a cyanophenyl group, for example, 4‐cyanophenyl; a mono‐ or di(C1‐C6 alkyl)phenyl
group such as 4‐methylphenyl, 2,4‐dimethylphenyl, 2‐methylphenyl, 4‐(iso‐propyl)phenyl, 4
ethylphenyl, 3‐(n‐propyl)phenyl and the like; a mono or di(alkoxy)phenyl group, for example, 3,4
dimethoxyphenyl, 3,4‐diethoxyphenyl, 3‐ethoxy‐4‐isopropoxyphenyl, 3‐ethoxy‐s‐butoxyphenyl, 3
methoxy‐4‐benzyloxyphenyl, 3‐methoxy‐4‐(1‐chloromethyl)benzyloxy‐phenyl, 3‐ethoxyphenyl, 4
(isopropoxy)phenyl, 4‐(t‐butoxy)phenyl, 3‐ethoxy‐4‐methoxyphenyl and the like; 3‐ or 4
trifluoromethylphenyl; a mono‐ or dicarboxyphenylﾠorﾠ(protected carboxy)phenyl group such 4
carboxyphenyl; a mono‐ or di(hydroxymethyl)pheny 
ected hydroxymethyl)phenyl such a
3‐(protected hydroxymethyl)phenyl or 3,4‐di(hydroxymethyl)phenyl; a mono‐ or
di(aminomethyl)phenyl or (protected aminomethyl)phenyl such as 2‐(aminomethyl)phenyl or 2
(protected aminomethyl)phenyl; or a mono‐ or di(N‐(methylsulfonylamino))phenyl such as 3‐(N‐
,4
methylsulfonylamino))phenyl. Also, the term ‘substituted phenyl’ represents disubstituted phenyl
groups where the substituents are different, for example, 3‐methyl‐4‐hydroxyphenyl, 3‐chloro‐4
hydroxyphenyl, 2‐methoxy‐4‐bromophenyl, 4‐ethyl‐2‐hydroxyphenyl, 3‐hydroxy‐4‐ni
hydroxy‐4‐chlorophenyl, and the like, as well as trisubstituted phenyl groups where 1,
trophenyl, 2‐
2, or 3 of the
substituents are different, for example 3‐methoxy‐4‐benzyloxy‐6‐methyl sulfonylamino, 3
methoxy‐4‐benzyloxy‐6‐phenyl sulfonylamino, and tetrasubstituted phenyl groups where the
substituents are different such as 3‐methoxy‐4‐benzyloxy‐5‐methyl‐6‐phenyl sulfonylamino.
Exemplary substituted phenyl groups include the 3‐methoxyphenyl, 3‐ethoxy‐phenyl, 4
benzyloxyphenyl, 4‐methoxyphenyl, 3‐ethoxy‐4‐benzyloxyphenyl, 3,4‐diethoxyphenyl, 3‐methoxy
4‐benzyloxyphenyl, 3‐methoxy‐4‐(1‐chloromethyl)benzyloxy‐phenyl, 3‐methoxy‐4
(1‐chloromethyl)benzyloxy‐6‐methyl sulfonyl aminophenyl groups.”). 
16  
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
feature that establishes patentability for the class of compounds, this is the epitome 
of a proper Markush group. An enlarged panel of the PTO Board interpreted 
Harnisch in Hozumi, which explains the importance of the recitation of a common 
utility: 
“The judicially created rejection of claims for ‘improper Markush grouping’ 
has most recently been discussed … in the case of In re Harnisch, 631 F.2d 716 
(CCPA 1980)…. The opinion in that case fairly thoroughly reviewed the history of 
this type of rejection and set forth, at least implicitly, some guidelines for 
determining whether or not a Markush group is proper. Broadly, the determinative 
factor was held to be whether there existed ‘unity of invention’ or whether the 
claims were drawn to a collection of ‘unrelated inventions.’ Specifically, the 
claims in that case were drawn to a class of compounds all of which were both 
disclosed and claimed as being ‘useful as dyestuffs.’ All of them were also both 
disclosed and claimed as being ‘coumarin compounds.’ Thus, all of the claims had 
in common a functional utility related to a substantial, structural feature disclosed 
as being essential to that utility.”34 
The PTO Manual of Patent Examining Procedure acknowledges that in the 
case of a Markush claim, “unity of invention exists where compounds included 
within a Markush group (1) share a common utility, and (2) share a substantial 
structural feature essential to that utility.”.35  This follows from the Jones case as 
34 Ex parte Hozumi, 1984 WL 62977, 3 U.S.P.Q.2d 1059 (PTO Bd. App. & Int. 1984)(Serota, Katz, 
Goldestein, Lovell, Steiner, EICS)(Goldstein, EIC)(emphasis supplied). 
35 MPEP § 803.02, Markush Claims [8th ed., Rev. 5 (August 2006)](“ Since the decisions in In re 
Weber, 580 F.2d 455 (CCPA 1978) and In re Haas, 580 F.2d 461 (CCPA 1978), it is improper for the 
Office to refuse to examine that which applicants regard as their invention, unless the subject
matter in a claim lacks unity of invention. In re Harnisch, 631 F.2d 716, 206 USPQ 300 (CCPA 1980);
and Ex parte Hozumi, 3 USPQ2d 1059 (Bd. Pat. App. & Int. 1984). Broadly, unity of invention exists 
where compounds included within a Markush group (1)
substantial structural feature essential to that utility.”). 
share a common utility, and (2) share a 
17  
 
Wegner, The Eagle Right to Generic Protection 
adopted in Harnisch that approved a Markush group where all members are 
disclosed as “having a common function.”36 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Applicants should shift more to true generic claiming, if only to avoid the 
anti-Markush prejudice that exists at the PTO today. Despite the shift that 
applicants should be making toward classic generic claims, situations will remain 
where Markush generic claiming represents a sound choice for patent applicants.   
There is no magic, formulaic way to short-circuit examination of pioneer 
inventions in Markush – or other – format.  There should be no magic cookie-
cutter amount of time to examine an invention.  Either the amount of time will 
balance out amongst the difficult pioneer cases and the multitude of routine 
improvement inventions, or, if not, administrative allowances must be made for the 
more difficult to examine cases.  But, when an Einstein or other genius inventor 
comes forward with a pioneer invention, the PTO should applaud the innovation 
and grant claims commensurate in scope with the pioneer nature of the technology 
and not attempt to limit the scope of protection. 
36 Harnisch, 631 F.2d at 721‐22 (construing Jones, 162 F.2d 479). 
18  
