GLOSSARY
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GLOSSARY  
Acre-foot: The volume (as of irrigation water) that would cover 1 acre to a depth of 1 foot (43,560 cubic 
feet). 
Action: In the context of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), describes actions proposed to 
meet a specific purpose and need and that may have effects on the environment, which are potentially 
subject to Federal control and responsibility. Federal actions generally fall into the categories of adoption 
of official policy, formal plans, and programs; or approval of specific projects. For this document, the 
term action applies to a specific project. 
Aesthetic quality: A perception of the beauty of a natural or cultural landscape. 
Aggradation: The deposition of sediment by running water, as in the channel of a stream. 
Air quality: A measure of the health-related and visual characteristics of the air, often derived from 
quantitative measurements of the concentrations of specific injurious or contaminating substances. 
Air quality classes: Classifications established under the Prevention of Significant Deterioration portion 
of the Clean Air Act that limit the amount of air pollution considered significant within an area. Class I 
applies to areas where almost any change in air quality would be significant, Class II applies to areas 
where the deterioration normally accompanying moderate, well-controlled growth would be permitted, 
and Class III applies to areas where industrial deterioration generally would be allowed. 
Alluvium: A general term for clay, silt, sand, gravel, or similar consolidated material deposited during 
comparatively recent geologic time by a stream or other body of running water in the bed of the stream, 
river, or floodplain, or as a cone or fan at the base of a mountain slope. 
Alternative: Any one of a number of options for a project. 
Alternative energy: Renewable energy sources such as wind, flowing water, solar energy, and biomass, 
which create less environmental damage and pollution than fossil fuels, and offer an alternative to 
nonrenewable resources. 
Ambient. Of the environment surrounding a body, encompassing on all sides. Most commonly applied to 
air quality and noise.  
American Indian tribe (or tribe): Any American Indian group in the conterminous United States that 
the Secretary of the Interior recognizes as possessing tribal status (listed periodically in the Federal 
Register). 
Ancillary road: Any road not classified as a primary road. 
Animal unit month: The amount of forage necessary to sustain one cow and one calf (e.g., a 1,000­
pound cow and calf) for a period of one month. 
Annual (ecology): A plant that completes its development in one year or one season and then dies. 
Aquatic: Growing or living in or near the water. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-1 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Aquifer: A water-bearing rock unit (unconsolidated or bedrock) that will yield water in a usable quantity 
to a well or spring. 
Aquitard: Refers to any layer in an aquifer or aquifer system that is much less permeable than the 
aquifers themselves, but not impermeable. 
Archaeological site: A discrete location that provides physical evidence of past human use.  
Archaeology: the scientific study of the life and culture of past, especially ancient, peoples, as by 
excavation of ancient cities, relics, artifacts, etc. 
Archival: Pertaining to or contained in documents or records that preserve information about an event or 
individual. 
Area of Critical Environmental Concern: A Bureau of Land Management (BLM) designation 
pertaining to areas where specific management attention is needed to protect and prevent irreparable 
damage to important historical, cultural, and scenic values, fish or wildlife resources, or other natural 
systems or processes, or to protect human life and safety from natural hazards. 
Arroyo: A dry gully, or a stream in a dry region. 
Artifact: Any object showing human workmanship or modification, especially from a prehistoric or 
historic culture. 
Ash: The residue that remains when something is burned. Also, one component of coal; generally, high 
ash-content coal is considered to be low-grade. 
Assessment: The act of evaluating and interpreting data and information for a defined purpose. 
Attainment area (air): Designation of a geographical area by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(USEPA) where the air quality is deemed to be better than the National Ambient Air Quality Standards 
(NAAQS). This designation is based on the measured ambient criteria pollution data available for the 
geographic area. Areas where the measured ambient criteria pollution data are worse than the NAAQS are 
identified as nonattainment. An area can be designated as unclassified when there are insufficient ambient 
criteria pollutant data for the USEPA to form a basis for attainment status. An area can be in attainment 
for some pollutants but not others. 
Backfill: The fill, often mine waste or rock, that replaces the void left from where a rock or ore has been 
removed. Also, the material used to fill in a trench in the groundbed (i.e., pipeline trench). The 
composition of the backfill varies based on the soil type being used and the component being covered. 
Background (visual): That portion of the visual landscape lying from the outer limit of the middleground 
to infinity. Color and texture are subdued in this area, and visual sensitivity analysis here is primarily 
concerned with the two-dimensional shape of landforms against the sky. 
Baghouse: An air pollution control device containing a large fabric bag, usually made of glass fibers, 
used to eliminate intermediate and large (greater than 20 PM [particulate matter] in diameter) particles. 
This device operates like the bag of an electric vacuum cleaner, passing the air and smaller particles while 
entrapping the larger ones. 
Base flow: The contribution of stream discharge from groundwater seeping into the stream. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-2 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Baseline: The existing conditions against which impacts of the proposed action and its alternatives can be 
compared.  
Basin: A depressed area having no surface outlet (topographic basin); a physiographic feature or 
subsurface structure that is capable of collecting, storing, or discharging water by reason of its shape and 
the characteristics of its confining material (water); a depression in the earth’s surface, the lowest part 
often filled by a lake or pond (lake basin); a part of a river or canal widened (drainage, river, stream 
basin). 
Best management practices: A suite of techniques that guide, or may be applied to, management actions 
to aid in achieving desired outcomes and help to protect the environmental resources by avoiding or 
minimizing impacts of an action.  
Big game: Large species of wildlife that are hunted (such as elk, deer, pronghorn antelope).  
Biological assessment: Information prepared by, or under the direction of, a Federal agency to determine 
whether a proposed action is likely to (1) adversely affect listed species or designated critical habitat; 
(2) jeopardize the continued existence of species that are proposed for listing; or (3) adversely modify 
proposed critical habitat. 
Biological opinion: A document that is the product of formal consultation, stating the opinion of the 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) on whether or not a Federal action is likely to jeopardize the 
continued existence of listed species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of critical habitat. 
Black Mesa Complex: Comprises two separate mining operations surface coal-mining operation—the 
Kayenta mining operation and the Black Mesa mining operation—on Black Mesa in Navajo County, 
Arizona. The Black Mesa Complex is located on contiguous coal leases within the boundaries of the Hopi 
and Navajo Indian Reservations. 
Boiler: Any device used to burn coal fuel to heat water for generating steam. 
Butte: A steep hill standing alone in a plain. 
Candidate species: A plant or animal species not yet officially listed as threatened or endangered, but 
which is undergoing status review by the FWS. 
Capital cost: The total investment needed to complete a project and bring it to a commercially operable 
status. The cost of construction of a new plant. The expenditures for the purchase or acquisition of 
existing facilities. 
Carbon dioxide: An atmospheric gas composed of one carbon and two oxygen atoms. Carbon dioxide 
results from the combustion of organic matter if sufficient amounts of oxygen are present. Liquid carbon 
dioxide is a good solvent for many organic compounds (for example, it is used to remove caffeine from 
coffee). 
Centrifuge: An apparatus consisting essentially of a compartment spun about a central axis to separate 
contained materials of different specific gravities, or to separate colloidal particles suspended in a liquid. 
In the case of this project, the centrifuge would remove water from the slurry. 
Chapter (Navajo): Navajo unit of local government; nearly all Navajo land is assigned to chapters. There 
are 110 Chapters on the Navajo Reservation.  
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-3 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clean Air Act of 1990: Federal legislation governing air pollution. The Clean Air Act established 
NAAQS for carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxide, ozone, particulate matter, sulfur dioxide, and lead. 
Prevention of Significant Deterioration classifications define the allowable increased levels of air quality 
deterioration above legally established levels and include the following: 
Class I – minimal additional deterioration in air quality (certain national parks and 
 
wilderness areas) 
Class II – moderate additional deterioration in air quality (most lands) 
Class III – greater deterioration for planned maximum growth (industrial areas) 
Clean Water Act of 1987: National environmental law enforced by the USEPA that regulates water 
pollution. 
Cliff dwelling: A rock and adobe dwelling built on sheltered ledges in the sides of a cliff; cliff dwellings 
are ruins that represent the abandoned homes of ancient cultures. 
Coal: A fossil fuel extracted from the ground by deep mining. It is a readily combustible black or 
brownish-black sedimentary rock composed primarily of carbon and hydrocarbons along with other 
elements including sulfur. Coal is formed from plant remains that have been compacted, hardened, 
chemically altered, and metamorphosed by heat and pressure over geologic time. It is primarily used as a 
solid fuel to produce heat through combustion and is the most common source of electricity generation 
worldwide. 
Coal resource area: An area of high potential for unmined coal. 
Coal washing: The process of separating undesirable materials from coal based on differences in 
densities. For example, pyritic sulfur, or sulfur combined with iron, is heavier and sinks in water; coal is 
lighter and floats. 
Collection area: Geographic location or specific area in which native plants that have cultural 
significance to the Hopi and Navajo people are collected for use as food and medicine, in rituals, and 
other uses such as for tools, construction, and baskets. 
Commercial area: A land use zoning term used to describe or designate areas in which business 
facilities, rather than residential uses, are concentrated. 
Compaction: Process by which the volume or thickness of rock is reduced due to pressure from 
overlying layers of sediment. 
Conduit: A pipe, usually made of metal, ceramic, or plastic, that protects buried cables or wires. 
Consent decree: A legal document, approved by a judge, that formalizes an agreement reached between 
USEPA and potentially responsible parties through which potentially responsible parties will conduct all 
or part of a cleanup action at a Superfund site; cease or correct actions or processes that are polluting the 
environment; or otherwise comply with USEPA initiated regulatory enforcement actions to resolve the 
contamination at the Superfund site involved. The consent decree describes the actions potentially 
responsible parties will take and may be subject to a public comment period. 
Construction, operation, and maintenance plan (COMP): A detailed plan depicting engineering, 
access, construction, environmentally sensitive areas, and reclamation that is prepared prior to 
construction and operation. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-4 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contrast rating: A method of determining the extent of visual impact for an existing or proposed activity 
that would modify any landscape feature (land and water form, vegetation, and structures). 
Conveyor: An apparatus for moving material from one point to another in a continuous fashion. This is 
accomplished with an endless (that is, looped) procession of hooks, buckets, or wide rubber belt, etc. In 
the case of this project, a conveyor moves coal from the Kayenta mining operation to the area where the 
coal is loaded onto the Black Mesa and Lake Powell Railroad, which transports the coal to the Navajo 
Generating Station. 
Cooperating agency: Assists the lead Federal agency in developing an environmental assessment or 
environmental impact statement. The Council on Environmental Quality regulations implementing NEPA 
define a cooperating agency as any agency that has jurisdiction by law or special expertise for proposals 
covered by NEPA (40 CFR 1501.6). Any Federal, state, or local government jurisdiction with such 
qualification may become a cooperating agency by agreement with the lead agency. 
Corridor: As discussed in this document, a wide strip of land within which a proposed linear facility 
(e.g., pipeline, transmission line) could be located. 
Cost/benefit ratio: The number that results from a quantitative evaluation of the costs which would have 
incurred by implementing an environmental regulation versus the overall benefits to society of the 
proposed action. 
Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ): An advisory council to the President established by the 
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969. It reviews Federal programs for their effort on environmental 
studies, and advises the President on environmental matters. 
Criteria: Standards on which a judgment or decision can be based. 
Cubic foot/feet per second (cfs): As a rate of stream flow, a cubic foot of water passing a reference 
section in one second of time. One cfs flowing for 24 hours will yield 7.983 acre-feet of water.  
Cultural resources: Remains of human activity, occupation, or endeavor as reflected in districts, sites, 
buildings, objects, artifacts, ruins, works of art, architecture, and natural features important in human 
events. 
Cumulative effect (or impact): The impact on the environment that results from the incremental impact 
of the action when added to other past, present, and reasonably foreseeable actions. Cumulative impacts 
are evaluated as part of the environmental impact statement (EIS), and may include consideration of 
additive or interactive effects regardless of what agency or person undertakes the other actions. 
Decibel: A unit for expressing the relative intensity of sounds on a logarithmic scale from zero for the 
average least perceptible sound to about 130 for the average level at which sound causes pain to humans. 
For traffic and industrial noise measurements, the A-weighted decibel, a frequency-weighted noise unit, is 
widely used. The A-weighted decibel scale corresponds approximately to the frequency response of the 
human ear and thus correlates well with loudness. 
Degradation: The wearing down or away, and general lowering or reducing, of the earth’s surface by the 
processes of weathering and erosion. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-5 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diné Bikeyah: The traditional land of the Navajo covers parts of northeastern Arizona, northwestern New 
Mexico, southeastern Utah, and southwestern Colorado between four sacred mountains (Mount Hesperus, 
Blanca Peak, Mount Taylor, and the San Francisco Peaks). 
Discharge: Outflow of surface water in a stream or canal (water). Discharge from an industrial facility 
that may contain pollutants harmful to fish or animals if it is released into nearby water bodies usually 
requires a permit issued by the USEPA and is monitored.  
Distance zone: A visibility threshold distance where visual perception changes. They usually are defined 
as foreground, middleground, and background. 
Diversion: A channel, embankment, or other manmade structure constructed to divert water from one 
area to another; the process of using these structures to move water. 
Drainage: The natural or artificial removal of surface water and groundwater from a given area. Many 
agricultural soils need drainage to improve production or to manage water supplies. 
Drawdown: The decrease in elevation of the water surface in a well, the local water table or the pressure 
head on an artesian well due to extraction of groundwater or decrease in recharge to the aquifer. 
Easement: A right afforded a person, agency, or organization to make limited use of another’s real 
property for access or other purposes. 
Ecology: The relationship between living organisms and their environment. 
Ecosystem: A complex system composed of a community of plants and animals, and that system’s 
chemical and physical environment. 
Effect (or impact): A modification of the existing environment as it presently exists, caused by an action 
(such as construction or operation of facilities). An effect may be direct, indirect, or cumulative. The 
terms effect and impact are synonymous under the NEPA. A direct effect is caused by an action and 
occurs at the same time and same place (40 CFR 1508.8(a)). An indirect effect is caused by the action 
later in time or farther removed in distance, but still reasonably foreseeable. Indirect effects may include 
growth-inducing effects and other effects related to induced changes in the pattern of land use, population 
density or growth rate, and related effects on air and water and other natural systems, including 
ecosystems. 
Emission: Effluent discharged into the atmosphere, usually specified by mass per unit time, and 
considered when analyzing air quality. 
Endangered species: A plant or animal that is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant 
portion of its range. Endangered species are rarely identified by the Secretary of the Interior in accordance 
with the Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973. 
Endangered Species Act of 1973: Provides a means whereby the ecosystems upon which threatened and 
endangered species depend may be conserved and to provide a program for the conservation of such 
threatened and endangered species. The ESA requires all Federal agencies to seek to conserve threatened 
and endangered species, use applicable authorities in furtherance of the purposes of the ESA, and avoid 
jeopardizing the continued existence of any species that is listed or proposed for listing as threatened and 
endangered or destroying or adversely modifying its designated or proposed critical habitat. The FWS is 
responsible for administration of this act. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-6 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
Energy conservation: A means of saving energy. 
Environment: The surrounding conditions, influences, or forces that affect or modify an organism or an 
ecological community and ultimately determine its form and survival. 
Environmental impact statement (EIS): A document prepared to analyze the impacts on the 
environment of a proposed action and released to the public for review and comment. An EIS must meet 
the requirements of NEPA, CEQ, and the directives of the agency responsible for the proposed action. 
Environmental justice: The fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all people regardless of race, 
color, national origin, or income with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of 
environmental laws, regulations, and policies. Fair treatment means that no group of people including 
racial, ethnic, or socioeconomic group should bear a disproportionate share of the negative environmental 
consequences resulting from industrial, municipal, and commercial operations or the execution of 
Federal, state, local, and tribal programs and policies (see Executive Order 12898). 
Ephemeral range: A rangeland that does not consistently produce enough forage to sustain a livestock 
operation but may briefly produce unusual volumes of forage that may be utilized by livestock. 
Ephemeral stream: A stream that flows only in direct response to precipitation in the immediate 
watershed or in response to the melting of a cover of snow and ice and has a channel bottom that is 
always above the local water table. 
Erosion: The wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, or other geologic agents and 
by such processes as “gravitation creep.” 
Extirpation: To destroy completely. 
Extraction: The act of extracting or drawing a substance out of the earth (e.g., mining). 
Federal Register: Published by the Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records 
Administration, the Federal Register is the official daily publication for rules, proposed rules, and notices 
of Federal agencies and organizations, as well as executive orders and other presidential documents. 
Floodplain: That portion of a river or stream valley, adjacent to a river channel, that is built of sediments 
and is inundated with water when the stream overflows its banks. 
Foreground: The visible area from a viewpoint or use area out to a distance of 0.5 mile. The ability to 
perceive detail in a landscape is greatest in this zone. 
Fossil: Any remains, trace, or imprint of a plant or animal that has been preserved by natural process in 
the earth’s crust since some past geologic time.  
Game management unit: A land management classification used by the Arizona Game and Fish 
Department to assist in managing hunting, such as hunting seasons allowed and number of permits to be 
issued for specific species, within the State of Arizona. 
Geochemistry: The study of the chemical components of the earth’s crust and mantle. Geochemistry is 
applied to mining exploration to detect sites that indicate abnormal concentrations of either the elements 
being sought or of their more readily detected associate elements. Depending on circumstance, 
geochemical exploration samples soils, rock, and lake and stream sediments. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-7 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Geographic information system: A system of computer hardware, software, data, people and 
applications that capture, store, edit, analyze, and graphically display a potentially wide array of 
geospatial information. 
Geologic formation: A rock unit distinguished from adjacent deposits by some common character, such 
as its composition, origin, or the type of fossil associated with the unit. 
Geology: The science that relates to the earth, the rocks of which it is composed, and the changes that the 
earth has undergone or is undergoing. 
Geothermal resource: Heat found in rocks and fluids at various depths that can be extracted by drilling 
or pumping for use as an energy source. This heat may be residual heat, friction heat, or a result of 
radioactive decay. 
Global warming: An increase in the average temperature of the earth’s atmosphere and oceans. The term 
also is used to describe the theory that increasing temperatures are the result of a strengthening 
greenhouse effect caused primarily by manmade increases in carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. 
Gray water: Any nonsewage water that is nonpotable because it has been used in some way; for 
example, water from sinks, bathtubs, showers, or laundry operations. It may be recycled for toilet and 
outside water uses including irrigation. 
Greenhouse gas: A component of the atmosphere that contributes to the greenhouse effect, or the process 
by which an atmosphere warms a planet. The major natural greenhouse gases are water vapor, carbon 
dioxide, and ozone. Minor greenhouse gases include methane, nitrous oxide, sulfur hexafluoride, and 
chlorofluorocarbons.  
Groundwater: Subsurface water that fills available openings in rock or soil materials to the extent that 
they are considered water saturated.  
Grubbing: To dig up and remove all plants (roots and stems or trunk) in order to clear the land. 
Gysum: A soft white mineral, the most common sulfate mineral. 
Habitat: A specific set of physical conditions in a geographic area(s) that surrounds a single species, 
group of species, or large community. In wildlife management, the major components of habitat are food, 
water, cover, and living space. 
Halite: A white and colorless mineral, sodium chloride or rock salt. 
Historic property: Any prehistoric or historical district, site, building, structure, or object included in, or 
eligible for inclusion in, the National Register of Historic Places maintained by the Secretary of the 
Interior. The term includes artifacts, records, and remains that are related to and located within such 
properties; the term also includes properties of traditional religious and cultural importance to an 
American Indian tribe or Native Hawaiian organization and that meet the National Register criteria. 
Hydrology: The study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water throughout the earth, addresses 
both the hydrologic cycle and water resources. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-8 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Impact (or effect): A modification of the existing environment as it presently exists, caused by an action 
(such as construction or operation of facilities). An impact may be direct, indirect, or cumulative. The 
terms effect and impact are synonymous under NEPA. 
Impoundment: A closed basin, naturally formed or artificially built, which is dammed or excavated for 
the retention of water, sediment, or waste. 
Indian Lands Program: The program’s emphasis is addressing environmental impacts on Indian lands 
that are not currently addressed by other programs. The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and 
Enforcement (OSM) is the regulatory authority for coal-mining operations that occur on Indian lands in 
the western United States. As such, OSM is responsible for the review and decisions on all applications to 
conduct mining operations and, if a mining permit is issued, OSM is responsible for inspection of the 
mines to ensure that the public and the environment are protected. Ultimately, OSM is responsible for 
ensuring that mining operations are fully reclaimed before the lands are returned to the tribes. 
Indirect effect (or impact): Secondary effects that occur in locations other than the initial action or later 
in time, but that are caused by the proposed action. 
Indurated rock: Hardened or cemented sedimentary rock. 
Industrial area: A land use zoning term used to describe or designate areas in which heavy industry is 
concentrated or allowed. 
Infrastructure: The facilities, services, and equipment needed for a community or facility to function, 
such as and including roads, sewers, water lines, and electric lines. 
Initial Program: A transitional program designed by Congress to implement the requirements of the 
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, established as a nationwide program to protect 
society and the environment from the adverse effects of surface coal-mining operations and to assist the 
states in developing and implementing a program to achieve the purposes of the Act. The Initial Program 
took effect six months after the enactment of the Act and created a dual inspection and enforcement role 
for OSM and the states in ensuring compliance with certain key provisions of the Act at all surface-coal­
mining and reclamation operations. The Initial Program was to be replaced by a permanent state 
regulatory program as approved by the Secretary of the Interior based on findings that the program 
provisions met the purposes of the Act and the state had the capability of carrying them out; or, where a 
state did not submit an application for a state program, upon promulgation and implementation of a 
Federal program. 
Intermittent: A river or stream that flows for a period of time, usually seasonally during rainy periods, 
and stops during dry periods. In arid regions, dry periods may be interrupted by occasional flash floods 
from brief but intense rain storms. 
Invasive species: Describes a large number of nonnative plant species whose introduction causes or is 
likely to cause economic or environmental harm or harm to human health. 
Issue: Describes the relationship between actions (proposed, connected, cumulative, similar) and 
environmental (natural, cultural, and socioeconomic) resources. Issues may be questions, concerns, 
problems, or other relationships, including beneficial ones. Issues do not predict the degree or intensity of 
harm the action might cause, but simply alert the reader as to what the environmental problems might be. 
The NEPA document should address issues identified through interaction with agencies and/or the public, 
and/or through resource studies. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-9 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Labor force: All persons 16 years of age or over who are either employed or unemployed and actively 
looking for a job.  
Land use plan: A plan or document developed by a government entity, which outlines specific functions, 
uses, or management-related activities of an area, and may be identified in combination when joint or 
seasonal uses occur and may include land used for support facilities that are an integral part of the use. 
Landform: A term used to describe the many land surfaces that exist as a result of geologic activity and 
weathering (e.g., plateaus, mountains, plains, and valleys). 
Landscape: An area composed of interacting ecosystems that are repeated because of geology, landform, 
soils, climate, biota, and human influences throughout the area. Landscapes are generally of a size, shape, 
and pattern, which are determined by interacting ecosystems. 
Landscape character: Particular attributes, qualities, and traits of a landscape that give it an image and 
make it identifiable or unique. 
Lawsuit: A civil action brought before a court in which the party commencing the action, the plaintiff, 
seeks a legal remedy. If the plaintiff is successful, judgment will be given in the plaintiff’s favor, and a 
range of court orders may be issued to enforce a right, impose a penalty, award damages, impose an 
injunction to prevent an act or compel an act, or to obtain a declaratory judgment to prevent future legal 
disputes. 
Lease: An authorization or contract by which one party (lessor) conveys the use of property to another 
(lessee) in return for rental payments. In cases of resource production, lessees pay royalties to the lessor in 
addition to rental payments. 
Life of mine: The estimated time period within which a mine is expected to operate, which also is the 
duration for which a permit is issued. The adjective “life-of-mine (LOM)” is used with “plan” or 
“permit.” Relevant Federal or state agencies have the authority to approve a modification of a LOM 
permit or a transfer of a LOM permit from one company to another. 
Lifestyle: A way of living based on identifiable patterns of behavior based on an individual’s choice, and 
influenced by the individual’s personal characteristics, their social interactions, socioeconomic and 
environmental factors, and cultural, ethnic, or religious background. 
Locomotive: A railway vehicle that provides the motive power for a train and has no payload capacity of 
its own; its sole purpose is to move the train along the tracks.  
Management indicator species: Designated by the U.S. Forest Service, these species are selected 
because their population changes are believed to indicate the effects of management activities.  
Megawatt: A unit for measuring power equal to one million watts. The productive capacity of electrical 
generators is measured in megawatts. 
Mesa: An isolated, nearly level land mass, formed on nearly horizontal rocks, standing above the 
surrounding country and bounded with steep sides. 
Methane: A colorless, nonpoisonous, flammable gas created by anaerobic decomposition of organic 
compounds. A major component of natural gas used in the home. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-10 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Methanol: An alcohol that can be used as an alternative fuel or as a gasoline additive. It is less volatile 
than gasoline; when blended with gasoline it lowers the carbon monoxide emissions but increases 
hydrocarbon emissions. Used as pure fuel, its emissions are less ozone-forming than those from gasoline. 
Poisonous to humans and animals if ingested. 
Mineral resources: Any inorganic or organic substance occurring naturally in the earth that has a 
consistent and distinctive set of physical properties. Examples of mineral resources include coal, nickel, 
gold, silver, and copper. 
Mitigation: The abatement or reduction of an impact on the environment by (1) avoiding a certain action 
or parts of an action, (2) employing certain construction measures to limit the degree of impact, 
(3) restoring an area to preconstruction conditions, (4) preserving or maintaining an area throughout the 
life of a project, (5) replacing or providing substitute resources to the environment, or (6) gathering data 
(e.g., archaeological or paleontological) prior to disturbance. 
National Ambient Air Quality Standards: The allowable concentrations of air pollutants in the air 
specified by the Federal government. The air quality standards are divided into primary standards (based 
on the air quality criteria and allowing an adequate margin of safety and requisite to protect the public 
health) and secondary standards (based on the air quality criteria and allowing an adequate margin of 
safety and requisite to protect the public welfare) from any unknown or expected adverse effects of air 
pollutants. 
National Environmental Policy Act of 1969: Our nation’s basic charter for protection of the 
environment. It establishes policy, sets goals, and provides means for carrying out the policy. In 
accordance with NEPA, all Federal agencies must prepare a written statement on the environmental 
impacts of a proposed action. The provisions to ensure that Federal agencies act according to the letter 
and spirit of NEPA are in the CEQ regulations for implementing NEPA (43 CFR 1500-1508). 
National Register of Historic Places. A listing, maintained by the Secretary of the Interior, of districts, 
sites, buildings, structures, and objects worthy of preservation. To be eligible a property must normally be 
at least 50 years old, unless it has exceptional significance, and have national, State, or local significance 
in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture; and possess integrity of location, 
design, setting, material, workmanship, feeling, and association; and (a) be associated with events that 
have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of history, (b) be associated with the lives of 
persons significant in our past, or (c) embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of 
construction; represent the work of a master; possess high artistic values; or represent a significant and 
distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or (d) have yielded, or may be 
likely to yield, information important to prehistory or history. 
Noise: Loud, unpleasant, unexpected, or undesired sound that disrupts or interferes with normal human 
activities. 
Noxious weed: Nonnative plant species that negatively impact crops, native plant communities, and/or 
management of natural or agricultural systems. Noxious weeds are officially designated by a number of 
states (including Arizona and Nevada) and Federal agencies. 
Operating cost: The expense of maintaining property or a facility (e.g., paying property taxes, wages, 
utilities, supplies, and insurance); it does not include depreciation or the cost of financing or income 
taxes. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-11 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Perennial stream: A stream or that part of a stream that flows continuously during all of the calendar 
year as a result of groundwater discharge or surface runoff.  
Pipeline: A continuous pipe conduit for transporting fluids such as natural gas and/or supplemental 
gaseous fuels, oil, or water from one point to another, usually from a point in or beyond the producing 
field or processing plant to another pipeline or to points of use. Pipelines require associated equipment as 
valves, compressor stations or booster pumps, communications systems, and meters. 
Plateau: In geology and earth science, a plateau is an area of high land, usually consisting of relatively 
flat open country if the uplift was recent in geologic history. Plateaus, like mesas and buttes, are formed 
when land has been uplifted by tectonic activity and then eroded by wind or water. 
Prime farmland: A special category of highly productive cropland that is recognized and described by 
the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Soil Conservation Service and receives special protection under the 
Surface Mining Law of 1977. 
Public land: Land or interest in land owned by the United States and administered through the Secretary 
of the Interior through the BLM without regard to how the United States acquired ownership, except 
lands on the Outer Continental Shelf, and land held in trust for the benefit of American Indians, Aleuts, 
and Eskimos. 
Pump station: Mechanical device installed in sewer or water system or other liquid-carrying pipelines to 
move the liquids to a higher level so gravity can assist with moving the liquid across long distances. 
Range: A large, open area of land over which livestock can wander and graze. 
Raptor: A bird of prey. 
Rare: A plant or animal restricted in distribution. May be locally abundant in a limited area or few in 
number over a wide area. 
Recharge: Replenishment of a groundwater reservoir (aquifer) by the addition of water, through either 
natural or artificial means. 
Reclaimed water: Treated, recycled wastewater not safe for consumption. Also known as nonpotable 
water. Reclaimed water is often used for irrigation and other nonconsumptive purposes. 
Reclamation: Restoration of land disturbed by natural or human activity (e.g., mining, pipeline 
construction) to original contour, use, or condition. Also describes the return of land to alternative uses 
that may, under certain circumstances, be different from those prior to disturbance. 
Recontouring: Return a surface to or near to its original form through some type of action such as 
grading. 
Record of Decision: A document separate from, but associated with, an EIS that publicly and officially 
discloses the responsible official’s decision on a proposed action. 
Recreation Opportunity Spectrum: The Recreation Opportunity Spectrum (ROS) provides a framework 
that allows forest managers to plan for and provide a variety of recreational environments. It allows 
managers to describe and provide a range of recreational opportunities from highly developed areas 
(Urban, Rural, Roaded Natural, Roaded Modified) to areas with little or no development (Semi-Primitive 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-12 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Motorized and Nonmotorized, Primitive). Attributes typically considered in describing the setting are 
size, scenic quality, type and degree of access, remoteness, level of development, social encounters, and 
the amount of onsite management. By providing and maintaining this spectrum of recreational settings 
and opportunities, a broad segment of the public can find quality recreational opportunities for a variety 
of recreational activities and experiences, now and in the future. Change in a national forest’s mix of ROS 
classes affect the recreational opportunities offered (USDA, USFS 1986). 
Refuse: Nonliquid, nonsoluble materials ranging from municipal garbage to industrial wastes that contain 
complex and sometimes hazardous substances. Refuse also includes sewage sludge, agricultural refuse, 
demolition wastes, and mining residues. Also referred to as solid waste. In the case of this project, refuse 
refers to the waste that would remain after coal washing. 
Reservation: Land set aside to achieve a particular land use or conservation objective. For the purposes 
of this document, reservation refers to those lands managed by an American Indian tribe under the U.S. 
Department of the Interior‘s Bureau of Indian Affairs. The reservation land is Federal territory held in 
trust for tribes. The American Indian tribes have limited national sovereignty. 
Retention pond: Wastewater pond, or retention area, in which floating wastes are skimmed off and 
settled solids are removed for disposal before the water leaves the permit area. Also called a sediment 
pond. 
Revegetation: The re-establishment and development of self-sustaining plant cover. On disturbed sites, 
this normally requires human assistance such as reseeding. 
Right-of-way: Land authorized to be used or occupied for the construction, operation, maintenance, and 
termination of a project, such as a road or utility. 
Riparian: Referring or relating to areas adjacent to water or influenced by free water associated with 
streams or rivers on geologic surfaces occupying the lowest position of a watershed. Pertaining to, living 
or situated on banks of rivers, streams, or other body or water. Normally used to refer to the plants of all 
types that grow along, around, or in wet areas. 
Rolling stock: Rail-borne railroad equipment such as locomotives, freight cars, passenger cars, and 
maintenance-of-way work cars that can be assembled into a train. 
Royalty: A percentage of value of the resource production of a facility or project paid in the instance of a 
leasing situation, from a lessee to a lessor. Terms of royalties are determined in and outlined within the 
lease. 
Rural: Sparsely settled places away from the influence of large cities and towns. Such areas are distinct 
from more intensively settled urban and suburban areas, and also from unsettled lands such as outback or 
wilderness. People tend to live in villages, on farms, and in other isolated houses on large plots of land. 
Salinity: A measure of the amount of dissolved salts given a volume of water. 
Scoping: The process open to the public early in the preparation of an EIS for determining the scope of 
issues related to a proposed action and identifying significant issues to be addressed in an EIS. 
Screen: An initial assessment performed with few data and many assumptions to identify alternatives that 
should be evaluated more carefully. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-13 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scrubber: Any of several forms of chemical/physical devices that remove sulfur compounds formed 
during coal combustion. These devices, technically know as flue gas desulfurization systems, combine the 
sulfur in gaseous emissions with another chemical medium to form inert “sludge,” which must then be 
removed for disposal. Scrubbers are used as air pollution control devices to trap pollutants in emissions. 
Sediment: Solid fragmental material, either mineral or organic, that is transported or deposited by air, 
water, gravity, or ice. 
Sediment pond: Wastewater pond, or retention area, in which floating wastes are skimmed off and 
settled solids are removed for disposal before the water leaves the permit area. 
Sedimentation: The result when soil or mineral is transported by moving water, wind, gravity, or glaciers 
and deposited in streams or other bodies of water, or on land. Also, letting solids settle out of wastewater 
by gravity during treatment. 
Seismicity: The geographic and historical distribution of earthquakes. 
Sensitive receptor: In terms of noise, people or animals that may hear a noise or be sensitive to increased 
noise levels within their range of hearing. 
Sensitivity: The state of being readily affected by the actions of external influence. 
Significant (impact): “Significant” has been used in this document to describe any impact that would 
cause a substantial adverse change or stress to one or more environmental resources. 
Sinkhole: A depression in the earth’s surface caused by dissolving of underlying limestone, salt, or 
gypsum. Sinkholes also form from human activity, such as the collapse of abandoned mines, due to water 
main breaks in urban areas, or from the overpumping and extraction of groundwater and subsurface 
fluids. 
Slurry: In the case of this project, the slurry is a mixture of 50 percent water and 50 percent finely ground 
coal. The coal from the Black Mesa Mine is transported in this slurry mixture via pipeline to the Mohave 
Generating Station. 
Special status species: Wildlife and plant species either federally listed or proposed for listing as 
endangered or threatened; state-listed; or priority species of concern to Federal agencies or tribes.  
Spoil: The dirt or rock removed from its original location through excavation as in strip-mining, 
trenching, dredging, or construction. 
Spur: A road, pipeline, or rail line that diverges from its primary path or route (i.e., a larger arterial or 
pipeline) to serve a specific area or connect to another road, pipeline, or rail line. 
Storage coefficient: The volume of water the aquifer releases from or takes into storage per unit of 
surface area of the aquifer per unit decline or rise of head. 
Subsidence: The lowering of the land-surface elevation from changes that take place underground. 
Common causes of land subsidence from human activity are pumping water, oil, and gas from 
underground reservoirs; dissolution of limestone aquifers (sinkholes); collapse of underground mines; 
drainage of organic soils; and initial wetting of dry soils (hydrocompaction).  
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-14 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substation: A facility with a collection of equipment for the purpose of raising, lowering, and regulating 
the voltage of electricity. 
Suburban area: Inhabited districts located either on the outer rim or outside the official limits of a city. 
Although suburbs may be located within city limits, the density of habitation is usually lower than in an 
inner city area and there is generally a transportation system(s) that allows commuting into more densely 
populated areas with higher levels of commerce. 
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act: Requires mine operators to minimize disturbances and 
adverse effects on fish, wildlife, and related environmental values, and to restore land and water 
resources. 
Surface water: All bodies of water on the surface of the earth and open to the atmosphere such as rivers, 
lakes, reservoirs, ponds, seas, and estuaries. 
Terrain: Used to describe the geophysiographic characteristics of land in terms of elevation, slope, and 
orientation. 
Thoroughfare: A public road from one place to another. 
Threatened or Endangered Species: Animal or plant species that are listed under the Federal 
Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (federally listed), or under similar state laws (state-listed). 
Total dissolved solids: A term that describes the quantity of dissolved material in a sample of water. 
Total maximum daily load: An estimate of the total quantity of pollutants (from all sources: point, 
nonpoint, and natural) that may be allowed into waters without exceeding applicable water-quality 
criteria. 
Traditional cultural lifeway/resources: Resources that are significant for retention and transmission of 
traditional cultures. Biological resources that could have traditional cultural significance include plants 
collected for food, medicine, ceremonies, and other traditional uses, as well as raptors (e.g., eagles and 
hawks) collected for ceremonial uses. Other natural resources that could have traditional cultural 
significance include minerals or clay deposits and sources of surface water or shallow groundwater 
pumped for traditional purposes. 
Traditional cultural properties/landscape features: These named places (landscape features) comprise 
the cultural landscape that provides the context for evaluating specific traditional cultural properties. 
Trans-basin: Trans-basinal diversion of water is the change in location of a water use, by conveyance of 
that water, between water bodies not normally in hydrologic communication. This can be either an 
underground or aboveground water body. Because water is generally adjudicated by the courts, this use 
can only occur if judicial or administrative (Arizona Department of Water Resources) approval has been 
obtained. 
Transition zone: The area between two discrete environmental areas, and thus containing elements of 
each. For example, the transition zone between an upland piñon forest and a lowland desert scrub 
environment. 
Transmissivity: The rate at which water is transmitted through a unit width of the aquifer under a unit 
hydraulic gradient. 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-15 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tribal Council: A group of officials elected by tribal members to govern tribal affairs in accordance with 
a tribal constitution adopted pursuant to the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934. 
Tribe: Any Indian tribe, band, group, or community having a governing body recognized by the Secretary 
of Interior. 
Tutsqwa: The Hopi heartland, encompasses much of northeastern Arizona. 
Undertaking: A project, activity, or program funded in whole or in part under the direct or indirect 
jurisdiction of a Federal agency, including those carried out by or on behalf of a Federal agency; those 
carried out with Federal financial assistance; those requiring a Federal permit, license, or approval; and 
those subject to State or local regulation administered pursuant to a delegation or approval of a Federal 
agency. 
Unit train: A long train of between 60 and 150 or more hopper cars, carrying only coal between a single 
mine and destination. 
Urban: An area where there is an increased density of human-created structures in comparison to the 
areas surrounding it. Urban areas are frequently referred to as cities or towns. The U.S. Census Bureau 
defines an urbanized area as: “Core census block groups or blocks that have a population density of at 
least 1,000 people per square mile and (386 per square kilometer) and surrounding census blocks that 
have an overall density of at least 500 people per square mile (193 per square kilometer).” 
Vegetation communities: Species of plants that commonly live together in the same region or ecotone. 
Viewer sensitivity: A measure of the degree of concern about change in the visual character of a 
landscape. It is determined by assessing the types of viewers, land uses on lands facing a project, numbers 
of viewers, duration of time spent looking at a view, and influence of adjacent land use on the view. 
Village (Hopi): The Hopi unit of local government, but much Hopi land is not assigned to a village and is 
administered at the tribal level.  
Visibility: The distance to which an observer can distinguish objects from their background. The 
determinants of visibility include the characteristics of the target object (shape, size, color, pattern), the 
angle and intensity of sunlight, the observer’s eyesight, and any screening present between the viewer and 
the object (i.e., vegetation, landform, even pollution such as regional haze). 
Visual resource management classes: Categories assigned to public lands based on scenic quality, 
sensitivity level, and distance zones. There are four classes, each of which has an objective that prescribes 
the amount of change allowed in the characteristic landscape.  
Volt: The potential difference across a conductor when a current of one ampere dissipates one watt of 
power. Electrical potential difference can be thought of as the ability to move electrical charge through a 
resistance. In essence, the volt measures how much kinetic energy each electron carries. Between two 
points in an electric field, such as exists in an electrical circuit, the potential difference is equal to the 
difference in their electrical potentials. This difference is proportional to the electrostatic force that tends 
to push electrons or other charge-carriers from one point to the other. Potential difference, electrical 
potential, and electromotive force are measured in volts, leading to the commonly used term “voltage.” 
Waters of the United States: All waters that are currently used, were used in the past, or may be 
susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce including adjacent wetlands and tributaries to water 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-16 
Glossary 
November 2008 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of the United States; and all waters by which the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or 
could affect interstate or foreign commerce. 
Watershed: All land and water within the confines of a drainage divide.  
Well field: Area containing one or more wells that produce usable amounts of water or oil. 
Wetlands: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and 
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation 
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Examples of wetlands include marshes, shallow 
swamps, lakeshores, bogs, muskegs, wet meadows, estuaries, and riparian areas. 
Wilderness, Wilderness Area: An area formally designated by Congress as part of the National 
Wilderness Preservation System. 
Xeroriparian: Riparian refers or relates to areas adjacent to water or influenced by free water associated 
with streams or rivers on geologic surfaces occupying the lowest position of a watershed. Pertaining to, 
living, or situated on, the banks of rivers and streams. “Xeroriparian” refers to being situated on dry 
washes (ephemeral streams). 
Black Mesa Project EIS 
Glossary-17 
Glossary 
November 2008 
