38 
Marine Fisheries Review
Introduction
Sponge–ﬁsh associations have been 
documented for a variety of species in 
both cold-water and tropical habitats. 
Eastman and Eakin (1999) found that 
ﬁshes of the genus Artedidraco (Artedi­
draconidae) are associated with sponge 
beds in the Ross Sea of Antarctica. 
Likewise, Tokranov (1998) described the 
association of sponge sculpin, Thyriscus 
anoplus (Cottidae), with sponge beds in 
the northern Kuril Islands.
Konecki and Targett (1989) found 
that cod iceﬁsh, Lepidonotothen larseni 
(Nototheniidae), in waters adjacent to the 
Antarctic Peninsula utilize the spongo­
coel of the hexactinellid (glass) sponge 
Rossella nuda as a substrate on which to 
deposit their eggs. Notothenioid ﬁshes 
known to utilize sponges as spawning 
and nesting sites include emerald rock­
Juvenile Red Rockﬁsh, Sebastes sp., Associations
with Sponges in the Gulf of Alaska
J. LINCOLN FREESE and BRUCE L. WING
The authors are with the Auke Bay Labora­
tory, Alaska Fisheries Science Center, National 
Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA, 11305 Glacier 
Highway, Juneau, AK 99801 [e-mail address: 
Linc.Freese@noaa.gov].
ABSTRACT—In 2001, a research sub­
mersible was used to survey seaﬂoor habitat 
and associated benthos in the northeastern 
Gulf of Alaska. One inspected site had a 
uniform sand-silt substrate, punctuated by 
widely spaced (10–20 m apart) boulders. 
Two-thirds of the boulders had sponge, 
Aphrocallistes sp., colonies. Eighty-two 
juvenile (5–10 cm) red rockﬁsh (Sebastes 
sp.) were also observed during the dive, 
and all of these ﬁsh were closely associated 
with the sponges. No juvenile red rockﬁsh 
were seen in proximity to boulders with­
out sponges, nor were any observed on the 
sand-silt substrate between boulders.
cod, Notothenia bernacchii (Moreno, 
1980) and Antarctic spiny plunderﬁsh, 
Harpagifer antarcticus (Daniels, 1978). 
Antarctic ﬁshes that utilize sponges for 
predator avoidance include sharp-spined 
notothen, Trematomus pennellii, and 
spotted notothen, T. nicolai, as well as 
the crocodile iceﬁsh, Pagetopsis mac­
ropterus. Dayton et al. (1974) state that 
glass sponges provide almost all of the 
vertical structure on the sea ﬂoor in the 
Ross Sea of Antarctica.
Finally, Munehara (1991) established 
that the silverspotted sculpin, Blepsias 
cirrhosus (Cottidae), uses the sponge 
Mycale adhaerens as a spawning bed, 
stating that the eggs beneﬁt from this 
association through predator avoidance, 
oxygen supply, and the natural antibac­
terial and antifungal properties of the 
sponge. Konecki and Targett (1989) note 
that glass sponges serve as important 
nesting and refuge sites for Antarctic 
ﬁshes, and destruction of sponge com­
munities by bottom trawling could have 
an impact on ﬁsh ecology in the region.
The 1996 amendments to the Magnu­
son-Stevens Fishery Conservation and 
Management Act require that increased 
emphasis be placed on “essential” ﬁsh 
habitat (USDOC, 1996). One type of 
marine habitat that fishery managers 
must consider during decision-making is 
living substrate. In Alaska waters, living 
substrate is often provided by a variety 
of epibenthic fauna, such as deepwater 
corals (e.g. Primnoa spp., Paragoria 
spp.), sea whips (Pennatulacea), and a 
number of large, erect sponges (Heifetz, 
2002; Malecha et al., In press). These taxa 
form a high-relief, complex habitat that 
is generally thought to foster increased 
biological diversity and productivity by 
providing abundant cover and food ag­
gregations for ﬁsh in various stages of 
their life history (Collie et al., 1997).
Studies conducted in the Gulf of 
Alaska (GOA) have shown that the 
aforementioned organisms are heavily 
impacted by even one pass of a com­
mercial bottom trawl (Freese et al., 1999; 
Krieger, 2001). These ﬁndings generally 
agree with those of studies conducted 
in other parts of the world (Watling and 
Norse, 1998; Auster and Langton, 1999; 
Moran and Stephenson, 2000). Trawl 
impacts can result from direct removal 
or damage to the megabenthos as well 
as changes in species composition over 
time (Wassenberg et al., 2002). Research 
in the GOA and elsewhere has shown 
that sponge communities and gorgonian 
coral colonies in boreal waters may be 
very slow to recover from trawl damage 
(Freese, 2003; Krieger, 2001).
An association between large Primnoa 
spp. colonies and six species of adult 
rockﬁsh has been documented by Krieger 
and Wing (2002) in the GOA. Although it 
has been assumed that sponges at north­
ern latitudes provide important habitat for 
ﬁsh in early stages of their life cycle in the 
GOA, there has heretofore been only an­
ecdotal information available to support 
this assumption. This paper describes in 
situ observations made from a research 
submersible of an association between 
juvenile red rockﬁsh, Sebastes spp., and 
one species of sponge in the GOA.
Materials and Methods
In June 2001, researchers from the 
NMFS Alaska Fisheries Science Center’s 
Auke Bay Laboratory conducted a series 
of biological surveys in the eastern GOA, 
using the research submersible Delta. 
The Delta is a 4.7 m long, battery-pow­
ered underwater vehicle able to dive to 
65(3) 
39
depths of 345 m with a pilot and an ob­
server. It is outﬁtted with video cameras, 
halogen lights, a laser scaling device, 
gyro compass, voice communications 
equipment, and a transponder. The tran­
sponder allows tracking of the vehicle by 
the submersible’s surface support vessel, 
which has GPS capability. During the 
survey dives, positional ﬁxes were taken 
at 30-second intervals.
The video equipment consisted of an 
externally mounted Hi-8 video camera 
pointed downward at an angle of 45° 
and an internal video camera positioned 
parallel to the seaﬂoor. The cameras were 
used to record images of the seaﬂoor and 
associated benthos, while an audio track 
was used to record observer comments. A 
digital camera was used by the observer 
to take still photographs. 
The primary purpose of the surveys 
was to collect information on red tree 
coral, Primnoa sp., abundance, distribu­
tion, and habitat associations at locations 
Figure 1. — Location of the study site in the Gulf of Alaska. 
where past NMFS trawl surveys had 
brought up the species as bycatch. Survey 
sites ranged from waters along the south­
east part of the Kenai Peninsula, south­
eastward to the Fairweather Grounds in 
the vicinity of Yakutat, Alaska.
Twenty dives were made during 
the cruise. This report details the ob­
servations made during one dive at 
59°14.88ʹN, 149°13.27ʹW, (about 100 
km south of Seward, Alaska) on 26 June 
2001 (Fig. 1). Although no red tree coral 
was observed during the dive, juvenile 
red rockﬁsh were observed in close as­
sociation with sponges.
The pilot headed the submersible in a 
general eastward direction maintaining 
close proximity between the vessel and 
the seaﬂoor. When boulders were noted, 
the pilot slowly approached these habitat 
features for close-up observations, and 
the boulders were slowly circled. The 
volumes of the boulders were calculated 
by estimating length, width, and height 
using the onboard laser scaling device. 
Volume estimates were made for only 
the sections of the boulders protruding 
above the seaﬂoor.
If sponges were attached, the volume 
of the sponge was calculated using 
length, width, and height estimates. 
Volumes of individual sponges were 
expressed as a percentage of the volume 
of the boulders. The sponges were then 
closely inspected for the presence of ju­
venile red rockﬁsh, counts were made of 
the number of rockﬁsh if present, and the 
laser scaling device was used to estimate 
their lengths. Epifaunal invertebrates 
other than sponges that were attached to 
the boulders or present on the surround­
ing seaﬂoor were noted, as were any ﬁsh 
species present. 
Results
The total length of the transect com­
pleted by the submersible was 865 m. 
Water depth at the site was 148 m with 
40 
Marine Fisheries Review
a temperature of 6.6°C. Underwater 
lateral visibility was about 10 m. The 
seafloor was flat, and the substrate 
consisted of a ﬁne silt-sand mixture, 
with occasional boulders encountered 
at intervals of about 10 to 20 m. The 
only three-dimensional relief was that 
provided by boulders and sponges, and 
occasional seawhips.
Vertebrate fauna encountered were 
typical of fauna found on similar 
substrate in the GOA, and included ar­
rowtooth ﬂounder, Atheresthes stomias, 
and other unidentiﬁed ﬂatﬁshes; spiny 
dogfish, Squalus acanthias; schools 
of adult Paciﬁc ocean perch, Sebastes 
alutus; and rougheye rockﬁsh, Sebastes 
aleutianus, (the two species could not be 
distinguished underwater); pricklebacks 
(Stichaeidae); eelpouts (Zoarcidae); 
and poachers (Agonidae). Macro-
invertebrates present included squat 
lobster, Munida quadrispina; hermit 
crabs (Paguriidae); spot shrimp, Pan­
dalus platyceros; bryozoans; hydroids; 
brachiopods; seawhips (Pennatula­
cea); seastars (Asteroidea); brittlestars 
(Ophiuridae); sea urchins (Echinoidea); 
sea cucumbers (Holothuridae); and gas­
tropods, in addition to the sponges.
Eighty-two boulders ranged along the 
transect, from 0.1 to 2.0 m along their 
longest axis, and most were roughly 
spherical in shape. Sponges were present 
on 66% of the boulders. Although other 
epifaunal invertebrates such as hydroids, 
bryozoans, brachiopods, basketstars, 
and seastars were also present on the 
boulders, sponges contributed most of 
the invertebrate biomass. In addition to 
habitat structure provided by these taxa, 
a small amount of cover was provided by 
occasional small indentations or caves 
located between the base of the boulders 
and the surrounding seaﬂoor, presum­
ably formed by water currents.
Fifty-four sponges were seen on the 
transect; all were attached to boulders. 
Aphrocallistes sp. made up 87% (47) 
of the sponges. In addition, ﬁve glass 
sponges, Rhabdocalyptus sp., and two 
unidentified sponges were present. 
Aphrocallistes sponges were roughly 
spherical in shape and had many ﬁnger-
like protuberances projecting from the 
sponge body. Rhabdocalyptus sponges 
were generally cylindrical in shape, 
and the walls of the sponge body were 
smooth. Estimated volumes for both 
types of sponge combined ranged from 
0.1 m³ to 8.4 m³ (x = 1.1 m³). Volumes 
of sponges expressed as a percentage of 
the volume of the boulders to which they 
were attached ranged from 10% to 700% 
(x = 195%).
Eighty-two juvenile red rockfish 
were noted in the immediate vicinity 
of sponges along the transect. These 
ﬁsh ranged in length from 5 to 10 cm, 
and were probably 2–3 years old. All 
appeared to be of the same species, 
although positive identiﬁcation was not 
possible from visual observation from 
the submersible. Only those boulders 
with attached sponges harbored juvenile 
rockﬁsh. Of the 82 rockﬁsh observed, 79 
(96% of total) were associated with Aph­
rocallistes sponges. The remaining three 
(4% of total) rockﬁsh were associated 
with Rhabdocalyptus sponges. Num­
bers of juvenile red rockﬁsh per sponge 
ranged from 1 to 10. These ﬁsh were 
usually ﬁrst observed hovering as indi­
viduals or small schools a short distance 
(< 0.5 m) above the sponges attached 
to the boulders. They invariably darted 
into the body of the sponge for cover as 
the submersible approached (Fig. 2). If 
the submersible remained motionless 
next to the sponge they would emerge 
from the sponge after several minutes 
had elapsed. They did not appear to be 
frightened by the submersible’s lighting 
system, disappearing into the sponge 
only when the submersible began to 
move. Statistical analyses showed no 
correlation (P > 0.05) between sponge 
volume and number of juvenile red 
rockﬁsh present, or between the sponge 
volume/boulder volume ratio and 
number of rockﬁsh.
Discussion
This survey shows that sponges of the 
genus Aphrocallistes can provide im­
portant habitat for juvenile red rockﬁsh. 
Although several species of sponge were 
present along the transect, almost all ju­
venile red rockﬁsh were associated with 
Aphrocallistes. Furthermore, the rockﬁsh 
showed a clear preference for epifanual 
cover as all rockﬁsh were associated with 
sponges rather than the small caves and 
crevices present at the base of many of 
the boulders.
Tyler and Bohlke (1972) listed 39 
species of ﬁsh in the Caribbean known 
to have some association with sponges, 
and categorized sponge-dwelling ﬁsh as 
either 1) morphologically specialized 
obligate sponge dwellers, 2) morpho­
logically unspecialized obligate sponge 
dwellers, 3) facultative sponge dwellers, 
or 4) fortuitous sponge dwellers. They 
stated that ﬁshes in category 1 were likely 
to spend their entire lives, with the pos­
sible exception of the larval stage, within 
the bodies of the sponges they inhabit. 
Fishes in category 2 may leave the host 
sponge to feed nocturnally. Facultative 
sponge dwellers (category 3) spend part 
of their lives on or in sponges, but have 
been observed in other types of habitat. 
Finally, fortuitous sponge dwellers (cat­
egory 4) comprised a variety of families, 
all of which are known to occupy a wide 
variety of habitat types. These families 
include gobies, clinids, pomocentrids, 
gobiescoids, apogonids (Tyler and 
Bohlke, 1972), a xenogongrid (Bohlke, 
1957), and two scorpaenids: Scorpae­
nodes tredecimspinosus (Eschmeyer, 
1969) and an unidentiﬁed scorpaenid 
species (Metzelaar, 1922). In addition 
to the aforementioned families, juvenile 
creole wrasse, Clepticus parrae, have 
been observed fortuitously associated 
with sponges in the Bahamas (Colin, 
1975).
The juvenile red rockﬁsh that were 
observed during this study probably can 
be classiﬁed in category 4, fortuitous 
sponge-dwellers. Personal observations 
made by the authors during other inves­
tigations (unpubl. observ.) in the GOA 
indicate that juvenile red rockﬁsh of the 
size encountered in 2001 can occupy 
a wide variety of habitat types, includ­
ing other species of sponge, gorgonian 
coral colonies, and interstices between 
cobbles and boulders. The fact that the 
juvenile rockﬁsh observed in this study 
were associated only with Aphrocallistes 
sponges can likely be attributed to the 
paucity of other available habitat types 
along the transect.
The lack of a clear relationship be­
tween sponge size and number of juvenile 
65(3) 
41
Figure 2. — Juvenile red rockﬁsh, Sebastes sp., associated with Aphrocallistes sp. sponge in the Gulf of Alaska. 
red rockﬁsh harbored was surprising, 
but can most likely be attributed to the 
fact that the ﬁsh preferred those sponges 
with many ﬁnger-like protuberances in 
which to seek cover. Sponges in general 
are highly polymorphic, and there was 
no clear relationship between sponge size 
and number of protuberances present on 
the body of the sponge. Likewise, the 
fact that only 4% of the rockﬁsh were 
associated with Rhabdocalyptus sponges 
can likely be attributed to the fact that 
this species is cylindrical in shape with 
a smooth texture, and affords minimal 
cover.
The locations of nursery grounds for 
many Sebastes spp. in the northeastern 
Paciﬁc are generally not well known. 
Based on the fact that juvenile rockﬁsh 
are lacking in offshore trawl catches 
but are often caught at nearshore trawl 
sites, Carlson and Haight (1976) hy­
pothesized that nearshore hard-bottom 
coastal areas and adjacent ﬁords serve 
as nursery grounds for Paciﬁc ocean 
perch, the most abundant rockﬁsh in 
Alaskan waters. Their hypothesis was 
supported by observations made from a 
submersible (Carlson and Straty, 1981), 
during which thousands of juvenile red 
rockﬁsh (6–8 cm length), believed by 
the authors to be Paciﬁc ocean perch, 
were observed over just such habitat. 
The observations made during our 
investigation suggest that juvenile 
red rockﬁsh may not exclusively use 
nearshore sites as nursery areas. The 
location at which we observed juvenile 
red rockﬁsh of a size similar to those 
observed by Carlson and Straty (1981) 
was about 50 km offshore in the GOA; 
furthermore, the substrate at our study 
site was mostly a sand and silt mixture 
rather than rocky.
In conclusion, our observations show 
that Aphrocallistes sponges provide 
habitat for juvenile red rockﬁsh. The 
association is fortuitous, in that many 
juvenile red rockﬁsh have been noted in 
a wide variety of other habitat types in 
the GOA (personal observ.), including 
other types of emergent epifauna, as 
well as in cover provided by nonliving 
substrates such as boulders and cobbles. 
The ﬁsh observed in this study probably 
beneﬁted from their association with the 
sponges through predator avoidance. 
The sponges provided most of the verti­
cal relief on the seaﬂoor at this site, with 
the exception of the boulders to which 
they were attached. Disruption of this 
type of sponge community by bottom 
trawling would be expected to have a 
negative impact on juvenile red rockﬁsh 
survival in areas where other types of 
cover are not available.
42 
Marine Fisheries Review
Literature Cited
Auster, P. J., and R. W. Langton. 1999. The 
effects of ﬁshing on ﬁsh habitat. In L. Benaka 
(Editor), Fish habitat: essential ﬁsh habitat 
and rehabilitation, p. 150–187. Am. Fish. Soc. 
Symp. 22.
Bohlke, J. E. 1957. The Bahaman species of 
emblemariid blennies. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. 
Phil. 109:25–57.
Carlson, R. H., and R. E. Haight. 1976. Juvenile 
life of Paciﬁc ocean perch, Sebastes alutus, in 
coastal ﬁords of southeastern Alaska: their envi­
ronment, growth, food habits, and schooling 
behavior. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 105:191–201.
________ and R. R. Straty. 1981. Habitat and 
nursery grounds of Paciﬁc rockﬁsh, Sebastes 
spp., in rocky coastal areas of southeastern 
Alaska. Mar. Fish. Rev. 43(7):13–19.
Colin, P. 1975. Neon gobies. TFH Publications, 
Neptune City, N.J., 304 p.
Collie, J. S., G. A. Escanero, and P. C. Valentine. 
1997. Effects of bottom ﬁshing on the benthic 
megafauna of Georges Bank. Mar. Ecol. Prog. 
Ser. 155:159–172.
Daniels, R. A. 1978. Nesting behavior of Harpa­
gifer bispinis in Arthur Harbor, Antarctic Pen­
insula. J. Fish. Biol. 12:465–474.
Dayton, P. K., G. A. Robillard, R. T. Paine, and L. 
B. Dayton. 1974. Biological accommodation 
in the benthic community at McMurdo Sound, 
Antarctica. Ecol. Monogr. 44:105–128.
Eastman, J. T., and R. R. Eakin. 1999. Fishes of 
the genus Artedidraco (Pisces, Artedidraconi­
dae) from the Ross Sea, Antarctica, with the 
description of a new species and color morph. 
Antarct. Sci. 11(1):13–22.
Eschmeyer, W. N. 1969. A systematic review 
of the scorpionﬁshes of the Atlantic Ocean 
(Pisces: Scorpaenidae). Occas. Pap. Cal. 
Acad. Sci. 76:1–143.
Freese, J. L. 2003. Trawl-induced damage to 
sponges observed from a research submers­
ible. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 63(3):7–13.
________ , P. J. Auster, J. Heifetz, and B. L. 
Wing. 1999. Effects of trawling on seaﬂoor 
habitat and associated invertebrate taxa in 
the Gulf of Alaska. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 
182:119–126.
Heifetz, J. 2002. Coral in Alaska: distribution, 
abundance, and species associations. Hydro­
biologia 471:19–28.
Konecki, J. T., and T. E. Targett. 1989. Eggs 
and larvae of Nototheniops larseni from the 
spongocoel of a hexactinellid sponge near 
Hugo Island, Antarctic Peninsula. Polar Biol. 
10:197–198.
Krieger, K. J. 2001. Coral (Primnoa) impacted by 
ﬁshing gear in the Gulf of Alaska. In J. H. M. 
Willison, J. Hall, S. E. Gass, E. L. R. Kench­
ington, M. Butler, and P. Doherty (Editors), 
Proceedings of the First International Sympo­
sium on Deep-Sea Corals, p. 106–116. Ecol. 
Action Cent. Nova Scotia Mus. Halifax, NS.
________ and B. L. Wing. 2002. Megafauna 
associations with deepwater corals (Primnoa 
spp.) in the Gulf of Alaska. Hydrobiologia 
471:83–90.
Malecha, P. W., R. P. Stone, and J. Heifetz. In 
press. Living substrate in Alaska: distribu­
tion, abundance and species associations. In 
P. Barnes and J. Thomas (Editors), Benthic 
Habitats and Effects of Fishing. American 
Fisheries Society, Bethesda, MD. 
Metzelaar, J. 1922. On a collection of marine 
ﬁshes from the Lesser Antilles, Bijdr. Dierkd. 
22:133–141.
Moran, M. J., and P. C. Stephenson. 2000. Effects 
of otter trawling on macrobenthos and man­
agement of demersal scaleﬁsh ﬁsheries on the 
continental shelf of north-western Australia. 
ICES J. Mar. Sci. 57:510–516.
Moreno, C. 1980. Observations on food and repro­
duction in Trematomus bernacchii (Pisces: 
Nototheniidae) from the Palmer Archipelago, 
Antarctica. Copeia 1980(1):171–173.
Munehara, H. 1991. Utilization and ecological 
beneﬁts of a sponge as a spawning bed by the 
little dragon sculpin Blepsias cirrhosus. Jpn. 
J. Ichthyol. 38(2):179–184.
Tokranov, A. M. 1998. Some features of the biol­
ogy of Thyriscus anoplus (Cottidae) in the 
Paciﬁc waters of northern Kuril Islands. J. 
Ichthyol. 38(3):677–679.
Tyler, J. C., and J. E. Bohlke. 1972. Records 
of sponge-dwelling ﬁshes, primarily of the 
Caribbean. Bull. Mar. Sci. 22(3):601–641.
USDOC. 1996. Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Con-
servation and Management Act as amended 
through October 11, 1996. U.S. Dep. Com-
mer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-F/SPO-23, 
121 p. 
Wassenberg, T .J., G. Dews, and D. Cook. 2002. 
The impact of ﬁsh trawls on megabenthos 
(sponges) on the north-west shelf of Australia. 
Fish. Res. 58:141–151.
Watling, L., and E. A. Norse. 1998. Disturbance 
of the seabed by mobile ﬁshing gear: a com­
parison to forest clear cutting. Conserv. Biol. 
12(6):1180–1197.
