EXPLANATION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES 
FIRST PIEDMONT CORP. ROCK QUARRY (ROUTE 719) 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Site Name: 
 
First Piedmont Corp. Rock Quarry (Route 719)  
 
Site Location:  
Pittsylvania County, Virginia 
 
Lead Agency:  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,  
 
 
 
Region III (“EPA” or “the Agency”) 
 
Support Agency:  
Virginia Department of Environmental Quality (“VADEQ”) 
 
A. 
Statement of Purpose 
 
A Record of Decision (“ROD”) for the First Piedmont Corp. Rock Quarry (Route 
719) Superfund Site (“Site”) was signed on June 28, 1991.  The ROD delineates the 
remedial action selected to address the following major components: Excavation and 
offsite disposal of the Carbon Black Pile, Waste Pile and the Northern Drainage soils and 
sediments; Construction of a Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) Subtitle 
C Cap on the landfill; Collection of leachate with treatment at a publicly owned treatment 
works (“POTW”); Washing and offsite disposal of surface debris; Ground water 
monitoring; and Institutional controls.  
 
Excavation of the Carbon Black Pile began on September 8, 1994. Excavation and 
off-site disposal of an estimated 1,260 cubic yards of Carbon Black Pile soil was 
completed on October 4, 1994.  In the first five-year review, which was completed on 
September 30, 1999, and the second five-year review, which was completed on February 
3, 2005, EPA determined that the remedy was not protective because sediments in the 
Southern Drainage area and portions of the Lawless Creek were found to have significant 
levels of zinc, and institutional controls to restrict land use had not been implemented. As 
part of the five-year reviews, EPA required the Potentially Responsible Parties (“PRPs”) 
to perform an additional investigation in order to find the source and to delineate the 
nature and extent of zinc contamination in sediment of the Southern Drainage and 
Lawless Creek areas of the Site.  At this time, based on the results of this investigation, 
additional excavation of the Carbon Black is required in order to address zinc 
contamination in the Southern Drainage and the Lawless Creek areas to protect the 
environment.  
 
 
This Explanation of Significant Differences (“ESD”) has been prepared in order 
to document the basis for a modification to the excavation and off-site disposal of the 
Carbon Black component of the selected remedy set forth in the ROD, to summarize the 
information that supports this modification, and to affirm that the revised remedy 
complies with the statutory requirements of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, 
Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C 9617(c), as amended (CERCLA).  
 
1
The modification described herein is “significant” as defined by 40 C.F.R.  
300.435(c)(2)(i) of the National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency 
Plan (NCP), and, therefore, requires the preparation of this ESD.  This modification to the 
selected remedy does not fundamentally alter the basic features of the selected remedy 
with respect to scope or cost, but modifies the cleanup standards for zinc soil 
concentrations.  Therefore, a ROD amendment is not required in this matter.  This ESD is 
issued in accordance with Section 117(c) of CERCLA.  This ESD is incorporated into the 
Administrative Record for the Site.  
 
 
II. 
SUMMARY OF THE SITE HISTORY, SITE CONDITIONS, AND 
SELECTED REMEDY 
 
 
The First Piedmont Corp. Rock Quarry Superfund Site is located along Route 719 
in Pittsylvania County, Virginia near the intersection with Route 360. It is approximately 
six miles north of the city of Danville (see Figure 1).   
 
 
The Site is an abandoned rock quarry located on a topographically high ridge.  
The quarrying operation left a cut into the rock outcrop bounded on three sides by the 
quarry high walls.  The fourth side of the cut is open and slopes to the west.  
 
 
Drainage from the area is to Lawless Creek, which lies approximately 1,400 feet 
to the northwest of the quarry. Lawless Creek is a tributary of Fall Creek, which is a 
tributary of the Dan River.  
 
 
The Site was initially operated as a quarry for crushed stone.  The four-acre 
property which comprises the Site consists of the abandoned quarry and the adjacent 
land.  The Site was leased by the First Piedmont Corporation to be used as a landfill for 
industrial and agricultural waste from April 1, 1970 to April 1, 1975.  Wastes were 
disposed of in the landfill from April, 1970 to July 1972, at which point the Virginia 
Department of Health ordered waste disposal operations to cease due to fire on the 
landfill.  
 
 
At the Site, the landfill operations were historically restricted, almost exclusively, 
to the two-acre quarry area.  The quarry was not filled in a systematic fashion; no cells or 
segregated disposal areas were used for specific wastes.  Hundreds of drums were buried 
in the landfill in random fashion with other solid waste.  Upon arrival at the Site, wastes 
were generally dumped at the high wall along the eastern edge of the landfill, where the 
quarry is approximately 35 feet deep, and had been pushed down with a bulldozer.  
Subsequent investigation by EPA indicated that wastes were not covered at the end of 
each day.   
 
 
The landfill contained approximately 65,000 cubic yards of industrial and 
agricultural waste and approximately 3,000 cubic yards of soil used as a core when 
landfilling operations were stopped.  The industrial wastes were generated by the 
Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company (“Goodyear”) and Corning Glass Works 
 
2
(“Corning”); the agricultural wastes were generated by Southern Processors, Inc 
(“Southern Processors”).  The wastes from Goodyear consisted of tires, general plant 
refuse, scrap rubber, rubber buildup and approximately 15,000 gallons of a mixture of 
residual MS-20 (a floor degreaser), water, carbon black (a reinforcement additive used in 
tire manufacturing that is comprised almost entirely of carbon) and detergent.  The MS-
20 contained ten percent by volume of tetrachloroethylene, which is a listed hazardous 
waste under the RCRA.  The wastes from Corning consisted of paper, glass, cardboard 
and off-specification batch materials which contained trace amounts of lead oxide.  The 
wastes from Southern Processors, a tobacco processing company, consisted of soil 
removed from tobacco leaves, tobacco scrap, paper and wood. 
 
 
Separate and apart from the landfill are two other areas of waste disposal on the 
Site associated with the landfilling operation.  These two areas are denoted as the 
“Carbon Black Pile” and the “Waste Pile” (See Figure 1).  The Carbon Black Pile 
consisted of approximately 100 cubic yards of carbon black and contaminated soils.  Zinc 
oxide bags were reportedly observed in the pile during the construction of access roads 
for the Remedial Investigation.  The Carbon Black Pile is approximately 150 feet from 
the most western edge of the landfill.  The Waste Pile contains approximately 10 cubic 
yards of waste material consisting of steel and nylon cords, some glass, waste rubber 
strips and contaminated soils.  The Waste Pile is located about 75 feet from the western 
edge of the landfill. 
 
 
Another disposal area not associated with the landfilling operations is located 
about 100 feet southwest of the Carbon Black Pile.  This area, denoted as the “Old 
Disposal Area”, in Figure 1, contains miscellaneous refuse including bottles, cans and 
metal debris.  Based on visual observation of this material, disposal in this area was 
estimated to have occurred 20 to 30 years prior to the landfilling operation and, as such, 
was not within the scope of the Record of Decision.  
 
 
In a letter dated June 1, 1981, the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company notified 
the First Piedmont Corporation that some of the wastes deposited at the First Piedmont 
Rock Quarry Landfill were hazardous.  The First Piedmont Corporation filed a 
“Notification of Hazardous Waste Site” form with EPA on June 5, 1981 listing solvents 
as one of the wastes disposed of at the landfill.  The EPA Field Investigation Team 
subcontractor sampled the media in the landfill vicinity in July, 1983 to provide data in 
order for EPA to determine whether the landfill should be proposed for listing on the 
National Priorities List (NPL).  Based on the results of this sampling, a Hazard Ranking 
Score (HRS) of 37.85 was calculated in 1985 for the Site.  Based on comments received 
by EPA, the HRS was rescored to 30.16.  The Site was listed on the NPL on July 21, 
1987, pursuant to Section 105 of CERCLA, 42 U. S. C. § 9605. 
 
 
EPA sent Special Notice Letters on May 6, 1986 to initiate negotiations with 
PRPs, First Piedmont, Corning, and Goodyear to perform a Remedial Investigation 
/Feasibility Study (RI/FS) for the Site.  On December 31, 1987, EPA signed an 
Administrative Order on Consent with the PRPs to undertake performance of the RI/FS 
for the Site, which included sampling in various areas of interest of the Site.  
 
3
 
 
Evidence indicated that ground water that flowed through the wastes in the 
landfill surfaced as leachate along the western edge of the quarry.  This leachate 
discharged to the north pond and eventually into the Northern Drainage, as identified in 
Figure 1.  Sampling indicated that contamination from the landfill contents migrated to 
the north pond and Northern Drainage via the transport and deposition of sediments in the 
leachate.  The highest concentrations of contaminants detected in the Northern Drainage 
were in the samples closest to the quarry and levels decreased with distance from the 
quarry area.  The contaminants of concern found in the leachate were arsenic, lead, 
antimony, and barium.  
 
 
Surface water samples were collected from the south pond, north pond, Southern 
Drainage, Northern Drainage, and Lawless Creek.  Sampling data from the south pond 
indicated that water there was not adversely affected by landfill contamination.  A very 
low level of 20 micrograms/liters (ug/l) of zinc was the only significant heavy metal 
contaminant detected in the south pond. The zinc concentration detected was below the 
background level for surface water zinc concentrations.  
 
 In the north pond, concentrations of arsenic, barium, cadmium, lead, and zinc 
were detected in concentrations of 58 ug/l, 8420 ug/l, 21 ug/l, and 219 ug/l, respectively, 
which were slightly above the Site background levels  
 
 
Leachate that had accumulated in the north pond ultimately flowed into the 
Northern Drainage area.  The area identified as the upper portion of the Northern 
Drainage in Figure 1 was closest in proximity to the landfill.  In this upper portion of the 
Northern Drainage arsenic, barium, iron, lead, manganese, and zinc were detected at 
concentrations of 13.7 ug/l, 5600 ug/l, 59,000 ug/l, 4.1 ug/l, 1540 ug/l, and 48.1 ug/l 
respectively, which were above background levels.  The concentrations of these 
contaminants significantly decreased downstream from the landfill.  In fact, where the 
Northern Drainage meets the Lawless Creek flood plain, only very low levels of barium, 
lead, and zinc (109 ug/l, 2.4 ug/l, and 32.8 ug/l respectively) were detected which were 
below background concentrations.   
 
 
Zinc and cadmium were detected in the Southern Drainage at the maximum level 
of 111,000 ug/L and 18.2 ug/L, respectively. The source of these high levels of zinc and 
cadmium likely is the Carbon Black Pile for a number of reasons: 1) the Carbon Black 
Pile was located up-gradient of the Southern Drainage; 2) based on sampling results,  
concentrations of zinc were higher down-gradient of the pile than up-gradient of the 
Carbon Black Pile; 3) it was reported that empty zinc oxide bags were sighted in the 
vicinity of the Carbon Black Pile during the construction of access roads during the RI.  
Therefore, infiltration of precipitation and surface water into the Carbon Black Pile is 
likely to have mobilized zinc from the pile in high concentrations.  The zinc 
contaminated water is likely to have migrated down-gradient through the shallow 
subsurface soil (and possibly rock fractures) and appears to have discharged into the 
surface water in the Southern Drainage.  Samples were collected from three locations in 
Lawless Creek (one was background) and two non-background samples.  At one non-
 
4
background sampling location, barium, iron, manganese, and zinc were detected at 
concentrations of 20.5 ug/l, 647 ug/l, 79 ug/l, and 26.5 ug/l, respectively, all of which are 
above the background concentrations.  At the other non-background sampling location, 
iron, manganese, and zinc were detected at concentrations of 604 ug/l, 57.7 ug/l, and 16.3 
ug/l, respectively, which were above background concentrations.  
 
 
 
At the landfill portion of the Site, soil samples had concentrations of arsenic, 
barium, cadmium, chromium, lead, nickel, vanadium, and zinc exceeding Site 
background levels. Barium, lead, and zinc were found in the highest concentrations.  
 
 
The Waste Pile soil samples generally showed concentrations of arsenic, barium, 
cadmium, lead, and zinc at levels exceeding background, with barium, lead, and zinc 
found in highest relative concentrations.  The concentrations range from twice the 
background level for arsenic to ten times the background concentration for lead.  
 
 
The Carbon Black Pile soil samples had concentrations of arsenic, barium, 
cadmium, lead, and zinc exceeding background levels.  Lead concentrations were about 
twice the background level while zinc was detected at concentrations ten times the 
background level.   
 
 
Shallow and deep ground water at the Site flows to the west, toward Lawless 
Creek.  Zinc was detected in three monitoring wells at concentrations of 504 ug/l, 2050 
ug/l, and 213 ug/l, which exceeded the background level of 61.3 ug/l.  One monitoring 
well had lead concentrations of 28.8 ug/l, which exceeded background and the proposed 
action level of 15 ug/l.   
 
 
EPA sampled the residential water sources of ten homes in the Beaver Park 
community near the Site.  Only two of the ten residential wells sampled had levels above 
drinking water standards.  One well had a detection of 466 ug/l of iron, which exceeded  
the Secondary Drinking Water criterion of iron of 300 ug/l.  The other well had a 
detection of 333 ug/l iron and 65.1 ug/l of manganese, which exceeded the Secondary 
Drinking Water criteria for iron and manganese of 300 ug/l and 50 ug/l, respectively.  
Because none of the major Site contaminants were detected in the residential water, these 
results indicated that the Site contamination had not affected any residential wells in the 
Site vicinity.   
 
 
Solid samples were collected from the contents of two of the drums on the surface 
of the landfill.  Concentrations of chromium, copper, and lead and higher concentrations 
of cadmium and zinc were detected in one drum, which were below background.  Below 
background concentrations of cadmium, chromium, lead, nickel, selenium and vanadium 
and above background concentrations of copper and zinc were detected in the other drum 
sampled.  
 
 
The Proposed Remedial Action Plan (“PRAP”) for the Site was released to the 
public in April, 1991.  The remedy selected for the Site addressed all of the contaminated 
media at the Site and consisted primarily of excavation and off-Site disposal of the non-
 
5
landfill wastes, off-Site disposal of the surface drums and debris, installation of a RCRA 
Subtitle C cap over the Landfill, collection and treatment of leachate, ground water 
monitoring, and land use restriction.  By implementing all of these components, the Site 
risks (exposure to leachate, source material, and quarry soil) would be reduced to within  
EPA’s acceptable risk range.  EPA issued a Record of Decision (“ROD”) for the Site on 
June 28, 1991.  The Commonwealth of Virginia concurred with the selected remedy.   
 
III. 
DESCRIPTION OF SIGNIFICANT DIFFERENCES AND THE BASES 
FOR THOSRE DIFFERENCES 
 
A. 
Description of the Modification 
 
 
The following is a summary of the activities conducted at the Site pursuant to the 
June 28, 1991 ROD.  
 
• Carbon Black Excavation.  Carbon Black excavation began on September 8, 
1994. Excavation and off-Site disposal of an estimated 1,260 cubic yards of 
Carbon Black Pile soil was completed on October 4, 1994. 
• Waste Pile. Soil and debris were removed from the waste pile on September 12, 
1994.  The volume of material that was removed and disposed of as a special 
waste was 95 cubic yards.  
• Drum and Debris Removal.  Removal of drums and debris from the surface of the 
landfill began on September 21, 1994.  A total of 96 drums and 100 cubic yards of 
tires and debris were removed from the Site.  The drum and debris removal 
operation was completed on October 5, 1994. 
• Gas Venting Layer.  Placement of the gas venting layer on the landfill portion of 
the Site began on October 26, 1994.  Three gas vents were installed to release any  
methane build up.  Placement and grading of this layer was completed on 
November 9, 1994.  
• Installation of Landfill Cap.   Placement of a Geosynthetic Clay Liner (“GCL”) 
began on November 26, 1994.  Panels were laid out so that the length of the panel 
was parallel to the slope of the gas venting layer. The liner placement was 
completed on January 9, 1995.  
• Leachate Collection System.  Construction of a leachate collection system began 
on October 17, 1995 and it took approximately two weeks to complete. The 
leachate collection system collects leachate in a collection trench excavated below 
the top of bedrock at the western edge of the landfill.  The leachate in the trench 
collects in a 4 inch slotted polyvinyl chloride (“PVC”) pipe, which is surrounded 
by fill material, and flows into the leachate collection sump at the southern end of 
the trench.  Leachate is then pumped from the leachate collection sump to primary 
and secondary 20,000 gallon storage tanks. The leachate is sampled quarterly and 
disposed of at Danville’s publicly owned treatment works (“POTWs”).   
• Wetland Monitoring.  The remedial action included the planting of vegetation and 
berry-producing shrubs in the disturbed portion of the Northern Drainage Area.  
The Operation and Maintenance plan calls for an annual “walk through” 
inspection by a qualified biologist for the first five years following the completion 
 
6
of the 1994-1995 remedial work.  The biologist checked the Northern Drainage 
Area for evidence of plant and vegetation succession.   The plants were growing 
and becoming established as designed.   
• Ground Water Monitoring.  Ground water monitoring is conducted at existing 
wells up-gradient and down-gradient of the landfill.  Ground water monitoring is 
to be conducted as long as leachate is collected at the Site, or for 30 years, 
whichever is longer.  Ground water monitoring results from 1995 through 2004 
indicated that zinc contamination decreased significantly after the Carbon Black 
Pile was removed.  However, one monitoring well, which is located 
approximately one hundred feet north of the Southern Drainage channel, had an 
average zinc concentration of 97 ug/l over a nine year period.  This is above the 
background level of 61.3 ug/l. 
• Site Use Restrictions.  Appropriate Site use restrictions will be placed for future 
use scenarios to ensure protection of public health and the environment.  EPA is 
in the process of implementing Site use restrictions.   
• Preliminary Site Close Out Report.  On September 27, 1995, EPA signed the 
Preliminary Site Close Out Report, which documented that the PRPs had 
completed construction activities at the Site.  
 
In the first five-year review (September 30, 1999), EPA determined that the remedy 
was not protective, because sediments in the southern drainage and portions of the 
Lawless Creek were found to have significant levels of metals, and institutional controls 
to restrict land use had not been implemented.  As a part of the first five-year review, 
EPA required the PRPs to perform additional investigations to further delineate the nature 
and extent of metal contamination in sediment of the Southern Drainage and Lawless 
Creek areas. 
 
 
In December 2001, the PRPs submitted a report to EPA entitled “Additional 
Investigation Report First Piedmont Rock Quarry/Route 719 Site, Pittsylvania County, 
Virginia” (or “Additional Investigation Report”).  The purpose of the Additional 
Investigation Report was to further delineate the nature and extent of metal contamination 
in sediment of the Southern Drainage and Lawless Creek from past deposits and to 
investigate any potential secondary sources of metals to the Southern Drainage.  
Sediment samples were collected from a total of eighteen sampling stations in July 2001.  
Ten stations were analyzed for sediment toxicity, total metals, total organic carbon, and 
sediment size.  Of these ten stations, four were located in the Southern Drainage, one was 
located at the confluence of the floodplain and Lawless Creek, one was located in the 
network of drainage channels within the Lawless Creek floodplain, and four were located 
in Lawless Creek waterbody.  Samples from the remaining eight stations were analyzed 
for total zinc only to identify contaminant migration pathways and potential sources of 
zinc.  Three of the zinc only stations were located within the Southern Drainage channel 
and five were located in the Lawless Creek floodplain.  
 
 
Results of the chemical analyses and toxicity tests conducted on the sediments 
collected from the Southern Drainage, Lawless Creek floodplain, and Lawless Creek 
indicated that zinc is the primary contaminant of concern.  Toxicity tests using sediment 
 
7
collected from deposits located down-gradient of the Site were performed on two 
commonly found sediment dwelling test species to determine the zinc concentration that 
was toxic to those organisms.  The toxicity test results generated a lowest observable 
effects concentration (“LOEC”) of 124 mg/kg indicating that zinc concentrations below 
this level are likely to have minimal or acceptable impacts on aquatic receptors.  Thus, 
locations where sediment zinc concentrations exceed the LOEC (124 mg/kg) are 
expected to have significant ecological impacts.  Based on the results of samples 
collected, sediment in the  Southern Drainage and Lawless Creek floodplain exceed the 
LOEC.   
 
 
The data indicated that zinc has migrated along the lower portion of the Southern 
Drainage and to a lesser extent to the drainage channels within the Lawless Creek flood 
plain.  Sediment toxicity tests conducted previously indicate that zinc concentrations 
which have accumulated in Lawless Creek to date are harmful to aquatic receptors.  It is 
likely that at times of high flow zinc contaminated sediments would migrate from the 
Southern Drainage to Lawless Creek.  
 
 
The Additional Investigation Report concluded that the former Carbon Black Pile, 
which was removed in 1994, might be the historical source of the zinc contamination.  It 
also concluded that a waste pile (“waste pile 2”) that is not related to current or past site 
operations is a potential source of zinc.  This waste pile is located adjacent to Route 719 
and up-gradient of one of the sampling stations in the Southern Drainage as identified in 
Figure 1.  After reviewing the report, EPA concluded that the area had not been 
sufficiently characterized and more work needed to be done to delineate the source of 
zinc contamination with greater accuracy. 
 
 
In December 2003, the PRPs submitted a report to EPA entitled “Zinc Source 
Investigation Report First Piedmont Rock Quarry/Route 719 Site, Pittsylvania County, 
Virginia” (or “Zinc Source Investigation Report”).  This investigation was performed to 
determine the source or sources of zinc.  Soil and sediment samples were collected on 
September 9, 2003 from eighteen sampling stations, including thirteen soil stations and 
five sediment stations.  All samples were analyzed for total zinc.  The investigation 
results indicated that the soil zinc concentrations for the samples collected down-gradient 
of the former waste pile were 23.9 mg/kg and 36.8 mg/kg.  These concentrations were 
similar to background, indicating that surface soils down-gradient of the former waste 
pile are not a source of zinc to the Southern Drainage area.   
 
 
The soil zinc concentrations of samples collected down-gradient of the former 
Carbon Black and the Old Disposal Area ranged from 41.1 to 533 mg/kg.  All of these 
values were higher than the Site background concentration (23.8 mg/kg).  The 
investigation concluded that zinc oxide disposed of at the Carbon Black Pile is the 
primary source of zinc in surface soils down-gradient of the Carbon Black Pile.  
 
 
Sediment samples were collected from five stations in the Southern Drainage area 
during the September 2003 sampling event.  Four of these sample stations were also 
sample stations that had been sampled in July.  The sediment zinc concentration for the 
 
8
sampling stations ranged from 18 mg/kg to 772 mg/kg.  EPA and the PRPs met to discuss 
the report on July 29, 2004, and agreed that more work needed to be done to characterize 
this portion of the Site. 
 
 
On August 12, 2004, EPA, VDEQ and the PRPs inspected the Site to identify  
additional areas that needed to be investigated.  The second Five-Year Review was 
completed by EPA in February 2005.  In response to EPA’s concern regarding potential 
zinc impacts to the Southern Drainage and the floodplains associated with Lawless 
Creek, as outlined in the Second Five-Year Review, the PRPs prepared a Work Plan to 
delineate the nature and extent of the zinc impacts on these areas.  EPA approved the 
Work Plan on March 2005.  
 
 
During a meeting with EPA on September 19, 2006, the PRPs proposed to 
excavate residual carbon black that had been left in place after the initial excavation of 
the former Carbon Black Pile area was completed.  These excavation activities were 
proposed for residual carbon black material identified in borings taken from the former 
Carbon Black Pile area during the August and September 2005 field investigation. At the 
September 19, 2006 meeting, EPA expressed concerns about the potential risk to 
ecological receptors (plants and soil invertebrates) posed by residual zinc concentrations 
identified in the soils.   
 
 
The excavation of residual zinc from the former Carbon Black Pile area will be a 
continuation of the excavation of 1,260 cubic yards of Carbon Black Pile soil that began 
on September 8, 1994 and was completed on October 4, 1994.  Soils with zinc 
concentrations in excess of 200.2 mg/kg will be excavated.  Excavation will be 
performed followed with confirmation sampling to verify that the zinc soil concentrations 
of 200.2 mg/kg are met. Excavated material will be disposed of in a waste disposal 
facility designed and permitted to accept soil with moderate zinc concentrations.  
Following completion of the removal activities, the excavated area will be backfilled with 
clean soil, graded, and seeded.  The area where the excavation will occur covers an 
estimated 0.6 acres, and approximately 2,000 cubic yards of soil will be excavated. The 
cost of the removal action, including engineering design costs, construction, construction 
quality assurance, and planting is estimated to be $93,000.   
 
 
B. 
Analysis of Modification 
 
Residual zinc in soil that remained in place after the Carbon Black Pile was 
excavated will be excavated.  The ROD did not call for soil cleanup standards for zinc.  
During the excavation of the Carbon Black Pile, excavation ended when no more carbon 
black was visible. EPA decided that soil cleanup standards for zinc in the soil would have 
to be established as a part of the new proposed removal action. The PRPs performed a 
statistical analysis of “No Observable Effect Concentrations” (NOEC) published data for 
plants and invertebrate organisms.  Based on their analysis, the PRPs proposed that the 
cleanup standard for zinc in soils be 292.5 mg/kg. Their analysis suggest that it is 
 
9
unlikely that more than 5% of the soil invertebrate and plant population will be adversely 
affected by zinc concentrations of 292.5 mg/kg or less.   
 
 
EPA found a number of flaws with the methodology that the PRPs used to 
calculate the 292.5 mg/kg or less cleanup standard.  The primary concerns were:  First,  
Values for plants and invertebrates were combined into a single analysis, resulting in a 
value that is less protective of the more sensitive receptor (plants).  Second, studies with 
different soil types, pH, and organic carbon were all used to calculate the cleanup 
standard for zinc in soil.  It would have been more appropriate to only use those studies 
that had similar soil types, pH, and organic carbon content. And third, lowest observable 
effect concentration (LOEC) data were based primarily on mortality endpoints.  LOECs 
based on sublethal endpoints are likely to be lower. 
 
The PRPs proposed remedial cleanup standard of 292.5 mg/kg zinc, which is the 
upper 95% confidence level of the no observable effect concentration (NOEC).  EPA did 
not support the selection of this value; among other reasons, because the lower 
confidence limit for the LOEC (200.2 mg/kg) is less than the upper 95% confidence limit 
of the NOEC.  EPA has selected 200.2 mg/kg or less of zinc in soil as the cleanup 
standard.   
 
 
The applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements (ARARs) identified in 
the ROD will apply to the additional removal of zinc contaminated soil from the former 
Carbon Black Pile area.  No additional ARARs will be required.  
 
IV. 
PUBLIC PARTICIPATION 
 
 
This ESD and the information upon which it is based have been included in the 
Administrative Record File for the Site.  The Administrative Record also includes the 
ROD and all documents that formed the basis for EPA’s selection of the cleanup 
remedy for the removal of zinc in soil at the Site.  The Administrative Record is 
available for public review at the locations listed below: 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. EPA, Region III 
         
 
 
1650 Arch Street 
 
 
 
 
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2029 
 
                                                Pittsylvania County Public Library 
                                                24 Military Drive 
 
 
 
 
Chatham, Virginia 24531 
 
 
Questions or comments on EPA’s action and requests to review the 
Administrative Record can be directed to:  
 
 
 
 
 
Ronnie M. Davis 
 
 
 
 
Remedial Project Manager 
 
10
 
 
 
 
U.S. EPA, Region III 
 
 
 
 
1650 Arch Street (3HS23) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2029 
 
 
 
 
(215) 814-3230 
 
 
The Agency encourages the submission of written comments concerning this ESD 
between May 31, 2007 and June 30, 2007. Based upon review of these comments and the 
level of community interest, EPA and VADEQ will determine if a public meeting 
concerning this matter is warranted.  
 
 
SUPPORT AGENCY REVIEW 
 
 
In accordance with 40 C.F. R § 300.435 (c)(2), EPA has notified the VADEQ of 
the modification to the soil removal component of the selected remedy described in this 
ESD.   
 
VI. 
AFFIRMATION OF STATUTORY DETERMINATION 
 
 
Based upon the Agency’s review of new information concerning the removal of 
zinc contaminated soil that was submitted by the PRPs at this Site, and the selection of 
the cleanup standards for zinc contaminated soil at the Site, EPA believes that the 
modified remedy is protective of human health and the environment, complies with 
Federal and State requirements that are applicable or relevant and appropriate to this 
remedial action, and is cost-effective.  In addition, the revised remedy utilizes permanent 
solutions to the maximum extent practicable at this Site.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
___Signature on file_______         
 
 
   ___May 30, 2007______ 
James J. Burke, Director                                                  Date 
Hazardous Site Cleanup Division  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
