 
CONTENTS 
Purpose of and Need for Action 
Purpose of the General Management Plan   1 
Need for the General Management Plan   3 
Park History and Use Relative to Management Planning   4 
Geographic Area Covered by the General Management Plan   9 
Planning Direction or Guidance   10 
Park Mission   10 
Mission Goals   14 
Special Mandates and Administrative Commitments   15 
Servicewide Mandates and Policies   15 
Planning Opportunities and Issues   28 
Decision Points   28 
Alternatives or Actions Eliminated from Further Study   31 
Impact Topics - Resources and Values at Stake in the Planning Process   36 
Impact Topics Dismissed from Further Consideration   40 
Connected, Cumulative, and Similar Actions   41 
Alternatives 
Potential Management Prescriptions   45 
Forest Zone   46 
Cultural Resource Zone   50 
Valley Floor Automobile Access Zone   51 
Valley Floor Controlled Automobile Access Zone   52 
Valley Floor Nonmotorized Recreation Zone   52 
Valley Floor Mid-Weekday Recreation Zone   53 
Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway Zone   53 
Park Road Zone   54 
Visitor Facility Zone   55 
Urban Recreation Zone   56 
Administration/Operations Zone   57 
Urban Transit Zone (Non-NPS Roads)   57 
Formulation of Alternatives   59 
Public Input and the Development of Alternatives   59 
Mitigation   61 
The Preferred Alternative   61 
The Environmentally Preferred Alternative   64 
Alternative A: Improved Management Of Established Park Uses   66 
Concept   66 
Management Prescriptions   69 
Costs   76 
Alternative B: Continue Current Management/No Action   80 
Concept   80 
Management Prescriptions   80 
 
ix 
CONTENTS (Continued) 
 
Costs   85 
Alternative C: Nonmotorized Recreation Emphasis   86 
Concept   86 
Management Prescriptions   89 
Costs   94 
Alternative D: Mid-Weekday Recreation Enhancement   95 
Concept   95 
Management Prescriptions   99 
Costs   103 
Summary of Alternatives   105 
Affected Environment 
Natural Resources   117 
Air Quality   117 
Rock Creek and Its Tributaries   119 
Wetlands and Floodplains   124 
Deciduous Forests   126 
Protected and Rare Species   128 
Other Native Wildlife   129 
Cultural Resources   136 
Archeological Resources   136 
Historic Resources and Cultural Landscapes   137 
Visitor and Community Values   141 
Traditional Park Character and Visitor Experience   141 
Regional and Local Transportation   144 
Community Characteristics   154 
Environmental Consequences 
Environmental Impacts of Alternative A: Improved Management of Established Park Uses   161 
Impacts on Air Quality   161 
Impacts on Rock Creek and Its Tributaries   167 
Impacts on Wetlands and Floodplains   172 
Impacts on Deciduous Forests   174 
Impacts on Protected and Rare Species   178 
Impacts on Other Native Wildlife   180 
Impacts on Archeological Resources   184 
Impacts on Historic Structures and Cultural Landscapes   186 
Impacts on Traditional Park Character and Visitor Experience   188 
Impacts on Regional and Local Transportation   196 
Impacts on Community Character   211 
Sustainability and Long-Term Management   214 
x 
 
 
CONTENTS (Continued) 
Environmental Impacts of Alternative B: Continue Current Management/No Action   216 
Impacts on Air Quality   216 
Impacts on Rock Creek and Its Tributaries   217 
Impacts on Wetlands and Floodplains   218 
 
Impacts on Deciduous Forests   218 
Impacts on Protected and Rare Species   219 
Impacts on Other Native Wildlife   220 
Impacts on Archeological Resources   221 
Impacts on Historic Structures and Cultural Landscapes   222 
Impacts on Traditional Park Character and Visitor Experience   222 
Impacts on Regional and Local Transportation   224 
Impacts on Community Character   227 
Sustainability and Long-Term Management   228 
Environmental Impacts of Alternative C: Nonmotorized Recreation EMphasis   229 
Impacts on Rock Creek and Its Tributaries   230 
Impacts on Wetlands and Floodplains   230 
Impacts on Deciduous Forests   230 
Impacts on Protected and Rare Species   230 
Impacts on Other Native Wildlife   230 
Impacts on Archeological Resources   231 
Impacts on Historic Structures and Cultural Landscapes   231 
Impacts on Traditional Park Character and Visitor Experience   231 
Impacts on Regional and Local Transportation   238 
Impacts on Community Character   251 
Sustainability and Long-Term Management   255 
Environmental Impacts of Alternative D: Mid-Weekday Recreation Enhancement   256 
Impacts on Air Quality   256 
Impacts on Rock Creek and Its Tributaries   257 
Impacts on Wetlands and Floodplains   257 
Impacts on Deciduous Forests   257 
Impacts on Protected and Rare Species   257 
Impacts on Other Native Wildlife   257 
Impacts on Archeological Resources   258 
Impacts on Historic Structures and Cultural Landscapes   258 
Impacts on Traditional Park Character and Visitor Experience   258 
Impacts on Regional and Local Transportation   262 
Impacts on Community Character   266 
Sustainability and Long-Term Management   266 
 
xi 
CONTENTS (Continued) 
Consultation and Coordination 
History of Public Involvement   269 
List of Preparers   271 
List of Recipients   272 
Bibliography, Index, and Appendices 
Bibliograph   291 
Index of Key Words   298 
Appendix A: Legislation   309 
Appendix B: Laws and Executive Orders   313 
National Park Service Enabling Legislation   313 
Other Laws Affecting NPS Operations   313 
Appendix C: Relationship of the general management plan to Other Planning Efforts   316 
Other NPS Planning Efforts   316 
Non-NPS Planning Efforts   318 
Appendix D: Letter from the Mayor of Washington, D.C. Requesting Another Alternative   321 
Appendix E: Federal and State-Listed special-concern Species   323 
Appendix F: National Register of Historic Places Properties   335 
Appendix G: Comparison of Impacts of alternatives on Traffic, Based on Modeling   336 
Appendix H: Summary of Traffic Modeling Methodology   341 
Introduction   341 
MWCOG Regional Transportation Model   341 
Modifications Made to MWCOG Model to Create the Rock Creek Park Model   342 
Rock Creek Park Traffic Model   343 
Traffic Model Validation   346 
 
LIST OF TABLES 
1:  Criteria Used to Establish Each Impact Topic   37 
2:  Summary of Management Prescriptions   47 
3:  Advantages of the Action Alternatives   63 
4:  Management Prescription Zoning under Each Alternative   69 
5:  Estimated Costs of Implementing the Alternatives    78 
6:  Summary of Key Differences among the Alternatives   107 
7:  Summary of Impacts of the Alternatives   110 
8:  Rock Creek Water Quality, 1959 to 1990    124 
9:  Recorded Roadkills in and adjacent to Rock Creek Park and the Rock Creek and Potomac 
Parkway, 1991 through 2000   132 
10:  Roadkills Recorded on Beach Drive in 2000   132 
11:  Roadkills Recorded on the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway in 2000   133 
12:  Locations of Recorded Roadkills for Four Species, 1991 through 2000   134 
13:  Average Annual Visitation at Rock Creek Park, 1991 to 1997   142 
xii 
 
 
CONTENTS (Continued) 
 
14:  Summary of Traffic Accidents in Rock Creek Park and the Rock Creek and Potomac 
Parkway, 1993 Through 1995   149 
15:  Accident Rates for the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway, Beach Drive, and Washington, 
D.C.   152 
16:  General Characteristics of the Populations of Washington, D.C. Wards 1 Through 4    156 
17:  General Characteristics of the Populations of Maryland Communities near Rock Creek Park    
157 
18:  Air Quality Impact Evaluation Based on Estimated 3-Hour Average Carbon Monoxide (CO) 
Concentrations   166 
19:  Beach Drive and Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway Segments Experiencing Noticeable or 
Greater Changes in Traffic Levels of Service between Alternative A and Alternative B   
190 
20:  Level-of-Service Characteristics of Urban and Suburban Arterials    198 
21:  Average Daily Traffic under Alternative A Compared to Average Daily Traffic under 
Alternative B in the Year 2020   206 
22:  Other Road Segments Experiencing Noticeable or Greater Changes in Traffic Levels 
between Alternative A and Alternative B   209 
23:  Wards Experiencing Noticeable or Greater Changes in Community Characteristics 
Associated with Traffic between Alternative A and Alternative B   213 
24:  Beach Drive and Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway Segments Experiencing Noticeable or 
Greater Changes in Traffic Levels of Service between Alternative C and Alternative B   
233 
25:  Average Daily Traffic under Alternative C Compared to Average Daily Traffic under 
Alternative B in the Year 2020   238 
26:  Other Road Segments Experiencing Noticeable or Greater Changes in Traffic Levels 
between Alternative C and Alternative B   243 
27:  Wards Experiencing Noticeable or Greater Changes in Community Characteristics 
Associated with Traffic between Alternative C and Alternative B   252 
28:  Maximum Hourly Volume of Traffic That Would Be Diverted by Alternative D Road 
Closures by Road Segment in the Year 2020   263 
29:  Traffic Impact Summary for Alternative D in the Year 2020   264 
E.1:  Federally Listed Species in Rock Creek Park   329 
E.2:  Rare Plants in Rock Creek Park   329 
E.3:  State-Listed Species in Arlington County, Virginia   331 
E.4:  State-Listed Animal Species in Maryland   332 
F.1:  Resources That Contribute to the Significance of the Rock Creek Historic District   335 
G.1:  Year 2020 Average Weekday Traffic Volumes   343 
G.2:  Year 2020 A.M./P.M. Peak Hour Traffic Volumes   344 
G.3:  Level of Service Analysis   344 
H.1:  Traffic Validation Summary   348 
 
 
xiii 
CONTENTS (Continued) 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
Region    5 
Vicinity    7 
Existing Conditions    11 
Rock Creek Watershed    18 
Alternative A    67 
Alternative B    81 
Alternative C    87 
Alternative D    97 
Sewerlines and Outfalls    121 
Year 1990 Average Weekday Traffic Volumes    145 
Neighborhoods    155 
Alternative A Year 2020 Average Weekday Traffic Volumes    163 
Alternative A Year 2020 A.M. Peak-Hour Volume Changes with Respect to Alternative B   199 
Alternative A Year 2020 P.M. Peak-Hour Volume Changes with Respect to Alternative B   201 
Alternative B Year 2020 Average Weekday Traffic Volumes    203 
Alternative C Year 2020 Average Weekday Traffic Volumes   241 
Alternative C Year 2020 A.M. Peak-Hour Volume Changes with Respect to Alternative B    245 
Alternative C Year 2020 P.M. Peak-Hour Volume Changes with Respect to Alternative B    249 
 
xiv 
 
 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
This section describes the physical resources of Rock Creek Park and the Rock Creek and Poto-
mac Parkway, including both natural and cultural resources. It also describes visitor and com-
munity conditions, such as visitor profile, visitation trends, automobile traffic and other transpor-
tation within and near the park, and the characteristics of the communities around the park and 
parkway. 
NATURAL RESOURCES 
AIR QUALITY 
Air quality is included as an impact topic based on the criteria presented in the “Impact Topics - 
Resources and Values at Stake in the Planning Process” section. The specific concerns related to 
this impact topic are summarized as part of the “Environmental Consequences” discussion. 
National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) were established in the 1970 Clean Air Act 
amendments. The standards are concentrations of contaminants in the air that will protect public 
health and prevent degradation or harm to the environment. 
The District of Columbia operates an ambient air monitoring network. The Air Resources 
Management Division of the District of Columbia Department of Consumer and Regulatory Affairs 
is the responsible agency for monitoring and enforcing the applicable standards. A complete table 
of the NAAQS is available on the internet site of the District of Columbia Air Resources 
Management Division at http://mail.environ.state.dc.us/dcairqua.htm. The web site also contains 
monitoring data, and a printed ambient air monitoring data report can be obtained.  
The Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments (MWCOG) is a partner in the program and 
analyzes the air quality data. MWCOG provides an area air quality index and notifies the public of 
the region’s air quality status. Up-to-date information on the index can be obtained by calling (202) 
962-3299. In addition, MWCOG has information available about its environmental programs and 
publications at http://www.mwcog.org/. 
Most air pollutants in the District of Columbia region are from vehicle emissions. Air quality has 
been improving in the region over the past 10 years for all measured contaminants because of 
improvements in vehicle emission controls (Metropolitan Washington Air Quality Committee 
1997). Despite improvements, the entire Washington, D.C. metropolitan area, including Rock 
Creek Park and the adjacent counties in Virginia and Maryland, is classified as being in non-
attainment with the ozone NAAQS by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).  
 
117 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
The park and parkway are within a class II air quality area. The air quality is generally good with 
the exception of ozone. Ozone cannot be measured as a tailpipe emission. Instead, it is a 
secondary pollutant that is formed in the atmosphere by the combination of volatile organic 
hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides with sunlight as a catalyst. Ozone exceedences generally occur 
in the summer and are region-wide, rather than localized. The occurrence of high levels of ozone 
is almost always associated with hot stagnant air masses over the region in combination with 
strong sunlight. High concentrations of ozone can result from the long-range transport of high 
ozone concentrations that are generated in other regions and drift into the area. 
The regional airshed and the study area are in compliance for all other NAAQS pollutants. 
However, the region only recently became an attainment area for carbon monoxide and now 
implements a maintenance plan to prevent violations of the carbon monoxide standard. Carbon 
monoxide is a tailpipe emission, and local monitoring can indicate problem areas. 
The National Park Service conducted a short-term air pollution monitoring study in the park and 
along the parkway from December 7 to 20, 1996 (Robert Peccia and Associates et al. 1997). The 
goal was to assess carbon monoxide concentrations at three locations during peak morning and 
afternoon rush-hours. Winter sampling was performed, because winter is the worst season for 
high carbon monoxide emissions. This occurs because vehicles emit more carbon monoxide 
during cold weather, especially during the cold-startup period, and temperature inversions can 
trap carbon monoxide emissions close to the ground.  
Monitoring sites were located at the intersection of 16th Street and Colorado Avenue, near Mili-
tary Road; at the intersection of the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway and Calvert Street; and at 
the golf course, away from roads. The golf course location was chosen in an effort to establish 
background (unaffected by local traffic) levels.  
Considerable variations were seen in the data as a result of wind direction, precipitation, and 
atmospheric mixing. On three occasions, wind direction caused the “background” golf course 
concentrations to be higher than the other sites.  
The study did not indicate that there were any “valley effects” that would tend to concentrate 
pollutants within the narrow valley bottom. In general, the measured levels showed agreement with 
measurements taken during the same period at other local air monitoring stations around the 
Washington, D.C. metropolitan area. The data generally confirmed that carbon monoxide is an 
area-wide air pollutant that is largely derived from vehicle emissions. The sampling results 
suggested that some of the carbon monoxide detected in the park drifts in from the city. 
As shown below, the highest concentration of carbon monoxide was 3.38 parts per million, 
measured over a 3-hour period at the intersection of 16th Street and Colorado Avenue. This and 
all other measured concentrations from the park and parkway were well below both the 1-hour 
and 8-hour NAAQS for carbon monoxide. Based on these limited sampling results, the carbon 
monoxide levels in the park and along the parkway meet the NAAQSs for carbon monoxide. 
1-hour NAAQS for carbon monoxide 
35 parts per million 
8-hour NAAQS for carbon monoxide 
9 parts per million 
Maximum carbon monoxide level measured during the 
December 1996 monitoring 
3.38 parts per million 
118 
 
Natural Resources 
ROCK CREEK AND ITS TRIBUTARIES  
Rock Creek and its tributaries are included as an impact topic based on the criteria presented in the 
“Impact Topics – Resources and Values at Stake in the Planning Process” section. The specific 
concerns related to this impact topic are summarized as part of the “Environmental Consequences” 
discussion. 
The Rock Creek Watershed map was included previously in the “Servicewide Mandates and 
Policies” section. Rock Creek flows generally south for 33 miles from its headwaters near 
Laytonsville, Maryland, to its confluence with the Potomac River at Georgetown. Land uses 
within the 77-square-mile Rock Creek watershed include urban, suburban residential, 
agricultural, and parkland.  
An estimated 500,000 people reside in the watershed. Approximately 70 percent of the watershed, 
mostly upstream from Rock Creek Park, is developed. Much of the developed area consists of 
impervious surfaces, such as buildings, roads, and driveways. Problems within the park that have 
been produced by upstream development include increased flooding from rapid runoff, abnormal 
stream bed scouring in some places and sedimentation in others, bank erosion, organic and 
chemical pollution, and accumulation of litter and other solid waste.  
Rock Creek is the primary water feature in the park, and within the area it has two major 
tributaries. 
Broad Branch enters from the northwest, just opposite the intersection of Blagden Ave-
nue and Beach Drive.  
Piney Branch enters Rock Creek from the northeast at Piney Branch Parkway, approxi-
mately a half mile south of Broad Branch.  
Sixteen smaller tributaries enter the creek in Rock Creek Park, primarily from the west. Most 
Rock Creek tributaries to the east were canalized, covered, and converted into storm drains during 
the early development of Washington, D.C. (Banta 1993). There also are numerous minor 
tributaries and many groundwater springs that drain to Rock Creek within the park. 
A recent study entitled Best Management Practices for Water Quality, Rock Creek Park (URS 
Greiner Woodward Clyde 1999) identified several facilities as actual or potential sources of water 
pollution in Rock Creek Park. These include the maintenance yard, public stables, H-3 park 
police stables, Edgewater park police stables, golf course, roads, and parking lots. For each of 
these areas, the report provided best management practices (BMPs) to remediate or prevent 
pollution. The National Park Service has begun implementing the recommended BMPs and will 
continue to do so, regardless of the alternative selected from this draft general management plan.  
As shown in the Sewerlines and Outfalls map, numerous municipal storm sewers converge in the 
Rock Creek valley and discharge surface water from city streets directly into park waters. The 
pollutants that surface waters transport from roadways and parking lots are a major source of 
contamination of Rock Creek and its tributaries during and after precipitation events. 
The Sewerlines and Outfalls map also shows that numerous municipal sanitary sewers are located 
within the park, including pipelines that run under road beds and under the creek channel. Sani-
tary sewers carry raw sewage, and can pollute park waters when leaks develop. In upper Rock 
 
119 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
Creek, high bacterial concentrations are suspected to originate from sanitary sewer leaks, and 
from failed septic systems in the Maryland portion of the watershed.  
A serious source of pollution exists in the southeastern portion of the park where there is an 
antiquated system of combined sanitary and storm sewers (see the Sewerlines and Outfalls map). 
Under normal conditions, the flow in these combined sewers is routed to the Blue Plains 
municipal wastewater treatment plant. However, during storms when rainfall exceeds 0.3 inches 
per hour, these sewers overflow and discharge raw, untreated sewage directly into Piney Branch 
and Rock Creek. There are 29 combined sanitary/storm sewer overflow structures on Rock Creek. 
Together, they can contribute as much as 42.5 million gallons of combined storm water and 
sewage to the creek during a 1-hour storm (URS Greiner Woodward Clyde 1999).  
The Washington, D.C. Water and Sewer Authority (WASA) estimates that 60 to 70 overflow 
events occur each year (Engineering News-Record 2001). In July 2001, the WASA proposed a 
$1 billion plan that would reduce overflow discharges throughout its service area by more than 90 
percent. It would involve constructing three 20-foot-diameter, concrete-lined tunnels that together 
could hold approximately 115 million gallons of mixed storm runoff and sewage. Runoff from all 
but the largest 5 to 10 storms annually would be stored temporarily in the tunnels and then routed 
to the Blue Plains Wastewater Treatment Plant. One of these tunnels, which would be a half-mile 
long and have a capacity of 5 million gallons, would be constructed along Rock Creek. The 
WASA is currently preparing a final plan for submittal to the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency and identifying sources of funding (Engineering News-Record 2001). 
For the purposes of water quality standards, the surface waters of the District of Columbia are 
classified based both on their current uses and the future uses to which the waters could be 
restored. Each designation category has applicable water quality standards that are the principal 
water quality management objectives for the park. The district works to support the designations 
and meet the applicable standards by granting permits and reviewing permit applications and 
environmental impact statements. The standards and classification of the district’s waters are 
published in the District of Columbia Register, Chapter 11 of Title 21 DCMR.  
The District of Columbia Water Resources Management Division has designated Rock Creek and 
its tributaries for restoration to meet all five beneficial use classes. The classes and the status of 
surface waters in the park in meeting the standards associated with the classes are as follows: 
Class A is for primary contact recreation. These standards are not being met in Rock 
Creek and its tributaries. 
Class B is for secondary contact recreation and esthetic enjoyment. These standards are 
not being met in Rock Creek and its tributaries. 
Class C is for propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife. The water quality in some of the 
tributaries partially supports the Class C designation, but the water quality of Rock Creek 
does not currently support this designation. 
120 
 
Rock Creek Regional Park
MNCPPC
ROCK
CREEK
PARK
Wise Road
Sherrill
Drive
Drive
Beach
Military
Road
Glover
Road
Ross
Drive
Piney
Branch
Road
Connecticut Ave.
Massachusetts Ave.
ROCK CREEK AND
POTOMAC PARKWAY
Drain Pipe Outfalls
Water
DC Storm Sewers
DC Sanitary Sewers
DC Combined Sanitary and Storm Sewers
Park Roads
City Roads
Rock Creek Park
SEWERLINES AND OUTFALLS
ROCK CREEK PARK / ROCK CREEK AND POTOMAC PARKWAY ï WASHINGTON, DC
United States Department of Interior ï National Park Service
DCS ï April 2002 ï 821 / 20036
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
 
122 
 
Natural Resources 
Class D is for protection of human health related to consumption of fish and shellfish. 
The Class D standards are partially supported below the Peirce Mill dam. However, the 
creek above the dam was not assessed for support of the Class D standards, because the 
dam will continue to be a barrier to the migration of fish until a fish bypass is completed 
in 2003 as part of the mitigation program for the Woodrow Wilson Bridge.  
Class E is for navigation. The Class E designation is supported in Rock Creek. 
Rock Creek and its tributaries have also been designated “Special Waters of the District of 
Columbia” for their scenic and esthetic importance. It is intended that the water quality of such 
designated waters be maintained and not allowed to degrade.  
Some point and non-point sources of water pollutants in Rock Creek Park were identified 
previously. The types of contaminants contributed to surface waters in Rock Creek Park include 
the following. 
Sediment is transported from unvegetated soils, such as construction sites and agricultural 
fields.  
Storm water runoff from transportation corridors and parking lots within the watershed 
carries sediments, oil and grease, and metals, such as cadmium, iron, lead, and zinc.  
Runoff from lawns and leaking sewerlines are sources of nutrients, including nitrogen 
and phosphorus, and contributes to high coliform bacteria counts. 
Pollution has adversely affected the ability of Rock Creek Park and its tributaries to support 
aquatic life. Banta (1993) determined that 58 percent of the tributaries of Rock Creek were classi-
fied as severely impaired for habitat quality and biological water quality using U.S. Environ-
mental Protection Agency (EPA) biological assessment standards, and that the remaining 42 per-
cent of the creek’s tributaries were moderately impaired. 
The Baseline Water Quality Data/Inventory and Analysis – Rock Creek Park (NPS 1994) 
reported that criteria for nitrite, pH, dissolved oxygen, copper, zinc, total and fecal coliform 
bacteria, and turbidity were exceeded multiple times throughout the study area. A summary of 
water quality sampling results for these parameters is provided in table 8. The criteria included 
drinking water standards and EPA freshwater acute toxicity standards. The baseline water quality 
report concluded that surface water quality in the park was typical of that encountered in streams 
in metropolitan areas.  
A 1996 water quality assessment report was prepared by the District of Columbia for the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency and U.S. Congress pursuant to Section 305(B) of the Clean 
Water Act (P.L. 97-117) (District of Columbia 1996a). This report documented violations of fecal 
coliform bacteria and pH standards.  
Water quality concerns in Rock Creek appear to have stabilized, both because upstream 
urbanization has reached a maximum and because of the diligence of government agencies in 
Maryland in controlling of pollutant discharges and storm water runoff. This particularly includes 
requiring new development to implement best management practices to control storm water 
runoff. In addition, there has been a decrease in upstream agriculture, and natural vegetation has 
been allowed to revegetate abandoned farmlands. This land use change reduces sediment,  
 
123 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
TABLE 8: ROCK CREEK WATER QUALITY, 1959 TO 1990 a/ 
Water Quality  
Parameter 
Total  
Number of Samples 
Number Exceeding  
EPA Standard a/ 
Percent Exceeding  
EPA Standard a/ 
Total nitrite, as N 
291 
73 
25 
pH c/ 
642 
27 
4 
Dissolved oxygen 
342 
28 
8 
Copper 
57 
6 
11 
Zinc 
58 
16 
28 
Total coliform 
419 
408 
97 
Fecal coliform 
204 
163 
80 
Turbidity 
254 
40 
16 
a/ Source: NPS 1994. 
b/ EPA criteria included drinking water and freshwater acute toxicity standards. 
c/ pH exceedence defined as greater than 9.0 or less than 6.5. 
pesticides, and fertilizers entering the waterway. The Rock Creek Watershed Conservation Study 
(CH2M Hill 1979) led to improvements to Rock Creek and its tributaries within the park.  
Park resources management staff members monitor sanitary sewers and facilitate their 
repair to correct leaks.  
The District of Columbia has been given assistance in tracing illegal pollutant discharges 
connected to storm drains.  
Combined sanitary/storm sewer outlets have been identified for retrofitting to reduce dis-
charges. 
Dry-weather outfall surveys have led to the cleaning of blocked combined sanitary/storm 
sewers to halt continual overflowing. 
Because the majority of the Rock Creek watershed lies outside of Rock Creek Park and the 
jurisdiction of the National Park Service, park personnel must work with other federal, local, 
state, district, and regional agencies and organizations to implement steps that would improve 
existing water quality in the park. The Chesapeake Bay Program is the most comprehensive 
interagency effort to improve water resource values in the region.  
WETLANDS AND FLOODPLAINS 
Wetland and floodplains are included as an impact topic based on the criteria presented in the 
“Impact Topics - Resources and Values at Stake in the Planning Process” section. The specific 
concerns related to this impact topic are summarized as part of the “Environmental Consequences” 
discussion. 
The Clean Water Act and Executive Orders 11990 and 11988 identify wetlands and floodplains 
as national natural assets. They direct all federal agencies to avoid the occupation, adverse 
modification, or degradation of wetlands and floodplains.  
124 
 
Natural Resources 
Wetlands. Three temporarily flooded, forested National Wetland Inventory (NWI) -designated 
wetlands (NWI designation of PFO1A) are found along Rock Creek in the northern portion of the 
park. Rock Creek is identified as an open water, tidally influenced riverine system (NWI 
designation of R1OWV) (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 1999).  
An additional wetland inventory was performed in 1997 (District of Columbia Government 
1997a). Its results differ from the NWI only by defining the northernmost forest wetland as being 
about twice the size of the wetland identified by the NWI.  
The most common wetlands in the park are located within the primary floodplain of Rock Creek 
where the creek it is underlain by Codorus silt loam (Soil Conservation Service 1976). These 
riparian wetlands are typically covered by sycamore-green ash forest. Other riparian wetlands, not 
identified by the NWI, are in the narrow alluvial deposits of the Pinehurst Branch, Fenwick 
Branch, and Joyce Branch drainages.  
Vernal pools, also not identified on the NWI, are widely scattered wetland features in the park. 
These are small, temporary puddles or ponds that appear during wet periods and are dry at other 
times. If they persist for 4 months or more, including the spring, these limited habitats can be 
breeding places for frogs, toads, and salamanders. The number of vernal pools in the park today 
may be reduced from the pre-urbanization era due to past draining or filling activities, stream bed 
scouring from increased runoff that has resulted from development in the watershed upstream 
from the park, and lowered water tables from urban groundwater usage.  
Other important wetland-related features in the park include groundwater springs and seeps. 
These small, wet areas are fed by relatively dependable flows of pollutant-free water. Several of 
these wetlands support endemic, aquatic animal species such as amphipods and other 
macroscopic invertebrates. 
Floodplains. Floodplains in the park were mapped as part of the Rock Creek Watershed 
Conservation Study (CH2M Hill 1979). Flood levels in the park have been substantially affected 
by urbanization and associated increases in impervious surfaces in the Rock Creek watershed. 
Stream flows in the main stem of Rock Creek during storm events are estimated to be more than 
double the predevelopment discharge (CH2M Hill 1979).  
Four major park buildings are in the 100-year floodplain. Peirce Mill and the Miller cabin are 
completely within the 100-year floodplain. Portions of the Lodge House and the Edgewater 
Stables building are on the fringe of the floodplain, but would not be subject to high velocities or 
deep water during flooding (CH2M 1979).  
Sections of Beach Drive and the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway are within the 100-year 
floodplain, as are a number of picnic groves and associated parking areas, picnic shelters, and 
restrooms. Under NPS floodplain management guidelines, historic structures, picnic facilities, 
daytime parking facilities, roads, and trails are acceptable within the 100-year floodplain. 
A network of storm sewer, sanitary sewer, and combined sanitary/storm sewerlines underlies the 
park (see the Sewerlines and Outfalls map). Some of these pipelines are within the 100-year 
floodplain. The storm sewers discharge into drainages that may lead to riparian wetlands, and the 
combined sanitary/storm sewers experience overflows that may discharge raw sewage into 
floodplains and wetlands whenever rainfall exceeds 0.3 inches per hour.  
 
125 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
DECIDUOUS FORESTS 
Deciduous forests are included as an impact topic based on the criteria presented in the “Impact 
Topics - Resources and Values at Stake in the Planning Process” section. The specific concerns 
related to this impact topic are summarized as part of the “Environmental Consequences” 
discussion. 
The establishing legislation for the park identifies “timber” as an essential resource to the park. 
The National Park Service interprets this in an ecological context to mean not individual trees, but 
the interrelated plant and animal populations that form the forest community. The ecosystem 
processes provided by forests are a part of this essential resource. In addition, forest stands are an 
integral component of the scenic quality of the park cited in the establishing legislation. 
Therefore, regardless of the management alternative selected from this draft general management 
plan, the National Park Service will maintain the forests consistent with its charge in the 1916 
Organic Act to preserve unimpaired the natural resources and values of the park for this and 
future generations. 
Approximately 80 percent (1,662 acres) of the park land area is covered with mature second 
growth forest. Activities prior to the park’s establishment in 1890, such as timber cutting, 
farming, and Civil War clearing, removed virtually all of the original forest. A few large oaks still 
living in the park are estimated to be more than 275 years old and may be remnants of virgin 
growth. Today’s woodlands are primarily a mixture of deciduous species typical of the eastern 
deciduous forest in the later stages of succession.  
Rock Creek Park runs along the topographic break separating the Piedmont Plateau and the 
Atlantic Coastal Plain provinces. The vegetation reflects affinities to both of these provinces. The 
following five forest associations have been identified and mapped in Rock Creek Park using the 
National Vegetation Classification System developed by The Nature Conservancy (1998).  
The beech-white oak/mayapple forest association occurs on moist to somewhat drier 
slopes. It is the most common of all associations found in the park. Two variants include 
the mixed oak/beech variant and the beech-tulip poplar variant. 
The tulip poplar forest association is uncommon and occurs on moist, mid-slope to low-
slope sites that were cleared in the past. The sites are exclusively dominated by tulip pop-
lar. 
The chestnut oak-black oak/huckleberry forest association is uncommon and occurs on 
ridge tops, convex upper slopes, and south-facing slopes on rocky, well-drained soils. 
The sycamore-green ash forest association is uncommon and occurs along stream banks, 
floodplains, and other low-lying areas subject to temporary or irregular flooding. 
The Virginia pine-oak forest association is rare because it is an early to mid-successional 
forest that is being replaced by hardwood forests. Remnants of this association occur on 
dry soils of hilltops in limited areas where forest succession has not yet replaced it. 
An inventory of park vegetation, conducted by park and volunteer staff between 1986 and 1994, 
documented 656 species of vascular plants in Rock Creek Park between the National Zoo and the 
Maryland boundary. Five plant species that had been found in the park during a 1919 vegetation 
126 
 
Natural Resources 
inventory were not found during the 1986 – 1994 inventory. They included swamp shadbush 
(Amelanchier canadensis), shooting star (Dodecatheon meadia), dwarf chinkapin oak (Quercus 
prinoides), Allegheny chinkapin (Castenea pumila), and a wild rose (Rosa setigera). The reasons 
for their absence in the second inventory are unknown.  
Small natural areas such as the park and parkway have been shown to be very important contribu-
tors to regional biodiversity (Falkner and Stohlgren 1997). Based on the vegetation inventory, 
Rock Creek Park continues to serve as a major reservoir of native flora for the region and is im-
portant in protecting the natural heritage of this area. 
The recent inventory of park vegetation also determined that 238 of the plant species were 
introduced species, not native to the area. Of this number, 42 species have been judged to be 
invasive exotic species that, unless controlled, are likely to spread and adversely affect native 
plant populations. Control of these invasive exotic plants is a serious problem in the park. A 
program now underway is selectively applying approved herbicides to invasive species in a 
limited portion of the park. However, control efforts are not able to keep pace with the rate of 
invasive plant introduction and spread. Management of invasive species will be a continuous need 
in the park and operational plans will be updated as control strategies and funding evolve. 
Soil properties are integral components of determining the species diversity, productivity, and 
regenerative potential of the deciduous forest system. Therefore, soil characteristics important to 
these processes are included in this impact topic characterization.  
The park’s soil resources are adversely affected by accelerated erosion, compaction, and 
deposition caused by human activities inside and outside the park boundaries. Some areas that 
receive heavy visitor use are subject to soil compaction, removal of vegetation cover, and erosion. 
This is particularly evident along streambanks, at picnic groves and other popular recreation 
areas, and along heavily used or improperly designed and maintained trails. Accelerated erosion 
caused by increased runoff from the upstream watershed is occurring along the Rock Creek 
channel in the northern portion of the park. Associated deposition of some of the eroded soils is 
occurring in the floodplains in the central and southern portions of the park and parkway. The 
National Park Service will implement measures to protect soils from erosion, compaction, and 
deposition caused by human activities and to restore areas of soils degradation, as required in 
Management Policies (NPS 2001b).  
As described previously in “Servicewide Mandates and Policies,” a 1980 memorandum from the 
Council on Environmental Quality requires the protection of soils that are classified as prime and 
unique farmlands. In a letter to the National Park Service, the Natural Resources Conservation 
Service (1998) identified two soil types within the park that are classified as prime farmlands. 
However, as discussed in “Impact Topics Dismissed from Further Consideration,” neither of the 
prime farmland soil types in the park would be disturbed by management action proposed in any 
of the alternatives. They will continue to be protected as part of the park’s forest resource. 
Woodland fires in the park were described in the section entitled “Servicewide Mandates and 
Policies.” An average of two fires occur in park each year. All wildfires are suppressed promptly 
by the District of Columbia Fire Department or park firefighters. 
 
127 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
PROTECTED AND RARE SPECIES 
Protected and rare species are included as an impact topic based on the criteria presented in the 
“Impact Topics - Resources and Values at Stake in the Planning Process” section. The specific 
concerns related to this impact topic are summarized as part of the “Environmental Consequences” 
discussion. 
The National Park Service is required under the Endangered Species Act to ensure that federally 
listed species and their habitats are protected on lands within the agency’s jurisdiction. Only one 
federally listed species, the endangered Hays spring amphipod (Stygobromus hayi), is known to 
inhabit the park.  
Lists of the rare and protected species that are documented as occurring in Rock Creek Park are 
provided in appendix E. Complete lists of federally listed species and the species identified as 
protected or rare by the states of Maryland and Virginia can be found on the internet. Internet 
addresses for the lists are presented in the bibliography under these citations:  
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 1999  
Maryland Department of Natural Resources 1994  
Maryland Department of Natural Resources 1995  
Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation 1998 
Federal- and State-Listed Amphipods. The Hays spring amphipod was discovered in Rock 
Creek Park in 1998. Earlier, another rare species, Kenk’s amphipod, also known as the Rock 
Creek groundwater amphipod, (Stygobromus kenki), was identified in park springs. Kenk’s 
amphipod is not currently listed under the Endangered Species Act, but it is under consideration 
by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) for future listing. In addition, three other 
Stygobromus species of amphipods that are listed by the state of Maryland as rare or uncommon 
have been located in or near the park (Maryland Department of Natural Resources 1995).  
Groundwater amphipods are sensitive to environmental pollution, making the present 
concentration of these species an extremely rare occurrence in the Piedmont region. The relative 
abundance of rare amphipods in the park has been attributed to the long-term protection of 
groundwater quality afforded by the park. 
The Hays spring amphipod ranges from one-half to one inch long. It is colorless, eyeless, and has 
adaptive hairs for sensing currents and food. They have life spans of 8 years or more and a low 
reproductive rate. Stygobromus amphipods spend the majority of their lives in groundwater below 
the surface, feeding on detritus. Amphipods are subject to a number of predators when they are at 
surface springs, such as stonefly larvae and salamanders, but probably have few if any predators 
below the surface.  
Threats to groundwater amphipods include alterations of groundwater flows, groundwater 
pollution, loss of detritus as a food source, and disturbance of spring sites. Common pollution 
problems for amphipods are nitrates in fertilizers (which can result in groundwater oxygen 
depletion), pesticides, and petroleum leaking from underground storage tanks. 
128 
 
Natural Resources 
Other State-Listed Species. Washington, D.C. does not currently provide special protection 
status for rare plant or animal species. As shown in appendix E, the adjoining states of Maryland 
and Virginia (Maryland Department of Natural Resources 1994; Virginia Department of 
Conservation and Recreation 1998) list  
seven plant species that are documented as occurring in Rock Creek Park as “highly state 
rare – critically imperiled” (E, S1, or S2)  
21 species that are documented as occurring in Rock Creek Park as “watch list – rare or 
uncommon” (S3)  
Although five of these species are trees, most are non-woody, herbaceous species that typically 
occur in a single population within the park.  
Three animal species with known occurrences in Rock Creek Park are listed as rare or uncommon 
by the adjoining state of Maryland (Maryland Department of Natural Resources 1995). Wetlands, 
including freshwater springs and outflow channels, provide habitat for each of these species. 
They include the  
yellow-crowned night-heron (Nyctanassa violacea), which is considered highly rare  
Appalachian spring snail (Fontigens bottimeri), which is considered rare  
gray petaltail dragonfly (Tachopteryx thoreyi), which is considered possibly rare, but of 
uncertain status  
The National Park Service is not under any legal obligation to protect these plant or animal 
species. However, park policy and management actions include maintaining these uncommon 
native species as part of the park’s natural heritage.  
OTHER NATIVE WILDLIFE 
Terrestrial Wildlife. Native wildlife species are included as an impact topic based on the criteria 
presented in the “Impact Topics - Resources and Values at Stake in the Planning Process” section. 
The specific concerns related to this impact topic are summarized as part of the “Environmental 
Consequences” discussion. 
The woodlands in Rock Creek Park provide suitable habitat for a variety of wildlife mammal 
species, despite their location within the city limits of the District of Columbia. Approximately 30 
species of mammals have been inventoried in the park. Species of particular interest because of 
their size or their public attention include the raccoon (Procyon lotor), red fox (Vulpes vulpes), 
gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus), opossum (Didelphis virginiana), beaver (Castor 
canadensis), gray squirrel (Sciurus carolinensis), eastern chipmunk (Tamias striatus), and white-
tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus). 
White-tailed deer have been recorded for many years, but since the late 1980s their numbers have 
substantially increased. Aerial infrared photography taken in March 1997 indicated a population 
of 87 deer, and a repeat survey in March 1998 estimated the number had increased to 155. The 
deer population is monitored to avoid adverse impacts park resources. 
 
129 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
Approximately 160 species of nesting or visiting birds have been found in the park, including the 
great-horned owl (Bubo virginianus), barred owl (Strix varia), red-tailed hawk (Buteo 
jamaicensis), broad-winged hawk (Buteo platypterus), belted kingfisher (Megaceryle alcyon), and 
numerous songbirds. Most of these are migrants or seasonal visitors. Typically, 22 to 24 species 
nest in the breeding bird census area in Rock Creek Park (unpublished data from the Rock Creek 
Park breeding bird census, 1997 through 1999).  
In recent years, volunteers evaluating bird populations have noticed pronounced declines in 
neotropical migrant species. Similarly declining populations of neotropical migrants are evident 
throughout the United States. These declines are thought to be caused by receding or fragmented 
habitats both in tropical wintering grounds and in northerly breeding grounds in temperate areas 
(Friesen et al. 1995). Nest parasitism of some species by the brown-headed cowbird (Molothrus 
ater) and predation by crows (Corvus brachyrhynchos) also appear to reduce breeding success in 
many areas, including Rock Creek Park. Consistent with the NPS’ preservation mandate, the park 
staff is exploring options for reducing the declines of migrant species locally, such as cowbird 
control, improved snag management, and trail rerouting or closure to avoid sensitive habitats. 
The variety and numbers of amphibians and reptiles found in the park are markedly reduced 
compared to inventories from the early and middle parts of the 20th century. Of species 
historically recorded for Rock Creek Park, only 9 of 17 amphibians and 11 of 24 reptiles have 
been recorded in recent years. The amphibian observations are consistent with the recent world-
wide decline in amphibian numbers and diversity.  
Some amphibians such as the gray treefrog (Hyla versicolor) and chorus frog (Pseudacris 
triseriata) have disappeared altogether from Rock Creek Park.  
Others amphibians, such as the spring peeper (Hyla crucifer), wood frog (Rana sylva-
tica), and spotted salamander (Ambystoma maculatum) can be found in modest numbers 
in wetland areas.  
Red-backed salamanders (Plethodon cinereus), which do not depend on wetlands, are 
relatively common in moist uplands where they inhabit moist niches under logs and leaf 
litter.  
Factors responsible for the declines in reptile diversity in Rock Creek Park are unknown. 
Relatively protected and abundant moist upland sites provide habitat for small snakes, such as the 
northern ringneck snake (Diadophis punctatus), which are common. Eastern box turtles 
(Terrapene carolina) and larger snakes such as the black rat snake (Elaphe obsoleta) are much 
less common.  
Aquatic Wildlife. Recent surveys have found approximately 35 species of fish in Rock Creek.  
Resident native species include five shiners (Notropis spp.), two bullheads (Ictalurus 
spp.), and three sunfish (Lepomis spp.). Blacknose dace (Rhinichthys atratulus) are rela-
tively common and can be found in the main stream and many tributaries.  
Other resident species are introduced, including carp (Cyprinus carpio), bluegill (Lepo-
mis macrochirus), and largemouth bass (Micropterus salmoides).  
130 
 
Natural Resources 
At least two native species, the blueback herring (Alosa aestivalis) and the alewife (Alosa 
pseudoharengus), migrate from salt water up Rock Creek to spawn each spring (anadro-
mous). An abandoned sewerline and an abandoned gauging station near Q Street that in-
terrupted their migrations have been removed from Rock Creek (Madaras 2001). The re-
moval of eight other barriers in Rock Creek and the installation of a fish bypass at the 
Peirce Mill Dam as part of the Woodrow Wilson Bridge mitigation are expected to allow 
these species to migrate from the mouth of the creek upstream to Needwood Lake in 
Montgomery County, Maryland (Madaras 2001).  
The American eel (Anguilla rostrata) is the only species found locally that lives in either 
fresh or brackish water. Eels migrate to the Sargasso Sea to spawn (catadromous). The 
removal of barriers in Rock Creek as part of the Woodrow Wilson Bridge mitigation is 
expected to enhance the habitat for this species. 
The urban pollution and storm water runoff problems that were described previously in the 
section entitled “Rock Creek and Its Tributaries” have adversely affected fish numbers and 
diversity in the park. Generally, the 16 tributaries of Rock Creek are more severely affected than 
the main channel. In a 1993 study by NPS staff, no fish were found in nearly half of the 
tributaries, and only one had more than a single species present. Flooding and scouring during 
storms, pollution from runoff, and periodic low flows are likely contributing factors. 
Non-Native Terrestrial Animals. Several non-native species of wildlife that occur in Rock 
Creek Park are adversely affecting the park’s natural resources.  
Free-roaming domestic cats (Felis catus), particularly near the park borders, prey on local 
populations of songbirds, squirrels, and other small mammals and may reduce their num-
bers (Mitchell and Beck 1992).  
Starlings (Sturnus vulgaris) compete with some cavity-nesting birds for nest sites.  
The gypsy moth (Lymantria dispar) has been present in the park for many years and, at 
times, has become sufficiently abundant to require aerial spraying to prevent forest defo-
liation and related impacts.  
The effects of these and other exotic animals on native species are not fully known. They could 
be substantial, considering the small size of the natural areas of Rock Creek Park and the park’s 
location within an urban setting. However, except for treatments of insect pests, no control efforts 
are presently contemplated for these species. 
Roadkill. Collisions with vehicles kill or injure terrestrial and semi-aquatic animals on roads in 
Rock Creek Park, along the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway, and on adjoining city streets. 
Since 1980, the park staff has kept informal counts of carcasses along roads and streets within 
and adjacent to the park and parkway. The data include species, date, and location where each 
carcass was found. The counts are non-systematic and were collected incidental to other activi-
ties. Because of the informal nature of the data collection and the frequent removal of roadkill 
carcasses by scavengers such as crows and raccoons, the park roadkill counts probably are lower 
than actual animal deaths. Larger, more conspicuous animals, particularly mammals, tend to be 
 
131 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
more represented in the count, as opposed to smaller animals such as songbirds, amphibians, and 
reptiles that are more easily overlooked or scavenged.  
For the 10 years between 1991 and 2000, park staff recorded 1,223 roadkilled carcasses. Table 9 
summarizes these data by class and by selected species.  
Between a quarter and a third of the annual recorded roadkill in the park and vicinity occurs on 
Beach Drive. For example, in the year 2000, 104 carcasses were recorded, including 28 from 
Beach Drive. Table 10 shows all roadkilled species recorded from Beach Drive in 2000 and sub-
totals for sections of the road under different traffic management strategies. 
TABLE 9: RECORDED ROADKILLS IN AND ADJACENT TO ROCK CREEK PARK  
AND THE ROCK CREEK AND POTOMAC PARKWAY, 1991 THROUGH 2000 
 
Type 
 
Number 
Percent of Total  
Roadkills Recorded 
Total recorded roadkills, 1991 through 2000 
1,223 
100 
Mammals  
1,088 
89 
Squirrel 
455 
37 
Raccoon 
303 
25 
Deer 
135 
11 
Opossum 
96 
8 
Other 
96 
8 
Gray fox 
3 
0.25 
Birds 
90 
7 
Reptiles 
45 
4 
Box turtle 
22 
2 
Black rat snake 
15 
1 
 
TABLE 10: ROADKILLS RECORDED ON BEACH DRIVE IN 2000 
 
 
Species 
 
Total for  
Beach Drive 
 
South of Broad 
Branch Road 
Sections Closed to 
Traffic on Weekends 
and Holidays 
Sections Open to 
Traffic North of 
Broad Branch 
Raccoon 
8 
5 
3 
0 
Squirrel 
7 
3 
3 
1 
Deer 
4 
1 
0 
3 
Water snake 
2 
0 
1 
1 
Unidentified bird 
2 
2 
0 
0 
Red-eyed vireo 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Snapping turtle 
1 
0 
1 
0 
Box turtle 
1 
0 
0 
1 
Opossum 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Domestic cat 
1 
0 
1 
0 
Total 
28 (100%) 
12 (43%) 
9 (32%) 
7 (25%) 
Percent of road length 
100% 
13% 
46% 
41% 
Average annual road-
kill per mile 
28/5.8 =  
4.8 
12/0.70 =  
17.1 
9/2.7 =  
3.3 
7/2.4 =  
2.9 
132 
 
Natural Resources 
As shown in the table, the highest incidence of roadkill on Beach Drive occurs south of Broad 
Branch Road. The roadkill rate on this stretch is five times higher than on more northern portions 
of Beach Drive, indicating that this area might be an appropriate site for the installation of miti-
gating measures such as traffic controls or protected wildlife crossings such as culverts. 
As shown in table 11, 16 animal carcasses were recorded from the 2-mile-long Rock Creek and 
Potomac Parkway in the year 2000. This produces an average annual roadkill of eight animals per 
mile. Contributing factors to this relatively high value probably include the higher traffic speeds 
on the parkway and heavier traffic level than on most park roads. 
TABLE 11: ROADKILLS RECORDED ON THE ROCK CREEK AND POTOMAC PARKWAY IN 2000  
Species 
Number 
Squirrel 
5 
Raccoon 
5 
Mallard duck 
2 
Unidentified bird 
2 
Crow 
1 
Deer 
1 
Total 
16 
The importance of roadkill to populations of wildlife is difficult to determine. Squirrels, raccoons, 
and deer sustain the heaviest toll from vehicle collisions. However, these species are common in 
the region and have high reproduction potentials. Their populations do not appear to be substan-
tially influenced by roadkill. For less common species with more limited reproduction potential, 
roadkill could be a contributing factor to population reductions or local extirpation (Foreman and 
Alexander 1998).  
Based on casual, undocumented sightings, four species of wildlife may have declined in the park 
over the past decade or more. These species are the opossum, gray fox, eastern box turtle, and 
black rat snake. Concern has been expressed that roadkill could be a contributing factor. Re-
corded roadkill numbers and locations for these species between 1991 and 2000 are shown in ta-
ble 12. For all four species, approximately a third of the roadkills were recorded outside of the 
park and parkway. 
Opossum – The number of road-killed opossum carcasses recorded in and around Rock Creek 
Park and the parkway has declined over the past 10 years. Numbers have dropped from a high of 
16 animals in 1992 to one specimen in 2000.  
Although the reason for the decrease is unknown, it is unlikely that roadkill is causing a popula-
tion decline. Opossums are common in the region and much of the United States. They have a 
high reproduction potential (2 litters per year with 5 to 13 young per litter) and are highly adapted 
to living in close proximity to humans, even in densely developed metropolitan areas (Hossler et 
al. 1994; Pennsylvania Game Commission 2001). The decline in roadkill in Rock Creek Park 
probably reflects population reductions caused by another factor such as a disease outbreak. It is 
unlikely that roadkill would seriously threaten or cause the extirpation of opossums in the park.  
 
133 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
TABLE 12: LOCATIONS OF RECORDED ROADKILLS FOR FOUR SPECIES, 1991 THROUGH 2000  
Location 
Opossum 
Grey Fox 
Box Turtle 
Black Rat Snake 
Park roads 
 
 
 
 
Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway 
18 
1 
 
 
Beach Drive south of Broad Branch Road 
14 
1 
 
1 
Beach Drive north of Broad Branch Road 
8 
 
2 
3 
Wise Road 
4 
 
1 
1 
Glover Road 
3 
 
3 
2 
Ross Drive 
1 
 
1 
 
Bingham Drive 
 
 
4 
 
Joyce Road 
 
 
 
1 
Nature center/maintenance area 
1 
 
1 
1 
Other park roads 
7 
 
 
 
Adjacent non-park roads 
 
 
 
 
Military Road (though park and nearby) 
17 
1 
2 
 
Oregon Avenue 
14 
 
8 
5 
Broad Branch Road 
4 
 
 
1 
Other non-park roads 
5 
 
 
 
Total roadkills recorded 1991-2000 
96 
3 
22 
15 
Gray Fox – In the past 10 years, three gray foxes have been found dead on roads in and around 
the park, including one each in 1991,1994, and 1999. Gray foxes are relatively common in the 
eastern United States. They have been described as habitat generalists that prefer wooded areas 
with dense cover for daytime dens and mixed fields and forests for nighttime hunting (Greenburg 
and Pelton 1994). 
A study in Tennessee found that gray foxes had overlapping home ranges of about 1,000 acres, 
and that a 5,000-acre area supported 12 adult and young foxes (Greenburg and Pelton 1994). New 
Mexico studies showed that gray foxes were tolerant of low to moderate residential development, 
but avoided high-density development (Harrison 1993 and 1997). At 1,700 acres, Rock Creek 
Park may provide sufficient habitat for only a few individuals. Additional habitat on adjoining 
lands would be necessary to support a larger, more sustainable gray fox population.  
Gray foxes, such as young animals dispersing from the den, will travel distances of 50 miles or 
more (Trippensee 1953). The Rock Creek corridor probably served as a travel route between 
foxes in the park and populations in woodlands to the north. However, as more of the forested ar-
eas in the upper drainage are developed, the interaction of animals in the park with those in other 
areas probably has been reduced. This would include the recruitment of foxes into the park popu-
lation. 
Gray foxes are very susceptible to canine diseases such as distemper and hepatitis (Nicholson and 
Hill 1984). The potential for these diseases to be introduced into the gray fox population from the 
large number of dogs using the park is a threat to gray foxes in the park. 
Gray fox populations in and around the park are probably small and are likely stressed by habitat 
destruction, habitat fragmentation, low recruitment, and periodic disease outbreaks. Roadkills, 
even infrequent ones, could contribute to an overall reduction of a resident population or even lo-
cal extirpation.  
134 
 
Natural Resources 
Box Turtle – There is no clear trend in recorded roadkills of box turtles in and around the park 
and parkway. Throughout the past 10 years, 22 box turtle roadkills have been recorded, for an av-
erage rate between two and three turtles per year. 
Prime habitat for box turtles includes wooded uplands and bottomlands. In the wild, box turtles 
are known to live at least 40 years and there are claims of some turtles living more than 100 
years. They do not reach sexual maturity until 4 or 5 years of age. The average clutch size is only 
four or five eggs, although a female may lay several clutches per year. The female does not pro-
tect the nest or hatchlings, and mortality of hatchlings is high, primarily because of predation 
(Dawson 1999).  
Populations of box turtles have declined throughout their range in the eastern United States be-
cause of a variety of human-induced factors. Roadkill is believed to be a contributing factor to the 
declining numbers, along with habitat loss and fragmentation, commercial and personal collect-
ing, predation by animals such as dogs and raccoons that are associated with human development, 
and disease (Hutchinson 2000; Mitchel, 2000). Because box turtles are long-lived and have a low 
reproduction potential, losses of individuals can have long-lasting effects on local populations.  
A study in the 1950s of mixed forests and agricultural lands in Maryland reported turtle densities 
at 10 per acre (Hall et al. 2000). Other studies in Missouri summarized by Dawson (1999) indi-
cated a lower density, identifying home range size as varying from about 5 acres to about 13 acres 
and stating that “the home ranges of several individuals will often overlap.” 
There is little information on box turtle populations in Rock Creek Park. The riparian wetlands 
along Rock Creek and its tributaries provide excellent habitat, and sightings of box turtles by park 
visitors and park staff are relatively common. However, studies of box turtle numbers or densities 
have never been conducted. Removing box turtles from the park for any purpose, including use as 
pets, is illegal, but anecdotal evidence suggests that such illegal collecting occurs at a rate far 
greater than the annual roadkill rate of two or three box turtles. However, the additive effect of 
roadkill may be a contributing factor in an apparent decline in box turtles in and near the park.  
Black Rat Snake – There is no clear trend in the pattern of roadkills of black rat snakes in Rock 
Creek Park over the past 10 years. Fifteen roadkills were recorded, including five on Oregon 
Avenue outside of the park. 
Black rat snakes are fairly common in the region. They are active during daylight hours and hi-
bernate during the winter months. They prefer dense cover along forest edges, meadows, and 
hedgerows and tend to avoid open areas such as closely mowed roadsides, road surfaces, and 
open fields. Black rat snakes use the interior of forests and, often, structures for periodic refuges 
(Durner 1991; Durner and Gates 1993).  
Habitat for the black rat snake has declined in the Washington D.C. metropolitan area over the 
decades as land has been converted from woodlots and agriculture to high-density development. 
Within Rock Creek Park, black rat snake populations also may have declined because of contin-
ued maturation of forest, as opposed to the mix of woodlands and meadows that existed histori-
cally. Roadkill may be a contributing factor affecting local populations, but the degree of effect is 
unknown. 
 
135 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
CULTURAL RESOURCES 
ARCHEOLOGICAL RESOURCES 
Several studies provide information on Rock Creek Park’s archeological resources, previous ar-
cheological work in the park, and the status of archeological research. These studies include 
Ancient Washington: American Indian Cultures of the Potomac Valley (Humphrey and 
Chambers 1985) 
Archeological Survey Report: An Archeological Investigation of Thirty-One Erosion 
Control and Bank Stabilization Sites along Rock Creek and Its Tributaries, Rock Creek 
Park and Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway (NPS, Inashima 1985a) 
National Capital Area Archeological Overview and Survey Plan for the Systemwide Ar-
cheological Inventory Program, National Park Service, National Capital Area (NPS, Lit-
tle 1995c) 
Rediscovering Archeological Resources at Rock Creek Park (Moran 1997) 
Some of the prehistoric and historic objects recovered from Rock Creek Park have been cataloged 
and are kept in storage at the NPS’ Museum Resource Center in Landover, Maryland. 
There are at least 10 archeological sites in the Rock Creek valley with known prehistoric occupa-
tions. Three are quartzite quarries, three are soapstone quarries, three are short-term campsites, 
and one is a cremation burial. The latter was excavated prior to construction of a pier for one of 
the Whitehurst Freeway ramps. Data from that excavation are still being analyzed. 
Historic archeological sites in the park are largely associated with historic agricultural and indus-
trial uses during the 18th and 19th centuries, Civil War-era operations, and development of the 
park under the administration of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1890 to 1933) and the Na-
tional Park Service (1933 to present).  
There is a high probability that there are additional undisturbed prehistoric and historic archeo-
logical resources in Rock Creek Park. Archeological sites in the park have not been systemati-
cally surveyed or inventoried, and precise information about locations, characteristics, and the 
significance of the majority of known archeological resources in the park is incomplete. Because 
the condition of archeological resources, especially those underground, is generally unknown, the 
impacts of development projects on archeological sites in the park are uncertain.  
As described in the “Servicewide Mandates and Policies” section, an archeological identification 
and evaluation study of the park is required by law. Such a study has been scheduled to begin in 
fiscal year 2003. In addition, individual surveys will be needed prior to the initiation of ground-
disturbing activities. Areas identified as having a high potential for archeological resources must 
be treated with special sensitivity.  
NPS policy at Rock Creek Park is to work with the District of Columbia State Historic Preserva-
tion Officer (DCSHPO) to nominate all archeological and historical resources within the park and 
136 
 
Cultural Resources 
parkway that appear to meet the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) criteria. Although 
Rock Creek Park is listed on the NRHP, its archeological resources have yet to be individually 
listed. Currently, 23 archeological sites associated with the earliest occupation of the region and 
one site associated with an early 19th century industrial complex (Blagden Mill) have been inves-
tigated. 
HISTORIC RESOURCES AND CULTURAL LANDSCAPES 
Several NPS documentary studies provide an understanding of the historic development of the 
Rock Creek Park area and the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway. These include:  
Rock Creek Park: An Administrative History (NPS, Mackintosh 1985b)  
Historic Resource Study: Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway, George Washington Memo-
rial Parkway, Suitland Parkway, Baltimore-Washington Parkway (NPS, Krakow 1990a)  
Historic Resource Study: Rock Creek Park, District of Columbia (NPS, Bushong 1990b) 
Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway (Historic American Buildings Survey, HABS No. 
D.C.-697, 1991-2) (NPS, Davis 1992) 
Linnaean Hill Cultural Landscape Inventory (NPS, Wheelock et al. 1998b) 
Peirce Mill Cultural Landscape Inventory (NPS Wheelock et al. 1998d) 
Europeans began to acquire private rights to land in the Rock Creek valley during the 17th cen-
tury. However, the Rock Creek valley remained largely untouched by settlement until a trading 
post was established in 1703 at what was then the navigable mouth of Rock Creek.  
Commercial and industrial use of Rock Creek increased steadily in the early decades of the 19th 
century. The gradient of the streambed and the water flow were sufficient to support a number of 
mills above and below the district line. The milling industry flourished along the creek in the first 
half of the 19th century, growing in direct proportion to the development of Georgetown and 
Washington City. More than a half-dozen water mills operated along its course within the district.  
Today only the Peirce Mill stands on the creek near Tilden Street as a reminder of this once-
common building type. Peirce Mill functioned as an integral part of a diversified farm complex. 
After 1890, stone grinding became obsolete and few water-powered flour millers operated in the 
eastern United States. However, Peirce Mill continued grinding corn, rye, and wheat into flour 
and meal until 1897 when its main shaft broke. 
The Peirce family erected two substantial enclaves of buildings, several of which remain today. 
They represent the only examples of 19th century structures erected in the park prior to its estab-
lishment. The original Peirce family dwelling and its immediate dependencies were located about 
a quarter mile west of Peirce Mill, just south of present-day Tilden Street. The Peirce estate even-
tually numbered 11 buildings, many of which were built of solid granite. The Peirce-Klingle 
Mansion, which houses the park headquarters, was the core of the second major complex of 
buildings erected by the Peirce family in what would become Rock Creek Park. 
 
137 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
Joshua Peirce became a prosperous nurseryman and landscape gardener who specialized in the 
cultivation of camellias and other exotic plants. His arboretum at Linnaean Hill provided botani-
cal specimens for the grounds of the White House, U.S. Capitol, and many of the national capi-
tal’s other federal reservations. The expansive landscape surrounding his mansion also included 
fruit trees and ornamental plants. Today, the Peirce structures stand as rare examples of early 19th 
century vernacular stone construction in the District of Columbia. 
The mills and estates in the Rock Creek valley were served by a network of roads. The courses of 
five of these pre-Civil War roads exist roughly today in the form of  
Tilden Street and Park Road (formerly Peirce’s Mill Road)  
Klingle Road (formerly Joshua Peirce’s Road, laid out in 1831) 
Broad Branch Road (surveyed and built in 1839) 
Blagden’s Mill Road (1847), a road trace on the landscape and a portion of Colorado 
Avenue  
Milkhouse Ford Road, now Rock Creek Ford Road 
Most of these early, narrow, unpaved roads were privately built, but they later evolved into public 
thoroughfares and were eventually acquired by the local government. Further road development 
was stimulated by the Civil War.  
In 1862, army engineers constructed Fort DeRussy as part of a circle of fortifications around the 
city. They also established Military Road to connect the defenses of the city. Located northeast of 
the intersection of Military Road and Oregon Avenue, Fort DeRussy was strategically placed to 
provide formidable resistance to enemy advancement down the valley. The fort saw action during 
the only Confederate assault on the city in July 1864. Although the fort’s structures were removed 
after the war, Fort DeRussy remains the most pronounced Civil War earthworks site in the na-
tional capital area. 
Operation of the Godey Lime Kilns began in 1864. The manufacture and sale of lime at this site 
continued until 1907. The kilns represent an important aspect of the thriving late 19th century 
commercial activities in Georgetown. The kilns were partially restored by the National Park Ser-
vice in 1967. 
Urban development in the area surrounding the valley began with a building boom in the 1880s. 
By the late 1880s, tracts north of the old Washington city limits and near the future park had been 
subdivided into suburban lots, with development potential reaching to the banks of Rock Creek.  
The rapid pace of suburban development threatened to destroy the rural character and natural 
scenery of the Rock Creek valley. In response, a bill establishing Rock Creek Park (Public Reser-
vation 339) was approved by both houses of Congress and signed into law (26 Stat. 492) by 
President Benjamin Harrison on September 27, 1890. A copy of this legislation is provided in ap-
pendix A. 
The first park improvements included a road system. The new park drive along the creek, named 
for Capt. Lansing Beach, incorporated existing road segments and a dirt road created by the con-
138 
 
Cultural Resources 
struction of a sewerline below Piney Branch in 1896. Walking trails and bridle paths also pro-
vided public access. 
Boulder Bridge was constructed in 1902. It has become a quintessential symbol of the rustic char-
acter and picturesque design of the first park structures. It is Washington’s finest example of rus-
tic bridge architecture, and one of the earliest Melan reinforced concrete arch structures of its type 
built in the district.  
In 1901-02, a Senate Park Commission comprehensive plan for the nation’s capital included a 
proposal for a regional park system that extended beyond the boundaries of the district to include 
such scenic areas as Great Falls. One aspect of their proposal was the development of a parkway, 
in the wording of the 1913 legislation establishing the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway, “for 
the purpose of preventing pollution and obstruction of Rock Creek and of connecting Potomac 
Park with the Zoological Park and Rock Creek Park.” 
On June 2, 1912, the reconstructed Joaquin Miller cabin (named for the California author of Song 
of the Sierras) was dedicated at a site just off Beach Drive, approximately a half-mile north of 
Military Road. The cabin, which had been disassembled and moved from its location across from 
Meridian Hill Park by the California State Association, soon became an “adopted” historic attrac-
tion in the park and a meeting point for picnic groups, hikers, and equestrian riders. Placement of 
the Miller cabin in the landscape was part of the picturesque improvement of the early 20th cen-
tury Rock Creek Park, which was also evident in the design of Boulder Bridge, the dam at Peirce 
Mill, and the rustic stone improvements to Milkhouse Ford. 
To accommodate the growing popularity of golf, two nine-hole golf courses were opened in 1923 
and 1926 in the east side of the park north of Military Road at the site of a former arboretum, 
which had been removed in 1920. A remodeled farmhouse served as a clubhouse. 
During the 1930s, numerous physical improvements in Rock Creek Park were made by the Na-
tional Park Service and Depression-era work relief laborers. The National Park Service made an 
effort to blend new construction with the picturesque park landscape, designing new structures in 
a rustic style popularly known today as “parkitecture.” 
In 1935-36, the stone-lodge-style Lodge House was constructed as a U.S. Park Police substation 
near the intersection of Military Road and Beach Drive. The National Park Service continued to 
preserve historic buildings, including the Peirce-Klingle Mansion, the other structures at the Lin-
naean Hill complex, and the Peirce Mill with its adjacent springhouse and barn. 
The 1930s marked the beginning of Rock Creek Park’s use as a commuter route. The completion 
of a motor drive from the park’s north end to East-West Highway in Maryland in 1932 and the 
opening of the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway in 1936 created a continuous automobile route 
from Maryland to central Washington, D.C. However, it was not until 1966 that a truly continu-
ous automobile route was created with completion of the zoo tunnel. Previously, evening zoo clo-
sure and flooding of fords hampered full use. 
Historic National Register Properties. Historic properties within the park and parkway that are 
listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) include the 
Peirce-Klingle Mansion  
 
139 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
Peirce Mill 
Peirce Springhouse and Peirce Mill Barn 
Godey Lime Kilns 
Boulder Bridge and Ross Drive Bridge 
Fort DeRussy, which is listed as a contributing feature to the “Civil War Fort Sites” Na-
tional Register nomination 
In addition to the listing of individual properties, the area of Rock Creek Park covered by this 
general management plan was listed in the NRHP as Rock Creek Park Historic District (No. 
91001524) on October 23, 1991. The historic district boundaries encompass Public Reservation 
339 established as Rock Creek Park on September 27, 1890. The historic district included 31 re-
sources classified as contributing to its significance. These resources are listed in appendix F. 
In 1997-98, the National Park Service, in consultation with the District of Columbia State His-
toric Preservation Officer (DCSHPO), completed a comprehensive survey of structures in Rock 
Creek Park and the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway that are eligible for listing on the NRHP. 
The Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway is eligible for listing, and the National Park Service cur-
rently is working with the DCSHPO to finalize a nomination. 
Cultural Landscapes. Cultural landscapes reflect the relationship between what is natural and 
what is man-made. According to The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of 
Historic Properties with Guidelines for the Treatment of Cultural Landscapes (Secretary of the 
Interior 1996), a cultural landscape is “a geographic area (including both cultural and natural re-
sources and the wildlife or domestic animals therein) associated with a historic event, activity, or 
person or exhibiting other cultural or esthetic values.” 
A cultural landscape inventory documents the qualities and attributes of a cultural landscape that 
make it significant and worthy of preservation. The goal of the National Park Service is to locate 
and evaluate cultural landscapes and provide information on their location, historical develop-
ment, characteristics and features, and management to assist park managers in planning, pro-
gramming, and recording treatment and management decisions. 
In 1997, the National Park Service initiated a cultural landscape inventory of the area covered by 
this general management plan. The inventory team has tentatively determined that  
Rock Creek Park meets the criteria for significance and integrity for listing in the Na-
tional Register as a historic designated landscape  
Linnaean Hill (which includes the Peirce-Klingle Mansion) and Peirce Mill meet the cri-
teria for a “component landscape,” which is a definable physical component of a larger 
landscape that contributes to the significance of a National Register-listed property and is 
individually significant  
140 
 
Visitor and Community Values 
VISITOR AND COMMUNITY VALUES 
TRADITIONAL PARK CHARACTER AND VISITOR EXPERIENCE  
Rock Creek Park was intended in the establishing legislation to be a “pleasure ground.” Visitors 
come for the scenery and the other sensory experiences that accompany a forested creek valley. 
They enjoy such features as the changing seasonal colors; life cycles and scents of the forest; 
sounds of water, wind, and small animals, including birds; and the quiet. The open spaces offer 
more active recreation and the sounds of people at play. 
Recreation Opportunities. One of the favorite ways to experience Rock Creek Park is from 
Beach Drive. This roadway, which is within the narrow creek valley for much of the length of the 
park, is a popular site for such activities as walking, in-line skating, and bicycling. In the average 
week, approximately 40,000 people recreate along its length, with the greatest use during the 
weekend. Portions of Beach Drive and other park roads are closed to motorized traffic during 
weekends to accommodate this heavy recreational use. 
A popular visitor experience on weekdays is motorized touring on Beach Drive and other park 
roads. Commuters and others use Beach Drive as a pleasant way to traverse the city in a 
north/south direction, even if they do not leave their cars for more direct contact with the out-
doors. The park averages more than 235,000 visits per week (12.4 million visits per year) from 
people driving through the park. 
The park offers a variety of views, from rugged expanses of mature, second-growth forest with 
little recent human disturbance to landscapes from the rural past. The engineered bridges are re-
minders of the monumental city to the south. Rock Creek Park provides a visual respite from the 
urban surroundings, an experience that draws almost 14.5 million visitors each year.  
Rock Creek Park offers visitors a variety of recreation options, including  
paved multi-use trails and weekend closures of Beach Drive for jogging, bicycling, in-
line skating, and other nonmotorized uses 
an extensive system of hiking and horseback riding trails 
Rock Creek Horse Center for public horseback riding and horse boarding (concession op-
erated) 
an 18-hole public golf course (concession operated) 
tennis courts, including 21 soft-surface courts and 10 hard surface courts (concession 
operated) 
scenic roads 
picnic areas, including 20 unrestricted picnic areas and 10 picnic areas requiring a permit  
sports fields suitable for soccer, football, volleyball, field hockey, lacrosse, and rugby 
 
141 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
the Carter Barron Amphitheater, which is a 4,200-seat outdoor theater offering summer 
musical and theatrical performances 
Rock Creek Gallery, also known as the Art Barn and the Peirce Mill Barn, which displays 
work of local artists 
two community gardens with a total of about 200 garden plots  
Visitor Profile. Visitors to Rock Creek Park are primarily local residents of the Washington, 
D.C. metropolitan area. However, because it is a national park, it also is visited by people from all 
over the country and the world who are visiting the area. The park’s recreational visitors come 
from a wide variety of demographic backgrounds representing many ethnic, racial, and economic 
groups reflective of the adjacent neighborhoods and society at large.  
Most visitors to interpretive centers, concessions, and picnic areas drive to the park in private 
automobiles. Many users of trails and Beach Drive arrive on foot, bicycle, or in-line skates.  
Visitors come to the park for a wide variety of reasons, including walking, hiking, jogging, bicy-
cling, communing with or studying nature, studying history, picnicking and family reunions, in-
terpretive and educational programs, spiritual meditation, reading, writing, and creating art. The 
length of a visitor’s stay depends on the purpose of the visit. A jogger may only stay an hour 
while a picnicker may stay all day. Many visitors come to Rock Creek Park on a regular or fre-
quent basis. 
Park staff collect annual visitation statistics for the entire area that the park administers. Visitation 
estimates are developed using park ranger counts, car counting devices, and formulas developed 
by the NPS’ Socio-Economic Studies Division in 1991. Visitation statistics are gathered and ana-
lyzed for all areas administered by the staff, so that visitation cannot be reported just for the area 
included in this general management plan. Therefore, the visitation statistics in table 13 reflect 
visitor use on all Rock Creek Park lands. 
TABLE 13: AVERAGE ANNUAL VISITATION AT ROCK CREEK PARK, 1991 TO 1997 
Visitation a/ 
Annual Visitors 
Total visits 
14,464,000 
Nonrecreational (commuters) 
12,389,000 
Recreational 
2,075,000 
a/ All values include visitation on Rock Creek Park lands that are not 
included in this general management plan. 
Recreational visits to Rock Creek Park occur fairly evenly over the warmer months of spring, 
summer, and early fall, and drop off in the late fall and winter. This pattern has been recorded at 
the nature center, where an average of 31 percent of annual visits occur during spring, another 31 
percent occur during summer, 22 percent occur during fall, and 16 percent occur during winter.  
Nonrecreational visits (commuters) are distributed evenly throughout the year, with an average of 
25 percent of total visits occurring each season. Nonrecreational visitors are overwhelmingly 
automobile commuters and, to a much lesser extent, nonmotorized commuters, principally cy-
clists. During scoping, many commenters identified themselves as commuters (by both automo-
142 
 
Visitor and Community Values 
bile and bicycle) and emphasized that they consider their commute through the park to be recrea-
tional because it is an enjoyable ride through a scenic landscape and provides mental decompres-
sion from the workday.  
Visitation Trends and Visitor Services. In the 1980s, recreational visitation to Rock Creek Park 
almost doubled, and then stabilized throughout the 1990s. In 1980 there were 1,060,000 recrea-
tional visitors. By 1989, this number had risen to 2,050,000 recreational visitors. Since then, there 
have been approximately 2 million recreational visitors each year. In the year 2000, the park sup-
ported 2,036,000 recreational visits.  
At the same time, the park’s visitor services have been severely reduced, resulting in a substantial 
decline in visitation to the park’s two interpretive centers. The nature center and planetarium’s 
visitation has dropped by more than half, from 49,000 visitors in 1979 to 24,000 visitors in 1997. 
Peirce Mill visitation had a similar decline, from 31,000 visitors in 1979 to 12,000 visitors in 
1997. Visitor services such as publications and wayside exhibits also are inadequate. The result is 
that many visitors to Rock Creek Park never know they are in a national park. Most never have 
contact with park rangers or receive any basic orientation or visitor services.  
Noise. In early December 1996, noise levels were measured at 21 sites in and around Rock Creek 
Park and the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway (Robert Peccia and Associates et al. 1997). 
Results included the following. 
Peak traffic noise levels within the park and parkway ranged from a low of 57 decibels 
(dB) equivalent sound level (Leq) at the 4th hole of the golf course to 79 dB Leq on the 
jogging trail south of Calvert, about 10 feet from the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway. 
Peak and off-peak noise levels were quite similar. Readings between these two periods 
varied by 4 dB or less at all 17 sites at which both peak and off-peak measurements were 
made. 
Peak noise levels at seven sites met or exceeded the Federal Highway Administration’s 
(FHWA’s) noise abatement criterion (NAC) of 67 dB Leq. All of these sites were within 
100 feet of Beach Drive or the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway and four of the seven 
were within 25 feet of the roads. Noise levels at four of these sites also met or exceeded 
the NAC during off-peak periods. 
Generally, the study found the following.  
Picnic areas along Beach Drive north of Military Road are not adversely affected 
by traffic noise.  
South of Military Road, traffic noise exceeds FHWA standards at picnic areas 
that are within 60 feet of Beach Drive.  
Visitor facilities within 110 feet to 125 feet of the Rock Creek and Potomac 
Parkway typically experience noise levels above the FHWA standard.  
The noise standard is frequently exceeded along segments of recreation trails 
within 100 feet of Beach Drive and the parkway.  
 
143 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
Noise samples near residences along Oregon Avenue, 16th Street, and Broad Branch 
Road, at Kalorama Circle and at the National Zoo were all within the FHWA standard. 
REGIONAL AND LOCAL TRANSPORTATION 
Regional Traffic Flows. Traffic congestion in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area is the 
second worst in the nation (Reid 1998). A detailed description of traffic conditions in the vicinity 
of the park and parkway is provided in Transportation Study, Rock Creek Park, Washington, D.C. 
(Robert Peccia & Associates 1997). The roads in the vicinity of Rock Creek Park are an impor-
tant component of the urban road network of Washington, D.C.  
Principal arterial routes radiate out from the center of the district and include Massachu-
setts, Wisconsin, Connecticut, Nebraska, Georgia, and Virginia Avenues as well as 16th 
Street. Many of the arterial streets extend into Maryland and are primary commuter and 
delivery routes into the district.  
Military Road, the Whitehurst Freeway, and Porter, Harvard, Calvert, and M Streets trav-
erse the park and provide for cross-town traffic. 
The Year 1990 Average Weekday Traffic Volumes map presents traffic counts on major roads in 
the vicinity of Rock Creek Park in 1990.  
As shown on the map, the major arterials each had an average daily traffic (ADT) count 
of 20,000 to 40,000 vehicles  
On weekdays, the peak-hour morning count and peak-hour evening count were nearly 
identical (difference of 10 percent or less) for almost every major roadway. 
On almost all of these roads, the peak-hour morning count and peak-hour evening count 
each accounted for approximately 8 percent to 9 percent of the ADT. 
During the morning and evening commuting periods, traffic levels on these arterial roadways 
typically meet or exceed their capacities. Table G.1 in appendix G shows the 1990 average daily 
traffic volumes for the major roadways in the area. The roadways usually can accommodate these 
high traffic volumes through aggressive traffic management measures such as reversing lanes 
during commuting periods.  
Both morning and evening traffic counts on virtually all of the roads in the mapped area have in-
creased in the past 10 years. However, the patterns described above are still occurring. A traffic 
validation using actual traffic volumes from the year 1999 is provided in appendix H. 
Excellent public transportation opportunities occur in the area. The Washington Area Metropoli-
tan Transit Authority provides Metro Bus service throughout the area. The Metro Rail’s red line 
runs to the west of the park and the green line runs to the east of the park. Several Metro Rail 
stops are within 1 mile of the central portion of the park. 
144 
 
Rock Creek Park
Georgetown
University
Walter Reed
Army Medical
Center
US
Naval
Observatory
American
University
POTOMAC RIVER
National
Zoological
Park
MARYLAND
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
VIRGINIA
Chevy
Chase
Circle
Dupont
Circle
Washington
Circle
White
House
Kennedy
Center
Lincoln
Memorial
Washington
Monument
Sheridan
Circle
50
29
66
66
50
410
410
190
193
355
390
29
29
29
29
Massachusetts Avenue
Massachusetts Avenue
K Street
Constitution Avenue
Theodore
Roosevelt
Bridge
M Street
Whitehurst
Freeway
P Street
Pennsylvania
Ave.
Virginia Ave.
23rd St.
22nd St.
Foxhall Road
Mac Arthur
Boulevard
Lee Highway
George Washington
Memorial Parkway
Military Road
River Road
Nebraska Avenue
Alaska Avenue
Beach Dr.
Wise Rd.
Sherrill
Dr.
Aspen St.
Bingham Dr.
Beach Dr.
Joyce
Rd.
Kennedy St.
16th St.
16th St.
17th St.
Georgia Ave.
Morrow
Dr.
Ross Dr.
Beach Dr.
Colorado Ave.
Blagden Ave.
Branch Pkwy.
Piney
Tilden St.
Park Rd.
Porter St.
Cathedral
Calvert
Florida Ave.
Rock Creek and
Potomac Pkwy.
St.
Ave.
24th St.
Beach Dr.
Adams Mill Rd.
Klingle
Rd.
Harvard St.
Arkansas Ave.
Grant Rd.
Glover Rd.
Broad
Branch Rd.
27th St.
Oregon Ave.
W. Beach
E. Beach
N. Portal Dr.
S. Portal Dr.
Wisconsin Avenue
Wisconsin Avenue
East
West
Highway
Connecticut Avenue
Connecticut Avenue
New Hampshire
Avenue
Rock
Creek
Park
Parkside Dr.
N
Map Scale: 1"= 0.5 Miles
(Joyce Rd.)
0 - 5,000
5,000 - 10,000
10,000 - 15,000
15,000 - 20,000
20,000 - 30,000
30,000 - 40,000
40,000 - 50,000
Over 50,000
11,500
30,000
29,000
(2700/2700)
(2600/2600)
(1000/1300)
(600/700)
(600/700)
(200/200)
(1000/1100)
(700/900)
(200/300)
(100/100)
(100/100)
(100/100)
(3100/3300)
(3000/3200)
(2900/3100)
(2300/2500)
(2900/3000)
(2000/2100)
(2900/3000)
(4900/5000)
(500/500)
(700/1000)
(2600/2400)
(1700/1700)
(200/200)
(500/600)
(2000/2000)
(400/400)
(300/200)
(200/200)
(0/0)
(100/0)
(3200/3400)
(2400/2600)
(2100/2100)
(2800/2800)
(2300/2500)
(1900/1900)
(1700/1700)
(2500/2600)
(2400/2600)
(700/1000)
(400/400)
(1400/1900)
(500/600)
(800/900)
(700/700)
(1300/1300)
(3100/3300)
(200/300)
(800/800)
(1700/2100)
(400/400)
(1200/1300)
(2200/2000)
(3100/3300)
(2100/2100)
(2500/2500)
(1800/1800)
(2100/2200)
(1800/2000)
(1100/1300)
(3400/3200)
(2400/2600)
(800/900)
(4400/4500)
(3700/3600)
(1700/2100)
(2700/2700)
(2900/2900)
(1200/800)
(200/200)
(2200/2000)
(2000/2000)
(600/600)
(2500/2500)
(1800/1800)
(2700/2700)
(600/600)
(3200/3200)
(2500/2500)
(2600/2600)
(1000/900)
36,000
30,000
28,000
30,400
32,200
24,700
43,400
41,200
25,000
14,000
40,000
34,000
52,400
55,000
24,000
9,000
19,800
28,400
900
34,000
20,600
2,000
1,200
5,800
22,300
19,000
21,000
25,000
33,400
37,000
16,000
9,900
2,000
9,000
30,800
30,500
30,200
38,000
6,800
200
9,000
500
7,100
8,900
5,000
18,000
10,100
5,000
36,200
35,000
34,000
29,000
33,500
23,100
33,500
41,800
1,600
6,400
22,000
20,000
29,000
28,000
6,800
2,400
5,400
5,400
10,200
8,000
1,000
8,500
8,700
3,500
2,500
2,100
1,700
24,000
46,000
29,000
29,500
10,000
10,200
6,000
22,000
27,600
44,000
21,600
23,000
30,000
(3900/3900)
(800/900)
(500/500)
(3100/3400)
(1600/1800)
(3300/3700)
(1700/1700)
(3800/4200)
(100/100) =
(AM Peak Hour/PM Peak Hour)
900 = ADT
022/736308/rocr20045.cdr 1/09/02
ROCK CREEK PARK / ROCK CREEK AND POTOMAC PARKWAY • WASHINGTON, DC
DCS • January 2002 • 821 / 20045
United States Department of Interior • National Park Service
YEAR 1990 AVERAGE WEEKDAY TRAFFIC VOLUMES
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
 
146 
 
Visitor and Community Values 
Local Traffic Flows. The Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway and Beach Drive are the principal 
roads within Rock Creek Park.  
The Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway extends approximately 2.5 miles from the Theo-
dore Roosevelt Bridge in the core of the district north to Calvert Street. The parkway is a 
four-lane, paved, limited-access facility with a posted speed limit of 35 miles per hour.  
As shown on the Year 1990 Average Weekday Traffic Volumes map, this road-
way carried more traffic than any other in the vicinity, with average daily traffic 
(ADT) counts of 40,000 to 55,000 vehicles. 
Traffic patterns were very similar to those described above for other arterials, 
with similar morning and evening traffic volumes and peak-hour counts during 
the morning and evening each accounting for approximately 8 percent to 9 per-
cent of the ADT. 
From Calvert Street, Beach Drive extends approximately 6.5 miles north to the Maryland 
state line. Beach Drive is a two-lane, paved road with a posted speed limit of 25 miles per 
hour. In 1990, traffic exhibited the following characteristics. 
Between Wise Road and Blagden Avenue, average daily traffic counts were 
8,000 to 9,000 vehicles. 
From Blagden Avenue south to the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway, counts 
ranged from 18,000 to 24,700 vehicles per day. 
On all stretches there was slightly more evening traffic than morning traffic. At 
all sites shown on the map, peak-hour evening traffic represented 9 percent to 11 
percent of the average daily traffic, while morning peak-hour traffic accounted 
for 7 percent to 9 percent of the daily total. 
As with the arterials, traffic has increased since 1990 on both the Rock Creek and Potomac 
Parkway and on Beach Drive. However, accurate estimates of the changes are not available. 
Twenty-four entry routes provide access to Rock Creek Park (see Existing Conditions map). Al-
though the park is closed at dark, park roads and entry points remain open. 
Major entry points north of Military Road include Beach Drive at the Maryland state line, 
West Beach Drive, and Wise Road.  
South of Military Road, major entry points include Joyce Road, Morrow Drive, Broad 
Branch Road, Blagden Avenue, Park Road, Tilden Street, and Piney Branch Parkway.  
Visitors can also enter the park from 16th Street NW, the Kennedy Street area, and from 
the National Zoological Park.  
Commuting has the greatest effect on traffic flows through Rock Creek Park. Traffic volumes 
show little seasonal variation and the highest traffic levels correspond to the peak morning and 
evening commuting times. To accommodate these peaks in commuter traffic, all lanes of the 
 
147 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway are designated as one-way southbound during the morning 
commute period and one-way northbound during the evening commute.  
To provide recreational opportunities for pedestrians, bicyclists, and in-line skaters, the park 
closes portions of Beach Drive to motorized vehicle traffic during the day on weekends and holi-
days. During these times, Beach Drive is closed from Broad Branch Road to Joyce Road, picnic 
grove 10 to Wise Road, and West Beach Drive to the Maryland state line. Bingham Drive and 
Sherrill Drive also are closed. 
During the week when all park roads are open to commuter traffic, interactions are common be-
tween automobiles and nonmotorized users, such as bicyclists and pedestrians. These particularly 
occur in areas where a trail does not parallel Beach Drive, where pedestrians and bicyclists often 
enter the traffic flow. 
To understand commuter patterns, the National Park Service commissioned a license plate survey 
in 1996 (Robert Peccia & Associates 1997). The survey results indicated the following. 
During weekday rush-hours, more than 99 percent of all vehicles using the Rock Creek 
and Potomac Parkway and more than 95 percent of vehicles entering Rock Creek Park 
pass through without stopping.  
Commuting patterns through Rock Creek Park do not simply flow north and south. In-
stead, many rush-hour drivers use segments of park roads to traverse the park and reenter 
the city street grid.  
Only 3 percent of the vehicles that enter the park at the Maryland state line exit 
onto the parkway.  
In the morning, the greatest number of vehicles that exit onto the parkway enter 
the park at Broad Branch Road (17 percent), Blagden Avenue (20 percent), and 
Piney Branch Parkway (34 percent).  
In the evening, the patterns are very similar. Only 1 percent of the vehicles that 
enter from the parkway exit the park at the Maryland state line. The majority of 
vehicles exit onto Broad Branch Road (18 percent), Blagden Avenue (19 per-
cent), and Piney Branch Parkway (33 percent). 
The study also determined vehicle occupancy in August 1996. During commuting periods, the 
average vehicle occupancy on park roads ranged from a low of 1.09 people per vehicle on Mor-
row Drive to a high of 1.38 people per vehicle on Tilden Street. On nearby streets in the district, 
the results ranged from 1.22 people per vehicle on Oregon Avenue to 1.34 people per vehicle on 
16th Street. These averages indicate that much of the rush-hour use is by vehicles with a single 
occupant (Robert Peccia & Associates 1997). 
Higher traffic volumes during peak hours cause delays at certain intersections during the 
commuting periods (Robert Peccia & Associates 1997).  
In the morning, the following intersections failed or functioned very poorly: Beach Drive 
and Blagden Avenue, Beach Drive and Piney Branch Parkway, Beach Drive and Tilden 
Street/Park Road, and 16th Street and Kennedy Drive/Morrow Road.  
148 
 
Visitor and Community Values 
In the evening, failures or poor operations occurred at Beach Drive and Joyce Road, 
Beach Drive and Porter Road, and Beach Drive and Tilden Street/Park Road. 
Most vehicles travel at or above the posted speed limit through the park. Spot speed checks re-
vealed that the average speed was 15 miles per hour over the posted speed limit. Commuters in 
Rock Creek Park also tend to have more aggressive driving habits than do visitors unfamiliar with 
the park. A detailed speed analysis can be found in Transportation Study, Rock Creek Park, 
Washington, D.C. (Robert Peccia & Associates 1997). 
Traffic Safety. An analysis of accidents on park roads between January 1, 1993 and December 
31, 1995 was included in the Transportation Study, Rock Creek Park, Washington, D.C. (Robert 
Peccia & Associates 1997). All of the information is this section is from that report. 
The accident investigation indicated that the frequency and severity of accidents are relatively 
low for an urban area. However, the relatively low number of serious accidents in the park may 
result in part from a perceived risk to personal safety. During weekdays, the high traffic speeds 
and heavy volumes may discourage recreational use, one of the primary purposes of the park.  
According to the 3-year accident study, the greatest safety problems are excessive vehicle speeds 
and aggressive driving tendencies. Conflicts between automobiles and recreational visitors are 
common, even when accidents are avoided.  
A total of 1,175 accidents were reported from Rock Creek Park and the Rock Creek and Potomac 
Parkway during the 3-year period. A summary of the accidents, separated into three geographic 
areas, is provided in table 14. 
TABLE 14: SUMMARY OF TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS IN ROCK CREEK PARK AND THE ROCK 
CREEK AND POTOMAC PARKWAY, 1993 THROUGH 1995 
 
Accident Type 
Beach  
Drive 
Other  
Park Roads 
Rock Creek and 
Potomac Parkway 
Total 
Total accidents 
294 (25%) 
224 (19.1%) 
657 (55.9%) 
1,175 (100%) 
Fatal accidents 
1 (0.3%) 
1 (0.4%) 
2 (0.3%) 
4 (0.3%) 
Injury accidents 
75 (25.5%) 
45 (20.1%) 
155 (23.6%) 
275 (23.4%) 
Property damage only 
218 (74.2%) 
178 (79.5%) 
500 (76.1%) 
896 (76.3%) 
Collision with motor ve-
hicle or other object  
273 (92.9%) 
210 (93.8%) 
621 (94.5%) 
1,104 (94.0%) 
Collision involved pedes-
trian or bicyclist 
13 (4.4%) 
4 (1.8%) 
11 (1.7%) 
28 (2.4%) 
Non-collision accidents 
8 (2.7%) 
10 (4.5%) 
25 (3.8%) 
43 (3.6%) 
Among the recorded accidents, almost 56 percent occurred on the parkway. Twenty-five percent 
were on Beach Drive, and 19 percent were on other park roads.  
In all three areas, most accidents (more than 92 percent) involved collisions with other cars or 
collisions with objects such as poles, signs, trees, guardrails, rocks, bridges, ditches, or animals. 
On Beach Drive, collisions of motor vehicles with pedestrians or bicyclists accounted for 4.4 per-
 
149 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
cent of traffic accidents. Other park roads (1.8 percent) and the parkway (1.7 percent) had lower 
percentages of accidents involving collisions of motorized vehicles with pedestrians or cyclists. 
Despite the difference in percentages of accidents involving pedestrians and cyclists, all three ar-
eas had similar fatality levels of 0.3 to 0.4 percent. Higher rates of collisions along Beach Drive 
with pedestrians and bicyclists probably were reflected by the injury rate of more than 25.5 per-
cent, compared to 20.1 percent for other park roads and 23.6 percent along the Rock Creek 
Parkway. The injury rate along the parkway may reflect the higher traffic speeds. 
In the 3-year period, there was little difference by year in the number of accidents occurring or 
the severity of the accidents (injury versus property damage only). This relatively constant level 
of accidents was observed in all three areas. 
Beach Drive. If traffic conditions were identical throughout the week, each day would be ex-
pected to represent approximately 14 percent of the traffic accidents. However, the analysis of ac-
cidents on Beach Drive shows otherwise. During the work week, almost 19 percent of traffic ac-
cidents occurred on Tuesdays, while only 12 percent occurred on Wednesdays. 
On Saturdays, three segments of Beach Drive are closed to motorized vehicles, and commuter use 
is absent. Despite traffic reductions associated with these factors, fully 14 percent of the traffic 
accidents on Beach Drive occurred on Saturdays. These same conditions (road closures and lack 
of commuters) also occur on Sundays, but Sunday accidents represented only about 8 percent of 
the weekly total. 
The locations of the 518 accidents that were recorded in the park north of the parkway were 
mapped. Of these, nearly 57 percent occurred on Beach Drive. Other roads in the park that had 5 
percent or more of the traffic accidents included Piney Branch Parkway (8 percent), Glover Road 
(6 percent), and Wise Road (5 percent). 
Anecdotal evidence would indicate that many accidents occur along the narrow portion of Beach 
Drive where there is no trail, and pedestrians and cyclists enter the traffic flow. However, map-
ping shows that only 29 accidents, including six with injuries and no fatalities, occurred in the 
three-quarter-mile stretch extending from the intersection with Broad Branch Road north across 
Boulder Bridge and through the gorge area. More than half of these accidents occurred near the 
intersection at the south end of this segment. Factors that could contribute to the low incidence of 
traffic accidents along this stretch of road probably include its closure to motorized traffic on 
weekends and holidays, and the extra caution taken by motorists who recognize the gorge area as 
potentially dangerous. 
The portion of Beach Drive south of the Wise Road intersection to picnic grove #10, which also 
is closed on weekends, had a similarly low level of accidents. However, this area appears to have 
an unusually high ratio of injury accidents (almost 60 percent, compared to 23 percent throughout 
the remainder of the park). The weekend closure segment between West Beach Drive and the 
Maryland border has accident and injury rates similar to those occurring along other parts of 
Beach Drive that are not closed on weekends. 
150 
 
Visitor and Community Values 
Fatalities. Four traffic fatalities occurred in the park and along the parkway during the 3-year pe-
riod. Two of the fatalities occurred along the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway. One was located 
southbound on the parkway near K Street, and the other was on the parkway near Virginia. One 
of these fatal accidents was in September and the other was in October. 
Both were collisions with pedestrians, and in both instances the fatality was a pedestrian. 
Both accidents occurred in lighted areas, during mid-week, in the late evening or early 
night, in rainy weather, and on wet roads. 
Contributing factors for both fatalities involved a pedestrian illegally on the roadway 
wearing clothing that was not visible. 
The other two fatalities were recorded in the park.  
Both fatalities were single-vehicle accidents where the driver died after colliding with a 
fixed object. Both occurred during the mid-week, in the late evening or early night. 
One accident occurred in March in clear weather on dry roads. It was located on Morrow 
Drive south of Joyce Road. 
The other was in November on wet roads in sleet, hail, or freezing rain. It occurred on 
Beach Drive near Blagden Road. Driving too fast for conditions was cited as a contribut-
ing factor. 
Traffic Accidents involving Pedestrians and Bicyclists. As shown in table 14, there were 28 traffic 
accidents involving motorized vehicles and pedestrians or bicyclists during the 1993 through 
1995 period. Eleven of these accidents were reported on the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway.  
Six of these were collisions with pedestrians, four were collisions with bicycles, and one 
accident report listed a pedestrian or cyclist as a contributing factor.  
Two of the 11 accidents were fatalities, both of which killed the pedestrian. Additional 
information on these two accidents was provided above. 
Six of the accidents resulted in injuries, three of which injured a pedestrian or bicyclist. 
In the other three cases, an occupant of the vehicle was injured. 
Seven of the accidents occurred during the mid-week (Tuesday through Thursday). Five 
occurred during low-light conditions.  
Contributing factors included “pedestrian/cyclist illegally in roadway” (six accidents), 
“pedestrian/cyclist disregarded traffic control” (three accidents), and “pedestrian/cyclist 
clothing not visible” (two accidents). 
Within Rock Creek Park, there were 17 accidents involving pedestrians or bicyclists. Thirteen of 
these occurred on Beach Drive and four were on other park roads. 
 
151 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
Five of the accidents were classified as collisions with pedestrians, and 12 were classified 
as collisions with bicycles. 
Eleven accidents resulted in injuries, four of which injured a pedestrian or bicyclist. In 
the other seven cases, an occupant of the vehicle was injured. There were no fatalities. 
Ten of the accidents occurred on a Saturday or Sunday. Only two occurred during low-
light conditions.  
All but one of the 17 accidents involved two or more motorized vehicles.  
Factors most commonly cited as contributing to these accidents included “driver failed to 
yield the right of way” (five accidents) and “driver disregarded traffic signs, signals, or 
road markings” (three accidents). 
Accident Rates. The accident rate for a road segment is described as the number of accidents per 
100 million vehicle-miles traveled. Accident rates also can be determined for fatal and injury ac-
cidents.  
Accident, injury, and fatality rates were calculated for the park and parkway for the 3-year period, 
1993 through 1995. The results are presented in table 15. The area evaluated for the Rock Creek 
and Potomac Parkway extended from Calvert Street to Ohio Drive. Park data included Beach 
Drive from the Maryland line to the intersection with the parkway south of the National Zoo. 
For comparison, table 15 also includes average accident, injury, and fatality rates in Washington, 
D.C. for 1993 through 1995 (calculated from data from the District of Columbia in 1995) and na-
tionwide in 1998 (Federal Highway Administration 1999). The parkway had accident rates that 
were higher than those occurring throughout Washington, D.C., but lower injury rates, and fatal-
ity rates that matched those both in the city and nationwide. On Beach Drive, the accident rate 
was about 10 percent lower than the citywide rate, with an injury rate that was 33 percent lower 
and a fatality rate about 20 percent below both the city and national averages. 
TABLE 15: ACCIDENT RATES FOR THE ROCK CREEK AND POTOMAC PARKWAY,  
BEACH DRIVE, AND WASHINGTON, D.C. 
 
 
Location 
Accident Rate  
(per 100 million  
vehicle-miles traveled) 
Injury Rate  
(per 100 million  
vehicle-miles traveled) 
Fatality Rate  
(per 100 million  
vehicle-miles traveled) 
Rock Creek and Potomac 
Parkway  
540 
127 
1.6 
Beach Drive 
387 
99 
1.3 
Washington, D.C. area 
425 
147 
1.6 
Nationwide 
-- 
125 
1.6 
152 
 
Visitor and Community Values 
Mass Transportation. There are 14 Metrorail stations within 1 mile of the park and parkway 
(see Vicinity map) and numerous bus stops. The Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Author-
ity provides bus and rail service in the region, which includes the District of Columbia, two coun-
ties in Maryland, and three counties in Virginia. Ridership between July and the end of Septem-
ber 1999 totaled more than 1 million, a sizable portion of the 3.2 million residents in the service 
area (www.wmata.com/METFACTS/facsnfigs.htm).  
Transit buses and commercial vehicles are not permitted on park roads or the parkway. The num-
ber of visitors entering the park and parkway by foot or bicycle from the mass transit network is 
unknown, but is believed to be relatively small. 
Nonmotorized Transportation Flows. Nonmotorized transportation in this document includes 
walking, bicycling, and other means of personal transport for the purpose of getting from one lo-
cation to another. This contrasts with nonmotorized recreation, defined here as walking or riding 
for pleasure, fitness, or some other recreational purpose. 
The 1990 census reported that 5 percent of the population of the District of Columbia bicycles to 
work. Studies prepared for the National Capital Region Transportation Planning Board 
(NCRTPB) of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments (MWCOG) reported that 
cyclists represent a wide range of ages, and more than half have an annual income of $75,000 or 
greater (Bairstow 1995a and 1995b).  
A recent survey (Sacks 1994) found that 67 percent of all users on the paved recreation trails in 
Rock Creek Park and along the parkway during weekday peak hours were engaged in transporta-
tion rather than strictly recreation. Average distance traveled by such users was 5.3 miles. Typical 
nonmotorized transportation participants in the park and parkway lived within 2 miles of the 
paved trail system and were going to destinations within 1 mile of the trail.  
Bicycling is the most popular form of nonmotorized transportation along the park and parkway, 
accounting for 54 percent to 86 percent of average weekday nonmotorized transit during a 1-day 
August 1996 survey (Robert Peccia & Associates 1997). Surveys (Bairstow 1995a and 1995b) of 
morning peak-hour bicyclists along the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway trail determined the 
following characteristics. 
Eighty-five percent of the trail users were going to destinations in the district and 16 per-
cent were headed through the park to locations in Arlington, Virginia.  
Bicyclists averaged 9.9 miles per trip on paved trails.  
Sixty-eight percent of cyclists preferred off-street trails while 20 percent preferred bike 
lanes on streets or sharing streets with automobiles.  
Bad weather was the greatest deterrent to cycling (72 percent). The threat to safety from 
traffic was the second most frequently mentioned deterrent (35 percent).  
The same survey of bicyclists on radial routes into the city documented that paved trails have a 
5-fold or greater increased bicycle use compared to designated street routes or low-traffic roads 
(Bairstow 1995a and 1995b). This survey, combined with 1993 counts, indicated about 60 bicy-
 
153 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
cles per hour during the evening peak-hours on the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway paved trail 
at P Street. The studies considered 12 to 80 bikes per hour to be in the high range for the region.  
A 1-day, 8-hour sample of nonmotorized transportation in the park and parkway was collected on 
Thursday, August 22, 1996 (Robert Peccia & Associates 1997). Similarly to the NCRTPB survey 
(Bairstow 1995a and 1995b), the Peccia survey found preferential use of trails, with an average 
weekday hourly volume of 34 users per hour on the bike/foot trail south of the Beach Road/Broad 
Branch Road intersection and 14 users per hour on Beach Drive north of this intersection. Beach 
Drive in the vicinity of Joyce Road averaged 22 users per hour, and 112 users per hour were re-
corded on the bike/foot path along the Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway south of P Street. 
Little information is available on pedestrian nonmotorized transportation. Most weekday and 
weekend walkers appear to be recreationists, but a small percentage of pedestrians are likely 
walking to their jobs or to some other destination.  
There are several hundred miles of paved trails and designated bicycle routes in the region. Major 
trails connecting to the paved trails through Rock Creek Park and the parkway include the Rock 
Creek Trail (in Rock Creek Regional Park, Maryland), the Capital Crescent Trail, and the C and 
O Canal Trail. 
COMMUNITY CHARACTERISTICS 
Community characteristics are included as an impact topic based on the criteria presented in the 
“Impact Topics - Resources and Values at Stake in the Planning Process” section. 
Metropolitan Washington, D.C. The Washington, D.C. metropolitan area is generally illustrated 
in the Regional map shown at the beginning of this general management plan. More than 4 
million people reside in the U.S. Census Bureau’s Washington metropolitan statistical area, 
including just over 600,000 who live within the boundaries of the district. The remainder of the 
statistical area consists of five Maryland counties, six Virginia counties, and four Virginia cities 
(District of Columbia Government 1996c). 
Washington, D.C.’s population is approximately 66 percent African American, 30 percent white, 
and 4 percent other races. Approximately 5 percent of Washington, D.C.’s citizens also identify 
themselves as Latino. Compared to statistics from the 50 states, the district’s per capita income is 
the third highest in the nation, and in 1989 was 42 percent above the national average (District of 
Columbia Government 1996c). 
Generalizations cannot be made about ethnic composition of the nearby areas in Maryland and 
Virginia. For example, populations in some of these communities are 90 percent or more white, 
while the Takoma Park area just north of the Maryland state line is 36 percent black, 48 percent 
white, and 16 percent other races, with about 17 percent of the residents identifying a Latino 
heritage.  
154 
 
Visitor and Community Values 
Surrounding Wards and Neighborhoods. The Neighborhood map shows the Washington, D.C. 
wards and neighborhoods in the vicinity of the park. It also shows the Maryland communities of 
Chevy Chase, Silver Springs, and Takoma Park that are just north of the park.  
Within the District of Columbia, eight wards have been established for purposes of voting and 
representation. As shown in the Neighborhood map, four of the wards border the park. Detailed 
descriptions of the wards are available in Indices: A Statistical Index to District of Columbia 
Services (District of Columbia Government 1996c). Table 16 summarizes some of the ward 
characteristics. 
Each ward includes from four to six Advisory Neighborhood Commissions (ANCs) that advise 
the district government on matters of public policy and review and make recommendations 
concerning neighborhood planning and development. They also participate in the district’s 
comprehensive planning process. The ANCs do not correlate to the traditional neighborhood 
boundaries shown in the Neighborhood map. 
As shown on the map, Rock Creek Park and the parkway are bordered by established urban 
neighborhoods. Those in the district include Hawthorn, Chevy Chase, Forest Hills, Garfield 
Heights, Massachusetts Park, North Cleveland Park, Cleveland Park, Massachusetts Avenue 
Heights, Cathedral Heights, Georgetown, Central, Hillcrest, Mount Pleasant, Crestwood, 16th 
Street Heights, Brightwood, Shepherd Park, and Colonial Village.  
The neighborhoods surrounding the park are some of the most racially, ethnically, and 
economically diverse in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area. Many residential and mixed-use 
areas, including Adams Morgan, DuPont Circle, and Georgetown, as well as office buildings and  
foreign embassies, also are located near the park and parkway. During scoping, citizens living in 
the adjoining neighborhoods both east and west of Rock Creek Park expressed concerns about 
local increases in traffic that might be associated with changes in park management. 
To the north of the park in Montgomery County, Maryland, are communities that are primarily 
residential, with commercial development extending along the major thoroughfares. These 
include Connecticut Avenue, Wisconsin Avenue, and 16th Street.  
Montgomery County neighborhoods are grouped into planning areas. The three planning areas 
nearest the park are Bethesda/Chevy Chase, Silver Spring, and Takoma Park. Table 17 
summarizes some of the characteristics of the people living in each of these planning areas. A 
complete profile of the planning areas is available from the Maryland-National Capital Park and 
Planning Commission at:  
http://www.clark.net/pub/mncppc/montgom/factmap/ 
 
155 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
TABLE 16: GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE POPULATIONS OF  
WASHINGTON, D.C. WARDS 1 THROUGH 4 a/ 
 
 
Ward 1 
 
Ward 2 
 
Ward 3 
 
Ward 4 b/ 
Total  
District 
Population 
79,641 
78,743 
77,774 
78,425 
606,900 
Area (acres) c/ 
1,222 
4,025 
4,746 
3,087 - 
3,706 d/ 
27,879 - 
29,779 d/ 
Land area used for housing  
82% 
48% 
87% 
87% 
75% 
Median household size 
(number of people) 
2.17  
1.75  
1.91  
2.53  
2.26  
Population density  
(residents per acre) 
66 
19 
13 - 16 d/ 
21 - 25 d/ 
20 - 22 d/  
Residential population density 
(residents per residential acre) 
81 - 120 e/ 
41 - 108 e/ 
19 - 28 e/ 
24 - 47 e/ 
27 - 58 e/ 
Median household income 
$26,798 
$31,716 
$48,967 
$33,025 
$30,727 
Age distribution 
Under 18 years 
17% 
10% 
12% 
18% 
19% 
18-64 years  
72% 
78% 
71% 
82% 
68% 
65+ years 
11% 
12% 
17% 
18% 
13% 
Racial composition 
Black 
57% 
35% 
6% 
85% 
66% 
White 
30% 
57% 
88% 
12% 
30% 
Other 
13% 
8% 
6% 
3% 
5% 
Also identified Latino 
heritage 
18% 
7% 
7% 
5% 
5% 
Education attainment  
Less than high school 
diploma 
32% 
19% 
6% 
36% 
27% 
High school graduate 
(only) 
16% 
12% 
9% 
25% 
21% 
College, 1-3 years 
16% 
17% 
15% 
24% 
19% 
College, 4 or more years 
36% 
52% 
70% 
25% 
33% 
Housing unit occupancy` 
Owner occupied 
25% 
26% 
47% 
53% 
35% 
Renter occupied 
64% 
60% 
48% 
42% 
54% 
Vacant 
11% 
14% 
5% 
5% 
11% 
a/ All data are from District of Columbia Government 1996c. All population data are based on the 1990 census. 
b/ Ward 4 data for age distribution and education attainment are in error in the source document and total more than 
100 percent.  
c/ Excludes public rights-of-way and areas within Rock Creek Park. 
d/ The source document presents two values for this parameter. Therefore, both values are presented here as a range. 
e/ The source document presents two values for this parameter, and a third can be calculated by dividing population by 
land area used for housing. Therefore, the maximum and minimum values are presented here as a range. 
156 
 
R
OC
K
Silver Spring
Takoma
Park
Shepherd
Park
Colonial
Village
Hawthorne
Chevy Chase
Chevy Chase
Brightwood
Petworth
16th
Street
Heights
Forest Hills
Wakefield
North
Cleveland Park
Cleveland Park
Crestwood
Mt.
Pleasant
Columbia
Heights
Glover
Park
Burleith
Georgetown
Hillcrest
Central
Foggy
Bottom
Old
City
2
Garfield
Woodley
North Cleveland Park
National
Zoo
ROCK CREEK &
POTOMAC PARKWAY
Massachusetts Avenue Heights
ROCK
CREEK
PARK
Rock Creek Regional Park
MNCPPC
NEIGHBORHOODS
ROCK CREEK PARK / ROCK CREEK AND POTOMAC PARKWAY  WASHINGTON, DC
United States Department of Interior  National Park Service
DCS  April 2002  821 / 20037
Rock Creek Park and Rock
Creek and Potomac Parkway
Neighborhood Boundary
Roads
Water
W
ise
Ro
ad
Sherrill
Drive
Be
ac
h
D
rive
M
il
i
t
a
r
y
R
oa
d
Ro
s
s
D
r
i
v
e
Glo
v
e
r
R
o
a
d
P
i
n
e
y
B
ra
n
c
h R
o
a
d
Connecticut Ave.
Adams Morgan
Kalorama Hgts.
Massachusetts Ave.
3000
 
0
 3000
Feet
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
 
158 
 
Visitor and Community Values 
TABLE 17: GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE POPULATIONS OF  
MARYLAND COMMUNITIES NEAR ROCK CREEK PARK a/ 
 
Bethesda/ 
Chevy Chase
(Planning 
Area 35) 
 
Silver Spring
(Planning 
Area 36) 
 
Takoma Park 
(Planning  
Area 37) 
 
Total  
Montgomery 
County 
Population 
85,000 
31,820 
34,855 
823,500 
Area (acres) 
12,864 
2,816 
4,096 
318,080 
Average household size  
(number of people) 
2.37 
2.06 
2.63 
2.64 
Population density  
(residents per acre) 
7 
11 
8 
3 
Median household income (1996) 
$95,495 
$49,500 
$44,030 
$66,085 
Age distribution 
Under 18 years 
21% 
18% 
26% 
25% 
18-64 years 
59% 
70% 
66% 
63% 
65+ years 
20% 
12% 
8% 
12% 
Racial composition 
Black 
3% 
26% 
36% 
13% 
White 
90% 
62% 
48% 
73% 
Other 
7% 
12% 
16% 
14% 
Also identified Latino heritage 
5% 
8% 
17% 
9% 
Education attainment level 
Less than high school diploma 
4% 
7% 
15% 
8% 
High school graduate (only) 
18% 
22% 
29% 
28% 
Some college, no degree 
2% 
6% 
5% 
5% 
College degree 
76% 
65% 
51% 
59% 
Housing unit occupancy 
 
 
 
 
Owner occupied or vacant 
74% 
35% 
43% 
71% 
Rental unit 
26% 
65% 
57% 
29% 
a/ All data are from Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission 1999. All population data are based on 
the 1997 census update survey. 
 
159 
AFFECTED ENVIRONMENT 
In addition to Rock Creek Park, many other recreational and educational opportunities exist in the 
area. Some of these are identified below. However, Rock Creek Park is unique because it is the 
only major natural area in this urban environment. 
More than 40 recreation centers, 25 swimming pools, and 75 tennis courts provide active 
recreational opportunities in the areas neighboring the park.  
More than 100 public and private schools are located in the surrounding area, along with 
major universities such as American University, University of the District of Columbia, 
George Washington University, Georgetown University, and Howard University.  
Many other public parks occur in the area, including the C&O Canal National Historical 
Park, the sites of the Civil War Defenses of Washington, Meridian Hill Park, Dumbarton 
Oaks Park, Glover-Archbold Park, Montrose Park, and the National Zoological Park.  
Montgomery County’s Rock Creek Regional Park borders Rock Creek Park to the north. 
The regional park follows Rock Creek through southern Montgomery County and pro-
vides many recreational opportunities such as fishing, boating, canoeing, picnic shelters, 
a golf course, and trails.  
160 
 
