AFSC Quarterly Report
13
DIVISION/LABORATORY REPORTS
AUKE BAY LABORATORIES
(ABL)
HABITAT ASSESSMENT & MARINE 
CHEMISTRY PROGRAM
Forage Fish in Nearshore Waters of Prince 
William Sound, Alaska
Nearshore ﬁshes were sampled at eight locations 
in western Prince William Sound (PWS) in July and 
August 2007; this was the second year of a 2-year 
study funded by the North Paciﬁc Research Board 
and the Alaska Oil Spill Research Institute. At each 
sampling location in July, ﬁsh were collected during 
the day with a beach seine in three shallow water 
(<5 m deep) habitats (eelgrass, kelp, bedrock out­
crops). In August, sampling was limited to eelgrass 
and kelp, and each location was sampled during the 
day and night. A total of 28,957 ﬁsh representing 
26 species were captured in July 2007 compared to 
5,274 ﬁsh representing 36 species in July 2006. Two 
large seine hauls of juvenile saﬀron cod (11,482 ﬁsh) 
and Paciﬁc herring (13,078 ﬁsh) accounted for the 
much greater summer catch in 2007. Of the total 
catch in July 2007, 90% were captured in eelgrass; 
the dominant species were juvenile Paciﬁc herring, 
saﬀron cod, and pink salmon. In August 2007, total 
catch was similar between day and night sampling–
629 ﬁsh were captured during the day compared to 
552 ﬁsh at night. Species richness, however, was 
greater at night (30 species) than during the day 
(20). Paciﬁc herring was the most abundant for­
age species captured in 2007. Other forage species 
captured in small numbers were Paciﬁc sand lance 
and capelin. Nearshore vegetated areas provide hab­
itat for juvenile herring, particularly in summer in 
western PWS.   
By Scott Johnson
MARINE SALMON 
INTERACTIONS PROGRAM
Live Capture of Young-of-the-Year Slope 
Rockﬁsh
Slope rockﬁsh (Sebastes spp.) are an important 
part of the ecosystem and a valuable ﬁshery in the 
North Paciﬁc Ocean. The most abundant and his­
torically most harvested slope rockﬁsh is the Paciﬁc 
ocean perch (S. alutus). Other important slope rock­
ﬁsh species include shortraker (S. borealis), rougheye 
(S. aleutianus), and northern rockﬁsh (S. polyspinis). 
As young-of-the-year, slope rockﬁsh can be found 
in the upper water column over abyssal depths. 
Eventually, they adapt to a demersal life and are 
associated with the benthos. The relationship be­
tween juvenile slope rockﬁsh and benthic habitat is 
poorly understood due to the depths at which the 
ﬁsh reside, which is usually greater than 150-200 
m. Aside from broad-scale habitat associations de­
termined from trawl data and limited observations 
from submersibles and ROVs (remotely operated 
vehicles), little data exist that detail habitat use of 
these deep-dwelling rockﬁsh species.
Because it is diﬃcult and expensive to bring sci­
entists to the natural milieu of slope rockﬁsh, new 
research is bringing slope rockﬁsh to scientists, 
with the ultimate objective of identifying habitat 
utilization amongst various benthic habitat types 
such as sponge and coral. In September 2007, sci­
entists from Auke Bay Laboratories (ABL) Marine 
Salmon Interactions (MSI) Program and the 
Marine Ecology and Stock Assessment Program 
took part in research activities aimed at capturing 
live young-of-the-year slope rockﬁsh. Thirty-three 
surface trawls were performed onboard the Alaska 
Department of Fish and Game (ADF&G) vessel 
Medeia. Trawling took place up to 60 nautical miles 
oﬀshore of Southeast Alaska between Icy Point and 
Cape Ommaney. The trawl was equipped with an 
aluminum aquarium codend (livebox) (Fig. 1) that 
directed ﬁsh and invertebrates into a calm water-
ﬁlled holding chamber. Once on deck, live speci­
mens were transferred from the aquarium codend 
to holding tanks with running seawater. At the 
Figure 1. Aquarium codend (livebox) ascending the stern ramp 
of the vessel Medeia. A trap door in the stern of the aquarium 
codend allows ﬁsh and invertebrates to enter a water-ﬁlled 
chamber free of turbulence.
14 
July-August-September 2007
conclusion of the cruise, live rockﬁsh were trans­
ferred to ABL’s Little Port Walter Marine Station 
and placed in aquariums in the station’s behavior 
laboratory. Of the 230 rockﬁsh captured, about 
95% survived the trawling process including ﬁsh 
as small as 14 mm (Fig. 2). An estimated eight or 
nine diﬀerent species of rockﬁsh were captured, al­
though genetic analyses will conﬁrm species iden­
tiﬁcations. The aquarium codend caught other live 
species as well, including juvenile and adult salmon 
(Oncorhynchus spp.), Paciﬁc saury (Cololabis saira), 
larval rex (Glyptocephalus zachirus), Dover sole 
(Microstomus paciﬁcus), and Paciﬁc herring (Clupea 
pallasii). Many unidentiﬁed small squid were also 
captured live. The greatest biomass in the catch was 
attributed to jellyﬁsh, primarily Aequorea sp. 
Once the rockﬁsh are acclimated to conditions 
in the behavior lab, they will be observed in four 
distinct habitat types (coral, sponge, cobble, and 
gravel) under both daytime and nighttime condi­
tions and in the presence and absence of a predator. 
This study will build on previous work that fo­
cused on quillback rockﬁsh (S. maliger), a demersal 
shelf rockﬁsh. These assessments will be helpful in 
determining the relative productivity of various 
habitats and will aid in establishing priorities for 
their protection. 
By Pat Malecha

SECM Pink Salmon Forecast on Target for 2007
Since 2004, ABL researchers have used informa­
tion from the Southeast Alaska Coastal Monitoring 
(SECM) project to forecast adult pink salmon com­
mercial harvest in Southeast Alaska. The SECM re­
search, which focuses on juvenile salmon and their 
associated epipelagic species and oceanographic 
parameters, occurs from May to August as juve­
nile salmon migrate seaward to the Gulf of Alaska 
from southeastern Alaska. The parameters used in 
the forecast model are peak monthly average catch-
per-haul of juvenile pink salmon and spring ocean 
temperatures. The SECM forecast for 2007 was 
40.0 million pink salmon. The ADF&G prelimi­
nary harvest estimate for the 2007 season is 44.0 
million pink salmon. An accurate forecast has ma­
jor economic consequences to the industry because 
it enables processors and ﬁsherman to devote the 
proper amount of resources to the anticipated har­
vest, which for pink salmon has an average exvessel 
value of about $20 million in the Southeast Alaska 
region. 
In 2007, for the ﬁrst time, ADF&G scientists 
used SECM juvenile pink salmon catch-per-haul 
data to improve their forecast, which previously 
relied exclusively on an exponential smoothing 
model of past harvest levels. By incorporating the 
SECM juvenile salmon index data into their model, 
ADF&G adjusted their original forecast for the 
2007 harvest from 58.0 million to 47.0 million, 
much closer to the realized harvest of 44.0 million 
ﬁsh. The convergence of the two diﬀerent forecast 
models towards similar predictions is indicative of 
the utility of the juvenile salmon index time series.
Catches of juvenile pink salmon during the 2007 
SECM cruises were the lowest in the 11-year time 
series of the project, suggesting that pink salmon 
returns to Southeast Alaska in 2008 will be poor. 
The 2007 survey data are currently being ﬁnal­
ized, and results and the 2008 SECM forecast will 
be presented at the Southeast Alaska Purse Seine 
Task Force meeting in Ketchikan, Alaska, on 28 
November 2007. The task force meeting is an annu­
al event sponsored by the ADF&G, the commercial 
purse seine ﬁshing ﬂeet, ﬁshing industry proces­
sor representatives, and other resource stakeholders 
from Southeast Alaska communities.
By Alex Wertheimer, Joe Orsi, 
Molly Sturdevant, and Emily Fergusson

Surface Trawl Calibration Completed to 
Maintain SECM Data Time Series
From 1997 to present, the Southeast Alaska 
Coastal Monitoring project at ABL has used the 
NOAA ship John N. Cobb to accrue a time series 
of biophysical data in the Southeast Alaska region. 
Figure 2. Unidentiﬁed rockﬁsh (Sebastes spp.) caught with 
an aquarium codend in surface waters offshore of Southeast 
Alaska.
AFSC Quarterly Report
15
These data, which include surface trawl catches in 
the northern region of Southeast Alaska, are used 
to gain a better understanding of factors aﬀecting 
year-class strength of salmonids and other ﬁshes. 
Currently the data are being used to forecast pink 
salmon run strength to Southeast Alaska (see com­
panion article above on forecasting). However, the 
Cobb is scheduled to be decommissioned after 2008, 
and there is no time line set for a replacement ves­
sel. Because of this uncertainty, ABL contracted the 
ADF&G research vessel Medeia to develop interves­
sel calibration data for the Nordic 264 surface trawl 
used for the SECM ﬁsh collections in July 2007. 
The Medeia has previously been used by ABL to 
conduct research with the Nordic 264 surface trawl 
in the coastal waters of the Gulf of Alaska. (More 
information on that research eﬀort is available on 
the North Paciﬁc  Anadromous Fish Commission 
website at http://www.npafc.org/new/publications/
Documents/PDF%202006/956(USA).pdf).
Catch statistics were compared between the two 
vessels to determine if correction factors would have 
to be applied. A total of 28 trawl hauls were ﬁshed 
by each vessel alongside one another over a 6-day 
period in Icy and Chatham Straits from 26 to 31 
July. Catches of juvenile salmon were signiﬁcantly 
higher for the Medeia, averaging 1.7 times the catch 
of the Cobb. These higher catches were probably due 
to the faster towing speed of the Medeia, resulting 
in a signiﬁcantly longer trawling distance by this 
vessel over the 20-minute haul durations. Although 
catch rates were higher for the Medeia, the species 
composition of the juvenile salmon catch did not 
diﬀer signiﬁcantly between the two vessels. Sizes of 
juvenile salmon captured also did not diﬀer signiﬁ­
cantly between vessels. 
The ratio of the catch of juvenile pink salmon 
between the two vessels (1.6 times higher by the 
Medeia) was similar to that of total juvenile salmon 
caught. However, the paired-diﬀerences for juve­
nile pink salmon were not statistically signiﬁcant. 
The catches of juvenile pink salmon were the lowest 
ever recorded for July over the 11-year SECM time 
series, which resulted in lower statistical power. To 
increase statistical power and to develop a calibra­
tion factor applicable to higher catch-per-set obser­
vations, we plan to repeat the paired comparison in 
2008, pending funding support from the Paciﬁc 
Salmon Commission Northern Fund. The 2007 
and 2008 data will enhance the feasibility of using 
the Medeia as a contractual option during the time 
period between Cobb decommissioning and replace­
ment, and as a standard for future calibration of a 
Cobb replacement vessel or contracted trawler. 
By Alex Wertheimer, Joe Orsi, Molly Sturdevant, 
and Emily Fergusson

Genetic Analysis Of Wild Coho Populations 
Before And After Local Coho Enhancement
The Marine Salmon Interactions  Program staﬀ 
have initiated a study on the eﬀects of large-scale 
coho salmon enhancement on the population struc­
ture of nearby wild coho salmon populations. The 
ﬁeld research will be based from ABL’s Little Port 
Walter (LPW) research station, located on the 
southern tip of Baranof Island in Southeast Alaska. 
The project is supported with funding obtained from 
the Southeast Sustainable Salmon Fund.
Coho enhancement using Sashin Creek coho 
salmon as brood stock started at LPW in the early 
1970s and ended in the late 1980s. Sashin Creek 
is the watershed draining into LPW. Subsequently, 
the Deer Lake coho enhancement project, located 
9 miles north of LPW, and Port Armstrong hatch­
ery, located 7 miles south of LPW, started culturing 
and releasing coho salmon and continue to release 
them to this day. Brood stock for both hatcheries 
originated from Sashin Creek and Deep Creek (lo­
cated 15 miles north of Sashin Creek). Nakvassin 
Creek is located 5 miles north of LPW, midway 
between LPW and Deer Lake. Coho salmon from 
Nakvassin Creek have not been used as brood stock 
for any enhancement projects. The enhancement 
projects produce returns of adult coho salmon in 
the tens of thousands; Sashin Creek and Nakvassin 
Creek have wild adult escapements numbering in 
the hundreds.
This summer MSI staﬀ collected samples from 
Port Armstrong hatchery, Sashin Creek, and 
Nakvassin Creek coho salmon for analysis with 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and mi­
crosatellite DNA assays to analyze the population 
structure. We will repeat the analysis on samples 
collected from the Deer Lake coho salmon enhance­
ment project in the spring. The DNA results will be 
evaluated to determine the current degree of popu­
lation diﬀerentiation among the enhanced and wild 
stocks. We will then extract DNA from archived 
Sashin Creek and Nakvassin Creek coho salmon 
scales collected by researchers at LPW in the 1960s, 
before any coho salmon enhancement was initiated 
16 
July-August-September 2007
on Baranof Island. The results from the scale assays 
will be compared to the current population struc­
ture to evaluate whether the genetic structure of the 
wild populations has been aﬀected by the local en­
hancement eﬀorts. 
The combined data will help assess the eﬀect of 
enhancement practices (i.e., selection, drift, or stock 
transfers) on the genetic structure of hatchery popu­
lations and the degree of gene ﬂow to nearby wild 
populations. This will help to determine whether 
current culture practices and the Alaska genetic 
policy are providing adequate protection for sus­
taining the genetic integrity of wild coho stocks.
By Andrew Gray and Alex Wertheimer
FISHERIES MONITORING & 
ANALYSIS (FMA) DIVISION

The Role of Observer Provider Companies in 
the North Paciﬁc Groundﬁsh Observer Program
Observer Provider companies provide critical 
operational support to the North Paciﬁc Groundﬁsh 
Observer Program (NPGOP). Provider companies 
recruit observers, provide all their logistical sup­
port during training and deployments in the ﬁeld, 
and return them after deployment for ﬁnal debrief­
ing with staﬀ from the Fisheries Monitoring and 
Analysis (FMA) Division. Observer Providers are 
responsible for salary, insurance, lodging, trans­
portation, and per diem throughout the observer’s 
employment. Most observers work for Observer 
Providers under short-term contracts which last up 
to 180 days. To ensure safety, Observer Providers 
are on call 24 hours a day to handle emergencies 
when their observers are in the ﬁeld. They provide 
the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) 
with logistical information on each observer de­
ployment. Observer Providers ensure that observ­
ers attend appropriate NMFS training classes and 
travel throughout Alaska to meet industry needs for 
observer coverage. Additionally, Observer Providers 
arrange for observers to meet NMFS requirements 
for submitting data and data quality.
To recruit observers, Observer Providers adver­
tise in a range of venues and then screen applicants 
to ensure that they meet qualiﬁcations established 
by NMFS, as well as any requirements the Observer 
Providers may have themselves. (Details of NMFS 
minimum qualiﬁcations are available on the AFSC 
website at: http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/FMA/quali­
ﬁcations.htm).  Once hired, individuals are enrolled 
in NMFS-provided training courses. Successful 
completion of the training course leads to certiﬁca­
tion as a North Paciﬁc Groundﬁsh observer, quali­
ﬁed to observe on ﬁshing vessels and at shore-side 
processing plants in Alaska.
 Certiﬁed observers are deployed by their respec­
tive Observer Providers to ports throughout Alaska. 
Fishing in Alaska is a dynamic activity and the 
Observer Provider companies face many logistical 
challenges in meeting the observer coverage needs 
of the ﬁshing industry. The busiest ports for ob­
servers and Observer Providers are Alaska’s busiest 
ﬁshing ports, Dutch Harbor and Kodiak. Observer 
Providers must ensure that their observers arrive to 
vessel or plant assignments on time and that they 
meet regulatory requirements designed to keep 
data quality high. Observer Providers must contend 
with unpredictable events such as weather delays 
or scramble to deploy an observer at the last min­
ute due to a late request for coverage. Additionally, 
Observer Providers must be certain that they can 
provide an alternate observer in the event that ill­
ness or injury prevents the assigned observer from 
fulﬁlling his or her duties. Each Observer Provider 
works with industry members with whom they have 
contracted to provide observer services, and the in­
dustry pays for the costs of providing the observer. 
 Observer Providers ensure that deployed observ­
ers submit data to NMFS according to established 
timelines, often daily, and complete quality con­
trol data reviews in NPGOP ﬁeld oﬃces in Dutch 
Harbor or Kodiak. At the end of each observer’s de­
ployment, Observer Providers ensure that observ­
ers complete debrieﬁng interviews and submit their 
data as part of the data quality control process, and 
return sampling and safety gear.
Five Observer Providers currently supply observ­
ers to NMFS: Alaskan Observers, Inc.; MRAG 
A North Paciﬁc groundifsh observer waits for his ship to come in. 
AFSC Quarterly Report
17
Americas, Inc.; NWO, Inc.; Saltwater, Inc.; and 
TechSea International Inc. (Contact information is 
available on the AFSC website at: http://www.afsc.
noaa.gov/FMA/observer_providers.htm.)  Each 
company has extensive experience with observer 
programs in the North Paciﬁc and elsewhere in the 
United States, and, for some, other regions of the 
world. These are competitive businesses, and this 
competition is important in keeping costs to the 
ﬁshing industry for observer coverage relatively low. 
In 1991 ten companies were operating, while only 
three of the original companies operate as Providers 
in Alaska today. 
Observer Program regulation and policy re­
quirements are increasingly complex. To assist 
Observer Providers in understanding and meet­
ing requirements, an FMA staﬀ member serves as 
a liaison with the Provider companies. The liaison 
answers Provider’s questions, listens to complaints 
and frustrations, and works to ﬁnd eﬀective solu­
tions to problems. The liaison role has helped build 
a close relationship between NMFS and Observer 
Providers and is an integral and essential part of the 
successful operation of the Observer Program.
Persons or companies wishing to become 
Observer Providers in the NPGOP must obtain a 
permit from NMFS. Instructions for applying for 
a permit and the requirements and responsibilities 
of an Observer Provider are found in the Code of 
Federal Regulations at 50 CFR §679.50 Subpart 
E. Applications are evaluated by a NMFS review 
board appointed by the NMFS Alaska Regional 
Administrator. Once an application is approved and 
issued, it cannot be transferred and will not expire 
as long as the Observer Provider remains active in 
supplying observers in Alaska. Once issued a per­
mit, the Observer Provider is authorized to provide 
observer services to the ﬁshing industry, and the 
Observer Provider becomes accountable to NMFS 
via regulations.
FUTURE CHALLENGES
In 2008, new regulations implementing a change 
to the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands Fishery 
Management Plan will increase demands on the 
workload of Observer Providers. This change, 
Amendment 80, allocates several groundﬁsh spe­
cies among trawl ﬁshery sectors and facilitates the 
formation of harvesting cooperatives. Amendment 
80 will require bottom trawl catcher-processors to 
carry two observers instead of one, increasing the 
number of observers deployed at any given time. The 
full impact of this change will only be understood as 
the year progresses. Due to the increased number of 
observer days at sea, the work of Observer Providers 
and FMA staﬀ will increase. Our past coopera­
tive eﬀorts provide a solid basis for the Observer 
Providers and the FMA to work together to ensure 
the continued collection of high quality data for the 
management of the North Paciﬁc groundﬁsh ﬁsheries. 
By Allison Barns, Martin Loeﬄad, and Bob Maier

HABITAT & ECOLOGICAL 
PROCESSES RESEARCH (HEPR)
Bering Sea Integrated Ecosystem Research 
Program 
The North Paciﬁc Research Board (NPRB) 
decided the outcome of the Bering Sea Integrated 
Ecosystem Research Program (BSIERP) in July. 
NPRB awarded major support to a proposal written 
by university and federal scientists. The study fo­
cuses on understanding trophic interactions among: 
1) colony-based foragers, 2) hot spot foragers, 3) pe­
lagic forage species, and 4) pelagic predators. NPRB 
awarded support for several study components 
including oceanographic moorings, ﬁsh, whales, 
seabirds, trophic interactions and local and tradi­
tional knowledge. In addition, the National Science 
Foundation is funding complementary Bering Sea 
research through the Bering Ecosystem Study 
(BEST). The principal investigators from BSIERP 
and BEST will collaborate in this research; their 
ﬁrst meeting occurred 17-19 September 2007 in 
Seattle. The BSIERP and BEST research programs 
will join several disciplines of marine science in an 
integrated study ranging from oceanography, ﬁsh, 
birds, and mammals to eﬀects on human society. 
The integrated ecosystem research program will be 
immensely challenging both intellectually and orga­
nizationally. Program results will add understand­
North Paciﬁc groundﬁsh observers rest in the Dutch Harbor 
airport before their ﬂight to the mainland. 
18 
July-August-September 2007
ing of the Bering Sea and provide information that 
underpins an ecosystem approach to management.
By Mike Sigler
Habitat Data Workshop
Essential ﬁsh habitat research has been con­
ducted since passage of the Sustainable Fisheries 
Act in 1996, but no formal eﬀort has been made 
to inventory habitat data collected by the Alaska 
Fisheries Science Center. In 2005, the HEPR Team 
identiﬁed a habitat data inventory as high priority, 
and subsequently, funds were provided to support 
a workshop. Bob McConnaughey, John Olson, and 
Jon Heifetz organized a Habitat Data Workshop, 
which was held on 20 September 2007 in Seattle. 
Twenty-six people from the AFSC, NMFS Alaska 
Regional Oﬃce, North Paciﬁc Fishery Management 
Council, Oceana, and the ADF&G participated. 
Twenty-two habitat data collections were invento­
ried with a standard format. The habitat data in­
ventory will be published as an AFSC Processed 
Report. An additional workshop outcome is a geo-
referenced “Alaska Bathymetry/Seaﬂoor Habitat 
and Biota” pilot database. The pilot database will be 
built from Alaska bathymetry developed by Steve 
Lewis (Alaska Regional Oﬃce) and small multibeam 
and submersible dive data sets from Jon Heifetz and 
Kalei Shotwell (Auke Bay Laboratories). The pilot 
database will follow the ShoreZone/Nearshore Fish 
Atlas approach.
By Mike Sigler
NATIONAL MARINE 
MAMMAL LABORATORY 
(NMML)
ALASKA ECOSYSTEMS PROGRAM
Bogoslof Island Northern Fur Seal Research
The population of northern fur seal (Callorhinus 
ursinus) pups on Bogoslof Island was estimated us­
ing shear-sampling, a mark-recapture method, in 
August 2007. A preliminary analysis indicates a 
continued increase in pup production on Bogoslof 
Island since the last estimate in 2005. Some of the 
increase in pup production may be a result of emi­
gration of adults from rookeries on St. Paul and 
St. George Islands, where pup numbers have been 
declining. While on Bogoslof Island, staﬀ of the 
Alaska Ecosystems Program instrumented 10 adult 
female northern fur seals with satellite tracking de­
vices to continue investigations on summer foraging 
behavior and winter migration.
By Tonya Zeppelin
Steller Sea Lion Pup Survey
In June and July 2007, using the chartered re­
search vessel Norseman II and the Alaska Maritime 
National Wildlife Refuge research vessel Tiglax, the 
Alaska Ecosystems Program conducted its annual 
cruise to survey Steller sea lion (Eumetopias jubatus) 
pups from the western Aleutian Islands through the 
central Gulf of Alaska. In order to assess pup con­
dition and health status, morphometrics (weight, 
girth, length) and tissue samples (blood, tissue, fe­
cal) were collected from 50 randomly selected pups 
at speciﬁc rookeries according to our biennial sam­
pling schedule. Necropsies were conducted on fresh­
ly-dead pups at seven sites, and tissue samples of the 
dead pups were saved for histology, contaminants, 
and parasite studies. Additionally, we collected 59 
scats from the eastern and central Gulf of Alaska 
regions and 121 scats from the central and western 
Aleutian Islands for dietary analysis.
By Tonya Zeppelin

Resight Surveys for Branded Steller Sea Lions
In order to estimate movement patterns, surviv­
al, and other vital rates of Steller sea lions, staﬀ of 
the Alaska Ecosystems Program and the ADF&G 
have been marking pups with brands or ﬂipper tags 
at rookeries in the eastern Aleutian Islands; the 
western, central, and eastern Gulf of Alaska; and in 
Southeast Alaska. Between July and August 2007, 
ship-based surveys were conducted on the chartered 
research vessels Norseman and Norseman II from the 
eastern Aleutians through Prince William Sound to 
resight branded and tagged Steller sea lions (Fig. 1).
Fifty-four sea lion haul-out and rookery sites 
were visited in the eastern and central Gulf of 
Alaska in June and July, and 90 branded sea lions 
were positively identiﬁed at 22 sites. Observed ani­
mals were born at four diﬀerent western stock rook­
eries (Marmot, Sugarloaf, Wooded, Seal Rocks) and 
three eastern stock rookeries (Hazy, White Sisters, 
Forrester). In addition, 15 sea lions captured as ju­
veniles by dive or land techniques were identiﬁed.
Thirty-seven sea lion haul-out and rookery 
sites were visited in the eastern Aleutian Islands in 
August, and 67 branded sea lions were positively 
AFSC Quarterly Report
19
identiﬁed at 10 sites. Most of the animals resighted 
in the eastern Aleutians were branded as pups on 
western stock rookeries. However, four of the sea 
lions were branded at eastern stock rookeries, and 
one was branded by Russian colleagues on Medney 
Island in 2006. Four sea lions captured as juveniles 
by dive or land techniques were also identiﬁed.
By Tonya Zeppelin

CETACEAN ASSESSMENT & 
ECOLOGY PROGRAM
Beluga Whales in Northern Cook Inlet, Alaska, 
August 2007
An aerial survey of the beluga population in Cook 
Inlet, Alaska, was conducted 1-2 August 2007. The 
13.1-hour survey covered all coastal areas north of 
Moose Point and the Native village of Tyonek in the 
northern part of the inlet (Fig. 2). Consistent with 
NMFS surveys conducted since 1993, the August 
2007 survey was ﬂown in a high-wing, twin-engine 
aircraft (NOAA Twin Otter N56RF) at an altitude 
of 244 m (800 ft) and a speed of 185 km/hr (100 
knots). The survey track paralleled the coast (1.4 
km oﬀshore) and crossed the inlet from just north 
of Moose Point to Tyonek on the ﬁrst day and 
from Point Possession to the Beluga River on 
the second day. Two ﬂights were ﬂown each day to 
coincide with the morning high tide and the af­
ternoon low tide. The intent of the survey was to 
obtain high-resolution video of each beluga group 
to determine age structure (white relative to gray 
individuals and dark gray calves) and an index of 
calf numbers.
Despite extensive surveys of the northern in­
let, belugas were found only in the Susitna delta. 
During the morning high tide on 1 August, belugas 
were dispersed and swimming in random directions 
across the delta from the Ivan River to the eastern 
tributary of the Susitna River, precluding us from 
acquiring any useable video or counts. A smaller 
group in tight formation traveling upriver near the 
oxbow in the Little Susitna River was videotaped 
and counted (median count = 27 whales). By the af­
ternoon low tide, whales were found in three com­
pact groups traveling along the edge of the mudﬂats 
near the mouth of the Ivan River (median count = 
53 whales), the eastern tributary of the Susitna River 
(median count = 96 whales), and the mouth of the 
Little Susitna River (median count = 32 whales) for 
a total median count of 181 whales. Similar results 
occurred on 2 August, with belugas found dispersed 
during the morning high tide across the Susitna delta 
and from the mouth to approximately 5 miles up the 
Little Susitna River. The afternoon low tide yielded 
two compact groups, one near the mouth of the Ivan 
River (median count = 88 whales) and the other near 
the Little Susitna River (median count = 53 whales), 
for a total median count of 141 whales. It was un­
usual that whales were not found in Chickaloon Bay 
or Knik Arm. The daily median estimates (a quick 
index of relative abundance not corrected for missed 
whales) were on par with August 2006 counts (126 
belugas on 16 August, 143 on 17 August) but were 
below counts made in August 2005 (236 belugas on 
11 August, 277 on 12 August).
By Kim Shelden, Kimberly Goetz, 
and Julie Mocklin
Figure 1. A branded Steller sea lion observed on a resight 
survey. Photo by Lowell Fritz.
Figure 2. On-effort tracklines and beluga sightings (stars) 
in northern Cook Inlet, 1-2 August 2007: black = 1 August, 
gray = 2 August. Effort shown includes morning high-tide 
and afternoon low-tide surveys. Only the afternoon low-tide 
sightings used in the total median counts are shown.
20 
July-August-September 2007
POLAR ECOSYSTEMS PROGRAM
Harbor Seal Census in Southeast Alaska
NMML’s Polar Ecosystems Program (PEP) is 
responsible for monitoring and estimating the abun­
dance of harbor seals in Alaska. The PEP conducts 
aerial surveys of harbor seals every August dur­
ing the seals’ annual molt, when they spend much 
of their time out of the water while shedding and 
growing new hair. For logistical purposes, Alaska 
is divided into ﬁve regions and one region is sur­
veyed each year. The ﬁve regions are the Gulf of 
Alaska, northern Southeast Alaska (surveyed this 
year), southern Southeast Alaska, the Aleutian 
Islands, and the north side of the Alaska Peninsula 
and Bristol Bay. The 2007 surveys were conduct­
ed 7-17 August 2007 using nine aircraft:  three 
NOAA twin-engine planes (two AC-Shrikes and a 
DHC-Twin Otter) and six chartered single-engine 
ﬂoatplanes (Cessnas). Six planes and crew were 
based in Juneau, two in Sitka, and one in Yakutat. 
Each plane carried a single observer; eight observers 
were from NMML and one was from the National 
Park Service.
Starting in 2006, surveys were conducted un­
der a new protocol designed to improve the spatial 
and temporal resolution of our surveys, data man­
agement, and workﬂow. The entire range of harbor 
seals in Alaska was divided into ﬁxed areas (poly­
gons) to better document seal counts and survey ef­
fort; each polygon covers several miles of coastline 
and can be surveyed in about 15 minutes, a period 
during which survey conditions (e.g., tide height, 
weather conditions) are relatively constant. In the 
past, seal haul outs and counts were associated with 
speciﬁc geographic coordinates. Such sites, however, 
were diﬃcult to deﬁne as they were often scattered 
across many rocky islets or sand bars. This created 
problems in standardizing how diﬀerent observers 
(using a portable GPS) were mapping site locations 
across years. Observers now only have to record 
a track of their day’s ﬂight and take photographs, 
ensuring that the area represented by each polygon 
is surveyed completely. The photographs are geo-
referenced, and the seals counted in them are as­
signed to the corresponding polygon instead of a 
speciﬁc site. This approach allows observers to fo­
cus on sighting seals and enhances continuity in the 
technique across years.
In contrast to last year, surveys in 2007 were 
ﬂown with few weather delays or limitations. As 
usual, surveys were conducted daily within 2 hours 
of low tide. The ﬁrst few survey days entailed recon­
naissance ﬂights to search for haul-out sites within 
all polygons along the entire coastline. Observers 
then targeted speciﬁc polygons where seals were 
observed, during reconnaissance ﬂights or previous 
years’ surveys, in order to get more replicate counts 
in polygons with seals. Flight tracks were automati­
cally recorded on a portable GPS while observers 
kept track of when they were on eﬀort (i.e., when 
searching wasn’t hampered by visibility, turbulence, 
etc.). Photographs of seal haul outs were taken 
through side windows at elevations of 500-1,000 ft. 
Sites where seals were hauled out on ice were pho­
tographed using a down-looking camera linked to a 
GPS (see article below). At least four replicate sur­
veys were conducted at most, if not all, of the larger 
seal haul outs. Larger haul outs (>20 seals) account 
for the vast majority of variability in counts across 
days. Image processing and counting will occur at 
NMML over the next several months.
By Dave Withrow, John Jansen, and Josh London

Tests of New Sampling Technique to Track 
Harbor Seal Populations in Alaska Fjords
Researchers from the Polar Ecosystems Program 
(PEP) are testing a new aerial survey technique for 
tracking populations of harbor seals that haul out 
in glacial fjords. Tidewater glacial fjords in Alaska 
attract the largest numbers of harbor seals in the 
state, if not the world, and because these seals (up 
to 5,500) are scattered across enormous ﬁelds of 
ﬂoating ice that shift with ocean and wind currents, 
they are particularly diﬃcult to count. Traditional 
methods for estimating abundance by visual tech­
niques or by taking oblique photographs have yield­
ed highly variable counts or counts where the error 
was unknown. More recent techniques have used 
high-altitude (3,000-4,000 ft) photogrammetry of 
the entire seal haul out. However, these surveys re­
quire exceptional visibility and weather (not typi­
cal of survey areas), so this method has sometimes 
resulted in photographs of varying quality and less-
than-certain seal identiﬁcation. These surveys also 
require a considerable time investment in post-pro­
cessing and analysis (e.g., digitizing negatives and 
distinguishing seals), which, when combined with 
the expense of outsourcing the photogrammetry, 
makes this method time-consuming and costly.
Thus, the PEP is testing a new aerial sampling 
method, which captures higher quality imagery of 
seals at lower altitudes (1,000 ft), along line tran­
AFSC Quarterly Report
21
sects, using a down-looking, high-resolution digi­
tal single-lens reﬂex (SLR) camera. The images are 
georeferenced and analyzed using conventional GIS 
software to map seal locations in non-overlapping 
images that represent about 40% of the ice ﬁeld. 
This technique was developed to test hypotheses 
regarding seal disturbance in Disenchantment Bay, 
but it holds promise as a more timely and cost-ef­
fective method for estimating total abundance using 
spatial statistical models currently being developed. 
The high quality imagery also allows for detailed 
analyses of individual seals (e.g., discriminating 
mother-pup pairs and population structure) and ice 
characteristics.
As part of the PEP’s annual harbor seal sur­
veys, which rotate through ﬁve regions of the spe­
cies’ range in Alaska (see article above), biologists 
photo-sampled ice-hauling seals in ﬁve tidewater 
glacial fjords:  Icy and Disenchantment Bays in the 
Gulf of Alaska, and Tracy Arm, Endicott Arm, and 
LeConte Bay in Southeast Alaska. The line transects 
were ﬂown by NOAA Corp pilots Steve Kroening 
and Jason Seifert aboard the NOAA Marine and 
Aviation Operations’ AC-500 Shrike (N47RF). A 
mounting platform constructed speciﬁcally for the 
surveys allowed the camera to be quickly installed 
and pointed vertically through the plane’s belly port. 
Flights were timed daily to overlap with the peak 
abundance of seals, which radio-telemetry stud­
ies suggest occurs between 1300 and 1600 hours. 
Surveys were conducted from 5 to 21 August 2007 
to coincide with the seals’ annual molt. The single 
NMML observer was based ﬁrst in Yakutat (for 
10 days) and then in Juneau. Visibility was gener­
ally favorable in Yakutat and just manageable in 
Juneau, allowing the team to complete three rep­
licate surveys of each glacial site. Surveys based in 
Yakutat included two unique sites (Malaspina and 
Bering Lakes) where seals haul out in fresh water 
at high densities on pieces of grounded (not tide 
or wind-forced) glacial ice (Fig. 3), a situation that 
doesn’t present the same logistical problems as 
moving ice ﬁelds with scattered seals. This year, 
as in past surveys, tidewater glacial sites attracted 
several hundreds to thousands of seals, except for 
Endicott Arm, which averaged less than 10 seals. 
The unusually low number of seals in Endicott Arm 
was likely due to the relatively small amount of ice 
that had been calved from the glacier at the head of 
the arm.
By John Jansen and Luciana Santos
RESOURCE ASSESSMENT & 
CONSERVATION ENGINEERING 
(RACE) DIVISION
GROUNDFISH ASSESSMENT PROGRAM
Annual Eastern Bering Sea Bottom Trawl 
Survey: Groundﬁsh
The twenty-sixth in the series of annual bot­
tom trawl surveys of the eastern Bering Sea (EBS) 
continental shelf was completed on 2 August 2007 
Figure 3. Unusually dense aggregation of harbor seals on grounded glacial ice in Bering Lake, 
southcentral Alaska. Photo by John Jansen.
22 
July-August-September 2007
aboard the AFSC chartered ﬁshing vessels Arcturus 
and Aldebaran. Scientiﬁc staﬀ from the AFSC, 
Alaska Department of Fish and Game, and the 
International Paciﬁc Halibut Commission partici­
pated in the survey and completed standardized bi­
ological sampling of crab and groundﬁsh resources 
at 376 stations (Fig. 1). Three-hundred ﬁfty-six of 
these stations have been sampled annually since 
1982, and the additional 20 stations in the north­
west have been sampled every year since 1987 to in­
vestigate the northern distribution and abundance 
of opilio crabs and commercial ﬁsh species in re­
sponse to the changing climate (Fig. 1).
Bottom temperatures on the EBS shelf were on 
average cooler in 2007 as compared to 2006, and 
the cold pool (≤2°C) extended farther south and 
east toward the Alaska Peninsula and into Bristol 
Bay (Fig. 2).
The largest catches of walleye pollock (Theragra 
chalcogramma) were concentrated along the north­
west outer shelf and near the Pribiloﬀ Islands 
where bottom temperatures were above 0°C (Fig. 3); 
large catches of walleye pollock were also observed 
north of the Alaska Peninsula near Unimak 
Island (Fig. 3). 
Ninety-ﬁve percent of the trawl catches contained 
walleye pollock and the estimated total biomass in­
creased to 4.16 million metric tons (t) in 2007 from 
2.85 million t in 2006 (Fig. 4). Catches of walleye 
pollock from the inner and middle shelves were 
composed mainly of 1-year olds that ranged in size 
from 10 to 20 cm. Similar to walleye pollock, Paciﬁc 
cod (Gadus macrocephalus) were broadly distributed 
across the EBS shelf and caught at nearly all sta­
tions. Total biomass declined for the second straight 
year (0.42 million t; Fig. 4); however, numbers of 
Paciﬁc cod ranging in size from 10 to 20 cm were 
almost four times greater compared to 2006, which 
suggests there may be a large incoming year class. 
For all ﬂatﬁshes except for yellowﬁn sole (Limanda 
aspera), the annual trend of total biomass declined 
from 2006 to 2007, but trends were less clear 
because of the variance associated with these esti­
mates (Fig. 4).
In addition to abundance and biomass estimates, 
analyses of size and age composition will be com­
pleted for selected commercial groundﬁsh species 
Figure 1. Standard and special study stations sampled during the 2007 eastern Bering 
Sea bottom trawl survey. Geographic regions shown indicate strata used for analysis of 
groundﬁsh catch data. 
Figure 2. Average annual bottom temperatures recorded 
during the eastern Bering Sea groundﬁsh bottom trawl surveys, 
1981-2007.
AFSC Quarterly Report
23
using collections of 64,903 length 
measurements and over 8,000 age 
structures. There were 22 special 
research projects conducted dur­
ing the 2007 trawl survey (see 
April-May-June 2007 Quarterly 
Report for a list of the projects). For 
one of these projects, the Arcturus 
collected midwater acoustic data 
from transects across sampling 
Figure 3. Map of the distribution of average bottom temperatures (°C) in relation 
to the abundance (kg/ha) of walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) observed 
during the 2007 eastern Bering Sea groundﬁsh bottom trawl survey.
Figure 4. Plot of biomass (x106 t) for eight commercial ﬁshes (or group of ﬁshes) on the 
eastern Bering Sea shelf estimated from standardized trawl survey data collected by 
the AFSC from 1982 to 2007. Error bars are 95% conﬁdence limits.
grid cells where there were high 
densities of walleye pollock. The 
AFSC 
Midwater 
Assessment 
and Conservation Engineering 
(MACE) Program is evaluating 
the feasibility of using acoustic 
data from annual EBS trawl sur­
vey trawl charter vessels for esti­
mating the midwater component 
of walleye pollock biomass during 
years without acoustic surveys. 
The Groundﬁsh Assessment and 
Recruitment Processes Programs 
are also collaborating on the rou­
tine collection of bongo plankton 
samples from the EBS survey 
charter vessels. Plankton tows 
were conducted once daily from 
the Arcturus during the ﬁrst and 
second legs. The goal is to expand
coverage of plankton tows to in­
clude both vessels for the entire 
survey area.
By Robert Lauth

Gulf of Alaska Groundﬁsh 
Trawl Assessment Survey 
Completed
The ﬁfth in the series of bien­
nial bottom trawl surveys of Gulf 
of Alaska (GOA) groundﬁsh 
resources, which began 25 May, 
was completed on 7 August 2007, 
covering the continental shelf 
and slope between the Islands 
of the Four Mountains (170°W 
long.) and Dixon Entrance (U.S.-
Canada border in Southeast 
Alaska) out to the 1,000-m depth 
contour. The survey was con­
ducted aboard three chartered 
commercial trawlers, the FV 
Gladiator, the FV Sea Storm, and 
the FV Vesteraalen. A total of 820 
tows were successfully completed, 
ranging in depth from 16 to 903 
m (Fig. 5)
The primary focus of the bien­
nial groundﬁsh surveys is to build 
a standardized time series of data 
designed to assess, describe, and 
24 
July-August-September 2007
monitor the distribution, abun­
dance, and biological condition of 
various GOA groundﬁsh stocks. 
Speciﬁc objectives of the 2007 
survey, as in others preceding it, 
were to:
1. Deﬁne the distribution and 
relative abundance of the princi­
pal groundﬁsh and invertebrate 
species inhabiting the continental 
shelf and slope of the GOA.
2. Collect data to deﬁne vari­
ous biological characteristics of 
major groundﬁsh species, such 
as age, sex, size, growth rates, 
length-weight relationships, and 
feeding habits.
3. Collect integrated ﬁshing per­
formance, net conﬁguration, and 
position data for all trawl hauls 
with which to derive precise ef­
fort estimates.
4. Collect environmental data 
such as surface-to-bottom water 
column temperatures.
5. Collect biological specimens 
and data requested by scientists 
from the AFSC or other cooper­
ating research groups.
Over the entire survey area, 
the most abundant species in 
2007 were, in descending order, 
arrowtooth ﬂounder, Paciﬁc ocean 
perch (POP), giant grenadier, 
Paciﬁc halibut, walleye pollock, 
ﬂathead sole, Paciﬁc cod, and 
northern rockﬁsh. Abundance 
has apparently decreased for most 
of these species since 2005; de­
clines ranged from 10% for POP 
to 17% for pollock, giant grena­
dier, and halibut; to 24% for cod; 
and 37% for northern rockﬁsh. 
The arrowtooth ﬂounder abun­
dance held steady since 2005. Of 
these major species, only ﬂathead 
sole exhibited an apparent in­
crease in estimated abundance of 
31%. Other notable changes were 
dramatic increases in the apparent 
abundance of Paciﬁc hake (69%) 
and spiny dogﬁsh (238%).
Arrowtooth ﬂounder and POP 
were the two most abundant spe­
cies in both the eastern and central 
Gulf of Alaska. While arrowtooth 
were also the most abundant spe­
cies in the western GOA, POP 
fell to third most abundant spe­
cies in that area, surpassed by 
giant grenadier. Estimates of 
abundance, distribution, and size 
composition from the survey re­
sults have been provided to stock 
assessment analysts for updates 
to the annual Stock Assessment 
and Fishery Evaluation (SAFE) 
Report of the North Paciﬁc 
Fishery Management Council’s 
(NPFMC) GOA Plan Team. 
Water temperatures observed 
during the 2007 survey exhib­
ited a much diﬀerent pattern 
than previous GOA surveys, as 
cooler water inﬁltrated shallower 
depths, often with warmer water 
below. Water temperatures from 
GOA surveys, adjusted to remove 
the eﬀect of date of collection 
through the use of a general linear 
model, are shown in Figure 6. 
The very warm near-surface 
temperatures that were observed 
in 2003 and 2005 were largely 
absent in 2007. In all years prior 
to 2007, water temperatures at 
depths greater than 400 m have 
generally been cooler than 4C. 
In 2007, water warmer than 4C 
extended to almost 600 m most 
of the time. The pattern of water 
temperatures in 2007 more close­
ly resembles the pattern in 1993 
than any other year, although 
the intrusion of colder water into 
shallower depths is much more 
pronounced in 2007.
By Mark Wilkins and 
Michael Martin
MIDWATER ASSESSMENT 
& CONSERVATION 
ENGINEERING (MACE) 
PROGRAM
Summer 2007 Pollock 
Acoustic-Trawl Survey
Midwater 
Assessment 
and 
Conservation Engineering (MACE) 
Program 
scientists 
conduct­
ed 
an 
acoustic-trawl 
survey 
from 2 June to 30 July 2007 on 
the Bering Sea shelf between 
161W and 175E aboard the 
NOAA ship Oscar Dyson. The 
principal objective of the sur­
vey was to collect echo integra­
Figure 5. Map showing bottom trawl tows (ﬁlled circles) completed during the 2007 
Gulf of Alaska groundﬁsh survey.   
ALASKA 
AFSC Quarterly Report
25
and light penetration on the distribution and behav­
ior of walleye pollock. Seabird observers recorded 
underway line-transect data on seabird abundance 
throughout the cruise. Permission was received to 
survey Russian waters in the Cape Navarin region, 
and a guest Russian scientist from TINRO-Centre 
in Vladivostok participated aboard the Oscar Dyson. 
Very few walleye pollock were observed on the 
eight easternmost transects between Bristol Bay 
and north of Unimak Island (Fig. 7). Walleye pol­
lock numbers increased slightly north of Unimak 
Pass and along the 100-m isobath surrounding the 
Pribilof Islands. 
West of the Pribilof Islands, pollock concentra­
tions increased gradually towards the north and west. 
A large aggregation of age-1 juveniles was observed 
Figure 6. Date adjusted temperature proﬁles by ½ degree longitude 
intervals observed during Gulf of Alaska surveys for years 1993-
2007. Water temperatures observed at shallower depths during 
the 2007 survey  were generally cooler than in previous surveys.
tion and trawl data to estimate the abundance and 
distribution of walleye pollock. The survey design 
consisted of generally north-south oriented, paral­
lel transects spaced 20 nautical miles (nmi) apart 
(Fig. 7). Acoustic and trawl data were collected 
during daylight hours. Nighttime operations in­
cluded additional trawling, conductivity-tempera­
ture-depth-ﬂuorometer (CTD) measurements and 
gear tests of a multiple opening/closing codend de­
vice for large trawls. Additional research projects 
included deployment of an underwater video record­
ing system to examine trawl eﬀects on the seaﬂoor, 
trawl selectivity experiments, collection of acoustic-
doppler-current-proﬁler (ADCP) data to investigate 
pollock movement, and measurement of underwater 
light level data to assess the eﬀect of light intensity 
26 
July-August-September 2007
Figure 8. Population numbers at length estimated for walleye pollock from the 
summer Bering Sea shelf acoustic-trawl survey. Panel A shows walleye pollock east 
of 170°W, Panel B shows walleye pollock west of 170°W in U.S. waters, and Panel C 
shows walleye pollock in Russian waters near Cape Navarin. Note Y-axes differ.
along the southern section of 
transect 19. The highest concen­
trations of pollock were observed 
between 175˚ and 179˚W. Adult 
walleye pollock ( larger than 30-
cm fork length (FL)) were most 
abundant oﬀshore of the 100-m 
isobath along transects 24 and 25, 
and juveniles (smaller than 30-cm 
FL) were most numerous on tran­
sect 27. Walleye pollock size com­
position ranged from 10- to 74-cm
FL across the shelf (Fig. 8). East 
of the Pribilof Islands (east of 
170˚W) the dominant length 
mode was 49-cm FL. West of 
170˚W the dominant length 
modes were 45-cm FL for adult 
walleye pollock and 14-cm for 
juveniles. In the Cape Navarin 
area of Russia, juveniles domi­
nated the population numerically, 
with modes at 15 and 21 cm, fol­
lowed by adults at 44 cm. Of the 
total estimated 2007 walleye pol­
lock biomass in the Bering Sea, 
13% was east of 170˚W, 82% was 
west of 170˚W in U.S. waters, 
and 5% was in Russian waters. 
More juvenile walleye pollock, 
especially age-1s, were observed in 
2007 than in 2006. 
In addition, several days were 
dedicated to trawl-oriented re­
search projects. Trawl selectivity 
experiments were carried out to 
estimate pollock escapement from 
the Aleutian wing trawl (AWT), 
using 1-inch monoﬁlament pock­
et nets attached to diﬀerent parts 
of the trawl meshes, a DIDSON 
acoustic imaging device, and still 
stereo camera to observe ﬁsh size 
and position. Two trials were 
completed; one with eight and the 
second with six trawl hauls. The 
results of these trials will be used 
to estimate diﬀerential escape­
ment of small pollock relative to 
that of  large pollock. Additionally, 
ﬁeld tests were conducted with a 
Figure 7. Estimated walleye pollock biomass between 14 m from the surface and 3 m 
off bottom along tracklines surveyed during the summer 2007 acoustic-trawl survey 
of the Bering Sea shelf. Transect numbers are underlined and the Steller sea lion 
conservation area (SCA) is outlined. 
˚W
˚W
AFSC Quarterly Report
27
multiple opening/closing codend 
device (MOCC) attached to the 
AWT. The MOCC is controlled 
by an acoustic link to the ship and 
contains three codends allowing 
up to three discrete samples to 
be collected during a single trawl 
haul. Four replicate trawl hauls of 
three codends each were made to 
estimate the transit time for ﬁsh 
to pass through the length of the 
AWT and into the MOCC in 
order to determine the appropri­
ate time interval for tripping the 
MOCC codends. Initial results 
suggested that about 10 minutes 
were required for ﬁsh to transit 
the AWT.
By Taina Honkalehto 
RECRUITMENT PROCESSES 
PROGRAM- FISHERIES 
OCEANOGRAPHY 
COORDINATED 
INVESTIGATIONS (FOCI)
Summer Field Season 
The Recruitment Processes 
Program had a busy summer ﬁeld 
season. During 4-16 September, 
the program participated in 
NOAA’s Ecosystems & Fishery 
Oceanography 
Coordinated 
Investigations program (Eco-
FOCI) cruise in the Gulf of 
Alaska 
(GOA) 
aboard 
the 
NOAA ship Miller Freeman. The 
cruise was conducted to collect 
the necessary data to rigorously 
evaluate the relative quality of 
food available to juvenile walleye 
pollock in two important nurs­
ery areas (Fig. 9), and to begin 
to address the potential for prey 
switching by arrowtooth ﬂoun­
der that may act as a density-
dependent community stabilizing 
mechanism, if it occurs. The data 
collected will also extend a time 
series established by the program 
Figure 9. Location of stations occupied during the fall eco-FOCI cruise aboard the 
NOAA ship Miller Freeman, 4-16 September 2007.
that may be useful as a pollock 
recruitment predictor. Walleye 
pollock is a major component of 
the GOA groundﬁsh ﬁshery and 
marine ecosystem.
Data and samples were suc­
cessfully collected at each of 
68 predetermined survey grid 
locations. Environmental and 
zooplankton 
data 
were 
also 
collected at each station. The 
Stauﬀer (a.k.a., anchovy) net was 
used to collect small midwater 
ﬁshes, which were sorted on deck 
(Fig. 10). A total of 2,600 walleye 
pollock were measured (Fig. 11), 
and many were preserved for sub­
sequent determination of age and 
diet. The vast majority of the juve­
nile walleye pollock were collect­
ed from the Semidi grid, which 
indicates that it is a more heav­
ily used nursery than is the area 
encompassed by the Kodiak grid. 
The number of juveniles collected 
was low relative to other years in 
the time series. Additional sam­
pling at seven grid locations was 
conducted using a bottom trawl 
to collect arrowtooth ﬂounder, 
which were dissected at sea to 
facilitate visual scan of stom­
ach contents. Acoustic data were 
collected continuously at 18, 38, 
and 120 kHz using the Simrad 
ER60 (APC 10) echo sounder. 
Personnel in the AFSC Food 
Habits and MACE Programs 
provided gear and consultation 
necessary for the successful col­
lection of the stomach scan and 
acoustic data.
The Recruitment Processes 
Program had several other cruises 
in the Bering and Chukchi Seas. 
Kevin Bailey, Morgan Busby, 
and Colleen Harpold joined 
our colleagues from Hokkaido 
University to sample the eastern 
Bering Sea shelf for zooplank­
ton, ichthyoplankton, and juve­
nile ﬁshes aboard the Japanese 
research vessel Oshoro maru. This 
is our tenth year of cooperation 
with Japanese scientists on this 
annual cruise. We also collected 
plankton samples aboard the F/V 
Arcturus in collaboration with the 
RACE Groundﬁsh Assessment 
Program (GAP) during the sum­
28 
July-August-September 2007
mer eastern Bering Sea bottom trawl survey. One 
sample was collected each day after the ﬁnal trawl 
of the day. AFSC scientists Jay Clark collected sam­
ples during Leg 1 (June) and Elizabeth Logerwell 
collected samples during Leg 2 (July). Both worked 
along side GAP personnel to process trawl catches 
the majority of the time. Morgan Busby also par­
ticipated in the Auke Bay Laboratories’ Bering 
and Aleutian Island Salmon International Survey 
(BASIS) survey of the Chukchi Sea aboard the 
Oscar Dyson (August –September). This was a new 
opportunity for the Recruitment Processes Program 
to obtain and study larval ﬁshes from areas much 
farther north than our usual collections areas. 
Recruitment Processes, as part of the  North Paciﬁc 
Climate Regimes and Ecosystem Productivity 
(NPCREP) project, a collaboration with NOAA’s 
Paciﬁc Marine Environmental Laboratory, staged an 
18-day cruise aboard the University of Washington’s 
research vessel Thomas G. Thompson to survey fall 
conditions in the eastern Bering Sea. Samples were 
taken on four cross shelf transects from the south­
eastern shelf to just south of St. Lawrence Island, 
and approximately 50 stations along the 70-m iso­
bath were occupied and sampled from St. Lawrence 
Island south to mooring site M2. This is the third 
year that NOAA has sampled these stations in 
spring and late summer. We now have data from a 
warm year when sea ice coverage in spring was min­
imal (2005), a year of cool conditions and increas­
ing ice (2006), and a cold year with moderate winter 
and spring ice coverage (2007). The data resulting 
from these cruises is being used to understand the 
role of sea ice in this ecosystem and to help predict 
how the eastern Bering Sea ecosystem may respond 
if the area experiences further warming and reduc­
tions in seasonal sea ice.
By Matthew Wilson

NEWPORT LABORATORY: FISHERIES 
BEHAVIORAL ECOLOGY PROGRAM
Reducing Elasmobranch Bycatch on Longline 
Gear: Laboratory and Field Studies With Rare-
Earth Metal Deterrents
Unwanted bycatch of elasmobranchs is a world­
wide problem in both commercial and recreational 
ﬁsheries. Sharks, skates, and rays compete with 
target species for baits and can occupy a large pro­
portion of hooks set on longlines, reducing capture 
eﬃciency and increasing costs of operation. Also, 
it is now recognized that declining populations 
of elasmobranchs might result in unintentional 
changes in ecosystem structure in both coastal and 
oﬀshore waters. Thus, new methods are needed to 
reduce elasmobranch bycatch.
Spiny dogﬁsh are found in temperate and subarc­
tic shelf waters worldwide. This small shark (<120 
cm) has some economic and cultural signiﬁcance in 
certain areas, but its abundance, toxic spines, and 
low market value make it a frequent nuisance species 
in both recreational and commercial ﬁshing in both 
the Atlantic and Paciﬁc Oceans (Fig. 12). Spiny 
dogﬁsh often occur in large schools and cause great 
damage to ﬁshing gear. They can make up more 
than 90% of the catch in surveys for Paciﬁc hali­
but conducted by the International Paciﬁc Halibut 
Figure 10.  Gary Cooper helps dump a catch of walleye pollock 
onto the sorting table. Photo by Ingrid Spies.
Figure 11. Ingrid Spies holds a juvenile walleye pollock 
while coworkers collect biological information. Photo by 
Ingrid Spies. 
AFSC Quarterly Report
29
Commission (IPHC) at some locations oﬀ Alaska 
and British Columbia, where dogﬁsh populations 
appear to be increasing. During 2006, spiny dog­
ﬁsh was the single most common species caught oﬀ 
British Columbia and the northwest United States, 
occupying 15% and 5% of the hooks ﬁshed in those 
areas, respectively. The area oﬀ Kodiak Island in 
Alaska also had high dogﬁsh catch (16% of hooks), 
barely exceeding halibut catch. Over 20 years ago, 
the IPHC recognized the negative eﬀects of dogﬁsh 
on setline catchability of halibut, observing more 
than a four-fold eﬀect on catchability ratios between 
areas with low and high dogﬁsh abundances.
In 2006, the World Wildlife Fund grand prize 
for “Smart Gear” was awarded for the discovery that 
rare-earth magnets can be used to repulse certain 
sharks. It has long been known that elasmobranchs 
respond to magnetic and electrical ﬁelds using the 
ampullae of Lorenzini (special sensing organs), but 
this was the ﬁrst ﬁshing-related application aimed 
at reducing shark bycatch. We also know that non­
magnetic rare-earth alloys can produce a shark re­
pulsing eﬀect. For example, alloys in the lanthanoid 
series are electropositive, giving up electrons in sea­
water to the more electronegative skin of a shark. 
While the exact mechanisms of deterrence are not 
understood, the potential for reducing dogﬁsh by­
catch is promising. However, to date, there has been 
no peer-reviewed experimentation to assess the ef­
ﬁcacy of rare-earth materials in deterring sharks.
During summer 2007, experiments were con­
ducted at the AFSC’s Newport Laboratory facility 
to test the hypothesis that rare-earth magnets and 
metals placed in close proximity to baits would re­
duce attacks on and consumption of baits by spiny 
dogﬁsh. Trials were also conducted with Paciﬁc 
halibut. Attacks on baits were tested in the presence 
of two diﬀerent rare-earth materials (neodymium-
iron-boride magnets and cerium mischmetal) both 
believed to aﬀect the behavior of elasmobranchs. 
Pairwise tests of the rare-earth materials with in­
ert metal decoys showed that dogﬁsh detected both 
rare-earth materials, but magnets provided no pro­
tection for baits in feeding trials. However, baits 
tested with mischmetal were attacked and con­
sumed at a lower frequency than mimic treatments 
(to 70% reduction), and times to attack baits were 
signiﬁcantly higher, as were numbers of approaches 
before ﬁrst attack. The time diﬀerential between 
mischmetal and mimic treatments and the number 
of baits consumed converged with increasing food 
deprivation (to 4 days), but diﬀerences were signiﬁ­
cant for all deprivation levels. Cerium mischmetal 
appeared to be irritating to dogﬁsh and may disrupt 
their bait detection and orientation abilities. In con­
trast, Paciﬁc halibut showed no reaction whatsoever 
to the rare-earth magnets or cerium mischmetal, 
and we concluded that the latter may be useful in re­
ducing spiny dogﬁsh bycatch in the halibut ﬁshery.
Following the encouraging results of labora­
tory trials, a ﬁshing trial was conducted during 
September 2007, to test the eﬃcacy of cerium mis­
chmetal in deterring spiny dogﬁsh in the ﬁeld. The 
ﬁshing trial was carried out oﬀ Homer, Alaska, in 
a joint eﬀort between AFSC’s Fishery Behavioral 
Ecology Program and the IPHC (Steve Kaimmer), 
with support from NOAA’s Bycatch Reduction 
Program. Thirty-six longline sets were made in lo­
cations known for both the presence of halibut and 
abundant dogﬁsh. Each set contained three skates 
of gear, one with standard hook gear, one with 
hooks protected with cerium mischmetal (Fig. 13), 
and one with inert metal mimics. 
Preliminary results indicate modest reduction
in dogﬁsh catch on the mischmetal-protected 
hooks, only about 17%. Catch of longnose skates 
Figure 12. Spiny dogﬁsh snarled in a demersal longline. Adult 
dogﬁsh may be up to 1.2 m long and weigh up to 10 pounds.
30 
July-August-September 2007
was reduced 48%. Catch of legal-sized halibut was 
increased by 5%. While these diﬀerences are not 
large, it is clear that cerium mischmetal can aﬀect 
catch rates of elasmobranchs. In our ﬁeld trial, dog­
ﬁsh were caught on 35% of the hooks in short, 2-
hour sets. Eﬀectiveness in individual sets appears 
to be density-dependent, and we speculate that the 
deterrents will be more eﬀective where dogﬁsh are 
less abundant. Some other limitations may aﬀect the 
use of cerium mischmetal in commercial operations. 
The material is relatively expensive, it has some haz­
ardous properties (e.g., it is a ﬂammable solid!), and 
hydrolyzes in seawater. While experiments are cur­
rently being conducted in Hawaii, New England, 
and Florida, our study represents the ﬁrst rigorous 
experimentation with rare-earth materials in a ﬁsh­
ery application.
By Allan Stoner
KODIAK LABORATORY: SHELLFISH 
ASSESSMENT PROGRAM
Eastern Bering Sea Annual Bottom Trawl 
Survey: Crab Resources
The 2007 eastern Bering Sea trawl survey took 
place from 4 June to 2 August conducted jointly by 
the Shellﬁsh and Groundﬁsh Assessment Programs 
aboard the chartered ﬁshing vessels Aldebaran and 
Arcturus. Three hundred seventy-six standard sta­
tions were sampled from Bristol Bay to west of St. 
Matthew Island on the Bering Sea shelf (Fig. 14). 
In addition, four extra stations were sampled af­
ter encountering a Tanner crab (Chionoecetes bair­
di) “hot spot”, deﬁned as 100 or more legal-sized 
males. When a hot spot is encountered, four addi­
tional tows are made 5 nmi miles in each direction 
(north, south, east, and west). Over 50,000 com­
mercially important crab species including red king 
crab  (Paralithodes camtschaticus), blue king crab 
(P. platypus), snow crab (C. opilio), Tanner crab, and 
hair crab (Erimacrus isenbeckii) were measured, and 
other biometric information, including shell and 
egg condition, weight, chela height and presence of 
parasitism were recorded.
 Due to colder than normal bottom water temper­
atures at the beginning of the survey for the second 
year in a row, only 51% of the female red king crab 
caught in Bristol Bay had extruded new clutches of 
eggs. Spawning stock assessment models rely upon 
future recruitment and mating success so an accu­
rate assessment of female reproductive condition is 
necessary. After most of the standard stations were 
completed at the end of July, the Aldebaran returned 
to Bristol Bay and resampled 32 stations (Fig. 14); 
over 98% of the females had completed the mat­
ing and molting cycle and extruded new clutches by 
this time.
Station locations and numbers of legal (i.e., 6.5-
in width and greater) male red king crab, Tanner 
crab and snow crab caught per square nautical mile 
are shown in Figures 15, 16, and 17 respectively. 
Due to low stock abundance, the ﬁshery for blue 
king crab in the Pribilof area has been closed since 
1999 and in St. Matthew since 1998. The red king 
crab ﬁshery in the Pribilofs has also remained closed 
due to blue king crab bycatch concerns. Historically 
there has been a ﬁshery for hair crab, although there 
has not been one since 2000.
The following are the 2007 abundance estimates 
for the ﬁve species of crab with the percentage of 
change from 2006. These estimates are derived for 
the annual Report to Industry.
RED KING CRAB, BRISTOL BAY
Legal males: 13.3 million crabs; 6% increase.
Pre-recruits: 10.2 million crabs; 37% increase.
Large females: 35.4 million crabs; 19% increase.

Status: The abundance of legal males increased 
slightly in 2007. The 2007 index of pre-recruit males 
showed a notable increase, while that for small 
males decreased by 23%. The abundance of mature 
females increased relative to 2006, although that 
Figure 13. Cerium mischmetal triangles are attached near the 
eye of circle hooks set for Paciﬁc halibut.
AFSC Quarterly Report
31
for pre-recruit females declined by 72%. While the 
stock is not considered to be overﬁshed, it remains 
well below the peak population levels of abundance 
of the 1970s.
RED KING CRAB, PRIBILOF DISTRICT
Legal males: 1.6 million crabs; 25% increase.
Pre-recruits: 0.2 million crabs; 8% decrease.
Large females: 1.7 million crabs; 85% increase.
Status:  Crabs are highly concentrated, and indices 
of abundance of all categories are characterized by 
very poor precision. Male abundance estimates in 
this district are highly inﬂuenced by the results of a 
limited number of tows with positive crab catches. 
The overall male plus female population abundance 
in 2007 increased by 50%; total males increased by 
28% and total females increased by 86%.
BLUE KING CRAB, PRIBILOF DISTRICT
Legal males:  0.1 million crabs; 46% increase.
Pre-recruits: 0.1 million crabs; 160% increase.
Large females: 0.2 million crabs; 49% decrease.

Status: The population is extremely low overall 
and trends in abundance are not easily detectable. 
Indices of male and female abundance are charac­
terized by very poor precision. All male size cat­
egories increased in abundance relative to 2006, 
although the abundance in all female size categories 
declined. The overall male plus female population 
abundance in 2007 declined by 6%. Irrespective of 
the percent change in abundance relative to 2006, 
the 2007 assessment reveals indices among the low­
est on record.
BLUE KING CRAB, NORTHERN DISTRICT (ST. 
MATTHEW)
Legal males: 1.4 million crabs; 1% decrease.
Pre-recruits: 2.3 million crabs; 212% increase.
Large females: 0.2 million crabs; 27% decrease
Status:  Indices of abundance in this district are af­
fected by the portion of the stock occupying inshore 
rocky untrawlable grounds. They are also character­
ized by low precision. The overall male plus female 
population abundance in 2007 increased by 113%. 
The 2007 assessment showed encouraging signs of 
a wider distribution of crabs around St. Matthew 
Island than encountered in recent past. Assessment 
of this stock is clouded by large uncertainty in es­
timated female abundance. The current assessment 
for small and pre-recruit males and small females 
are among the highest population estimates on 
record which may indicate future recruitment to 
the stock.
TANNER CRAB, EASTERN DISTRICT
Legal males: 12.1 million crabs; 17% decrease. 
Pre-recruits: 92.5 million crabs; 26% increase.
Large females: 40.8 million crabs; 6% decrease.
Status:  Since 2004, this stock demonstrated encour­
aging signs of recovery and increasing abundance in 
both 2005 and 2006. In 2007, with the exception 
of the pre-recruit male category, all sex-speciﬁc size 
categories decreased relative to 2006. The overall 
male plus female population abundance in 2007 
decreased by 12%. The legal male abundance index 
is characterized by low precision, and legal-sized 
males continue to represent only a small portion 
of mature male stock abundance. The current esti­
mates of small and pre-recruit male abundance are 
among the highest population estimates on record, 
which suggest future recruitment to the stock. 

SNOW CRAB, ALL DISTRICTS COMBINED
Large males: 150.9 million crabs; 5% increase.
Pre-recruits: 344.3 million crabs; 19% increase.
Large females: 1244.4 million crabs; 19% increase.
Status: The abundance indices of all sex-speciﬁc size 
categories increased slightly in 2007 relative to 2006 
with the exception of the small female category. 
The overall male plus female population abundance 
increased by 2%. The female reproductive stock is 
evidenced by high frequencies of old and very old 
shell crab which is of concern in terms of expected 
reproductive output. The mode of apparent male re­
cruitment in 2006 was not replaced by new recruit­
ment in 2007. With the exception of the pre-recruit 
and large male size categories which are average, 
the current assessment of small male abundance, 
and small and large female abundances are among 
the lowest estimates on record. There is apparent 
continued recruitment failure in the small male and 
female size categories; the recruitment trend since 
1994 is dramatically low and future outlook for the 
stock is uncertain.
HAIR CRAB, ALL DISTRICTS COMBINED.
Legal males: 2.0 million crabs; 91% increase.
Total females: 1.3 million crabs; 65% decrease.
32 
July-August-September 2007
Figure 14. Stations sampled (+) by grid during the annual eastern Bering Sea bottom trawl survey 
during 2007. Shading in sampled areas indicates resampled stations.
Figure 15. Catch rates by location of legal-sized male red king crab during the 2007 eastern Bering 
Sea bottom trawl survey.
AFSC Quarterly Report
33
Figure 16. Catch rates by location of Tanner crab during the 2007 eastern Bering Sea bottom trawl 
survey.
Figure 17. Catch rates by location of snow crab during the 2007 eastern Bering Sea bottom trawl 
survey.
34 
July-August-September 2007
Status: Since the early 1990s, this population has 
shown persistently declining trends in abundance. 
In 2007, the abundance indices of all male size cate­
gories increased relative to 2006, while female abun­
dance declined substantially. Recruitment trends in 
this stock are unclear due to poor representation of 
small crabs in the survey and to the extremely poor 
precision of the abundance estimates. Current stock 
status is not well estimated.

Additional Research
Also, in 2007 the Bering Sea Fisheries Research 
Foundation (BSFRF), receiving funds from the 
ﬁshing industry, NPRB, and NMFS, conducted a 
separate red king crab survey in Bristol Bay begin­
ning in May. Comparative tows with the NMFS 
Bering Sea trawl survey vessels were carried out on 
9 and 10 June. The BSFRF vessel, the F/V American 
Eagle, made 5-minute tows alongside the NMFS 
vessels, which made 19 standard 30-minute tows. 
Catch data from this eﬀort is currently being ana­
lyzed.
By Jan Haaga, Lou Rugolo, and Claire Armistead


RESOURCE ECOLOGY & 
FISHERIES MANAGEMENT 
(REFM) DIVISION 
RESOURCE ECOLOGY & ECOSYSTEM 
MODELING PROGRAM
Fish Stomach Collection and Lab Analysis
Laboratory analysis was performed on 786 
groundﬁsh stomachs from the eastern Bering Sea 
and on 185 groundﬁsh stomachs from the Gulf of 
Alaska. During the eastern Bering Sea (EBS) trawl 
survey, 2,802 stomachs were collected, and 1,256 
stomachs were analyzed at sea. A total of 3,416 
stomachs were collected during the later legs of the 
Gulf of Alaska trawl survey, and 1,494 stomachs 
were analyzed at sea. Fisheries observers collected 
809 stomach samples from the Bering Sea. A total 
of 2,773 records were added to the groundﬁsh food 
habits database. 
By Troy Buckley, Geoﬀ Lang, and Mei-Sun Yang
Ecosystem Indicators Update
The Ecosystem Considerations report of the 
Stock Assessment and Fisheries Evaluation (SAFE) 
Report was presented at the North Paciﬁc Fishery 
Management Council’s September 2007 Plan 
Team meetings. Many of the physical environmen­
tal indices in the Ecosystem Considerations report 
were updated. For example, the Paciﬁc Decadal 
Oscillation (PDO), the leading mode of North 
Paciﬁc sea surface temperature (SST) variability, 
transitioned from moderately positive in early 2006 
to moderately negative in summer/early fall 2006 
and has slowly increased to weakly positive values 
during summer 2007. When the PDO is positive 
SST anomalies tend to be positive along the North 
American coast, extending to the southeastern 
Bering Sea. The Bering Sea experienced a relatively 
cold winter and spring in 2007. The presence of sea 
ice together with below normal ocean temperatures 
likely resulted in the ﬁrst ice edge primary produc­
tion bloom since 1999. Despite the presence of ice 
in the Bering Sea, there was a record low total area 
of sea ice in the Arctic in summer 2007. Unlike the 
northern Bering Sea and Arctic Ocean hot spots, 
the rate of warming in the southern Bering Sea is 
slowing down, suggesting a large natural variability 
component to recent extremes in addition to a back­
ground anthropogenic contribution toward warmer 
temperatures. 
Some biological indices were also updated in 
this draft of the Ecosystem Considerations report. 
Demersal groundﬁsh species in the Bering Sea-
Aleutian Islands region (BSAI) and Gulf of Alaska 
(GOA), for example, had above-average recruit­
ments from the mid- or late 1970s to the late 1980s, 
followed by below-average recruitments during 
most of the 1990s. There is an indication for above-
average recruitment from 1994 to 2000 (with the 
exception of 1996). In the GOA, recruitment has 
been below average across stocks since 2001. Annual 
groundﬁsh surplus production in the EBS and GOA 
decreased between 1978 and 2005. Declines in pro­
duction may be a density-dependent response to ob­
served increases in biomass and aging populations 
of groundﬁsh. The eastern Bering Sea groundﬁsh 
community appears to have fewer small individuals 
and more large individuals through time (Fig. 1a). 
The community size spectrum (CSS) slope became 
less negative and the CSS intercept decreased from 
1982 to 1987, primarily due to signiﬁcant changes in 
the slopes and intercepts of non-target ﬁsh over time 
(Figs. 1b and 2). This would imply that, overall (and 
particularly for nontarget ﬁsh), the groundﬁsh com­
munity has fewer small individuals and more large 
individuals through time. Factors other than ﬁsh­
AFSC Quarterly Report
35
ing, such as the regime shift in 1976/77, may have 
had an inﬂuence on the community size spectrum.
More updates will be provided in the ﬁnal 
November 2007 report.
By Jennifer Boldt
Multispecies and Ecosystem Modeling
Dr. Sarah Gaichas of the Resource Ecology & 
Ecosystem Modeling (REEM) Program orga­
nized the “Ecosystem Modeling Applications in 
Fishery Management Symposium” at the American 
Fisheries Society (AFS) annual meeting in San 
Francisco, California, 2-6 September 2007. The 
full-day symposium with poster session was co-orga­
nized with John Field (Southwest Fisheries Science 
Center), Jason Link (Northeast Fisheries Science 
Center  (NEFSC)), Howard Townsend (NOAA 
Chesapeake Bay Program Oﬃce) and Megan Tyrell 
(NEFSC). AFSC participants included Dr. Grant 
Thompson who contributed a poster, Drs. Sarah 
Gaichas and Ivonne Ortiz who presented talks, 
and three University of Washington students, Jodie 
Little, Teresa A’Mar, and Doug Kinzey, who presented 
work done in collaboration with AFSC scientists.
The symposium was accepted and considered 
timely by AFS because the objectives of ﬁshery 
management are extending beyond optimizing sin­
gle species yields to consider the broader ecosystem 
eﬀects of ﬁshing. Ecosystem models can provide a 
structured framework for addressing uncertainty and 
unintended consequences in ﬁsheries management 
decision-making. The objective of this symposium 
was to explore current and potential management 
applications of ecosystem modeling across marine, 
estuarine, and freshwater systems using a variety of 
modeling methods. The symposium was organized 
by practitioners for practitioners, with presentations 
including a broad range of work encompassing the­
oretical and technical modeling advances, as well as 
issue-oriented case studies, all within the context of 
real-world ﬁshery management. It both showcased 
the current state-of-the-art in ecosystem modeling 
and facilitated the exchange of methods, ideas, and 
experience between participants working in diverse 
regions and ecosystems. 
This symposium was intended to start an on­
going dialogue among scientists across disciplin­
Figure 1. Eastern Bering Sea demersal ﬁsh (20-90 cm) community size spectrum (CSS), 1982-2006, for all ﬁsh in 3-D (a) and for 
nontarget ﬁsh only in 2-D (b).
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. Eastern Bering Sea demersal ﬁsh (20-90 cm) 
community size spectrum (CSS), 1982-2006, changes in slope 
(a) and intercept (b) of the CSS, 1982 to 2006.  NT= nontarget.
36 
July-August-September 2007
ary boundaries to improve ecosystem modeling 
eﬀorts for ﬁsheries applications and was successful 
at gathering diverse presenters. Participants ranged 
from students to senior scientists working in both 
academic and agency environments. Marine ecosys­
tems from Alaska and Hawaii through the Paciﬁc 
Northwest, Gulf of Mexico, and New England were 
represented, in addition to the estuarine Chesapeake 
Bay, and a tidal marsh system in Louisiana. The 
symposium ﬁnished with an international ﬁshery 
example from the Southern Ocean. The modeling 
applications presented encompassed single species 
models incorporating climate and predation ef­
fects, evolutionary models, individual based models, 
minimum realistic models of subsets of interacting 
species, spatially explicit models, and whole ecosys­
tem food web models. These models were used in 
management applications including standard stock 
assessments, spatial allocation of quotas, optimal 
placement of marine protected areas, water and 
land use management, and full ﬁshery management 
strategy evaluations for individual species and en­
tire ecosystems. The poster session and talks were 
well attended for the duration of the symposium, 
and received many positive comments. For more in­
formation on the meeting, visit http://www.ﬁsher­
ies.org/sf/. Downloadable abstracts for all symposia 
can be found at http://www.ﬁsheries.org/sf/images/
documents/online_oral_abstracts.pdf. 
By Sarah Gaichas
National Ecosystem Modeling Workshop 
(NEMoW)
REEM Program staﬀ served on the steering 
committee and made presentations at the “National 
Ecosystem Modeling Workshop (NEMoW)” held 
by NMFS in Santa Cruz, California, 29-31 August 
2007. NEMoW was held as a national workshop 
analogous to the national stock assessment work­
shops and national economists meetings for the 
purpose of exploring the establishment of ecosys­
tem modeling (EM) standards of use and review 
for living marine resource management applica­
tions. In this context, EM includes a wide range of 
biophysical, multispecies and ecosystem modeling 
methods. There were 39 NMFS participants and 
6 observers, including attendees from the AFSC’s 
REEM and the Status of Stocks & Multispecies 
Assessment Programs. A report to be issued in the 
future will include recommendations stemming 
from the workshop. Given the expressed inter­
est of our stakeholders relayed at the workshop, it 
was observed that EM eﬀorts should continue or 
be expanded. A wide range of issues was identiﬁed 
as common and historically important. From these, 
workshop participants identiﬁed an extensive set of 
generic EM objectives and model classes that are 
widely applicable across NMFS. Addressing these 
objectives merit or in many cases require an EM ap­
proach. It was clear that these more holistic, broader 
EM issues will persist into the foreseeable future.
By Kerim Aydin
 9th International Polychaete Conference 
Mei-Sun Yang presented the results of a study 
of polychaete consumption by marine ﬁshes in 
the Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska at the 9th 
International Polychaete Conference held in Portland, 
Maine, 12-17 August 2007. This study examined the 
percent in diet and geographic distribution of poly­
chaetes (Fig. 3) consumed by marine ﬁshes in the 
study region. The main ﬁsh predators of polychaetes 
included Alaska plaice (Pleuronectes quadritubercu­
latus), northern rock sole (Lepidopsetta polyxystra), 
yellowﬁn sole (P. asper), Dover sole (Microstomus 
paciﬁcus), rex sole (Errex zachirus) and ﬂathead sole 
(Hippoglossoides elassodon). Indices of polychaetes 
abundance (expressed as percentage of total stom­
ach contents weight) by subregion were estimated 
to show the relative abundance of polychaetes con­
sumed each year by groundﬁsh in both the eastern 
Bering Sea (1981-2006) and Gulf of Alaska (1987-
2006). Polychaetes abundance ranged from 71.11% 
of Alaska plaice stomach contents to 1% of ﬂathead 
sole stomach contents in the eastern Bering Sea. In 
the Gulf of Alaska, polychaetes abundance ranged 
from 1% of ﬂathead sole stomach contents to 56.91% 
of rex sole stomach contents. Estimates of the total 
amount of polychaetes consumed by the groundﬁsh 
population during each summer feeding season 
of each year ranged from 93,111 metric tons (t) in 
1999 to 27,705 t in 1990 for the Gulf of Alaska. In 
the eastern Bering Sea, the estimate ranged from 
2,632,022 t in 1994 to 914,382 t in 1985.
By Mei-Sun Yang, Geoﬀ Lang, Angie Greig, and 
Kerim Aydin
Seabird Interactions: Research Summary
The REEM Program participated in the ongo­
ing development of the National Bycatch Report by 
providing information on ﬁsheries, ﬁshery moni­
toring, and related seabird bycatch for the Alaska 
groundﬁsh ﬁsheries. Staﬀ also coordinated with the 
Washington Sea Grant Program (WSGP) as they 
AFSC Quarterly Report
37
completed their study to characterize the aspects of 
the Alaskan groundﬁsh trawl ﬂeet that aﬀect sea­
bird interactions, including an eﬀort assessment 
of trawl warp and third wires. That component 
was done under contract to the AFSC, and ful­
ﬁlls a requirement under the Short-tailed Albatross 
Biological Opinion. The WSGP will be publishing 
their report. Staﬀ also participated in a review of 
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) draft 
Conservation Action Plan for Black-footed and 
Laysan Albatrosses. The report should help guide 
research and management eﬀorts related to the con­
servation of seabirds for many years. 
We previously reported that Dr. Ann Edwards, 
National Research Council postdoctoral fellow at 
the AFSC, had successfully initiated a pilot pro­
gram with the USFWS to collect feather samples 
during albatross colony counts on Midway Island 
(AFSC 2007 January-March Quarterly Report). 
Results from the analyses of stable isotope val­
ues in feathers from Laysan albatrosses nesting on 
Midway Island in 2007 conﬁrm that the delta-15N 
values of birds sampled on the colony diﬀer, on 
average, from values of birds salvaged from longline 
ﬁsheries oﬀ Alaska and Hawaiian waters.  This 
paves the way for interpreting whether a ﬁsheries-
derived diet is correlated with reproductive success in 
Laysan albatrosses.
By Shannon Fitzgerald
ECONOMICS & SOCIAL SCIENCES 
RESEARCH PROGRAM
Steller Sea Lion Economic Survey Data 
Collection Completed
Little is known about the public’s preferences for 
providing additional protection to the threatened 
and endangered stocks of Steller sea lions. These 
preferences are primarily the result of the non-
consumptive value people attribute to such protec­
tion, which can take the form of active use values 
(such as the beneﬁts of viewing Steller sea lions in 
the wild) or non-use values (such as the value as­
sociated with protecting Steller sea lions for future 
generations or the personal satisfaction of knowing 
they will continue to exist in the future). Since these 
types of values are not observed in markets, non­
market valuation approaches must be used.
To understand these public preferences Dr. Dan 
Lew (Economics & Social Sciences Research (ESSR) 
Program), working with David Layton (University 
of Washington), and Stratus Consulting, has de­
veloped and implemented a non-market valuation 
survey that collects the information necessary to es­
timate the public’s preferences and values for provid­
ing additional protection to Steller sea lions. In the 
survey, information about preferences for protecting 
Steller sea lions are primarily obtained through a se­
ries of stated preference choice experiment (SPCE) 
questions. This type of question is commonly used 
Figure 3. Polychaetes (Family Scalibregmidae) extracted from a southern rock sole stomach.
38 
July-August-September 2007
in marketing and transportation research, health 
economics, and environmental economics to under­
stand economic preferences and values. In this appli­
cation, each SPCE question presents the respondent 
with a choice between maintaining the current set 
of protection actions and two options that involve 
doing more and spending more to protect Steller sea 
lions. Each option is described in terms of the ex­
pected population sizes and Endangered Species Act 
statuses for each stock in 60 years and the potential 
cost on the respondent’s household each year. In this 
way, the SPCE questions are intended to emulate a 
market decision. Furthermore, diﬀerent versions of 
the survey present diﬀerent combinations of expect­
ed results and costs. This is necessary to ensure there 
is suﬃcient variation in the data for the econometric 
models to estimate the eﬀect on choice behavior of 
the individual attributes describing each option (i.e., 
expected population sizes and statuses).
Following clearance under the Paperwork 
Reduction Act, the ﬁnal survey implementation 
was begun in January and concluded in August. The 
mail survey was initially sent to a stratiﬁed random 
sample of 5,000 U.S. residents—800 Alaska resi­
dents and 4,200 other U.S. residents. A modiﬁed 
Dillman mail-telephone protocol was followed that 
involved multiple follow-up contacts (i.e., multiple 
mailings and telephone contacts). The implementa­
tion achieved response rates, excluding undeliver­
ables, of 70% for Alaska residents and 60% for other 
U.S. residents, which are extremely good response 
rates for stated preference mail-based surveys.
At present, the survey data are being summarized 
and the analysis of the SPCE question responses 
has begun.
By Dan Lew
A Quantitative Model for Ranking and Selecting 
Communities Most Involved in Commercial 
Fisheries
In an article for NAPA Bulletin (an applied an­
thropology journal), Drs. Jennifer Sepez and Ron 
Felthoven of the ESSR Program, along with col­
league Dr. Karma Norman of the Northwest 
Fisheries Science Center, propose a quantitative 
model for ranking commercial ﬁsheries involvement 
by communities. The model was developed for the 
purpose of evaluating the level of participation of 
communities involved in North Paciﬁc and West 
Coast ﬁsheries, using multiple indicators including 
vessel ownership, landings, and permit holdings. 
Analysis of recent ﬁshing community proﬁling 
projects from other locations in the United States 
shows there have been four basic approaches to se­
lecting a manageable number of communities for 
analysis, including focusing only on major ports, 
aggregating communities by region, selecting rep­
resentative examples, and focusing only on the top 
of a ranked list. Falling within the ranked list ap­
proach, the proposed model uses data envelopment 
analysis (DEA) as a nonparametric, multidimen­
sional modeling method appropriate for evaluating 
and ranking ﬁshing communities based on an array 
of quantitative indicators of ﬁsheries involvement. 
The results of applying this model to commu­
nities involved in West Coast and North Paciﬁc 
ﬁsheries are summarized in the article. Nineteen in­
dicators of ﬁsheries dependence and 92 indicators of 
ﬁsheries engagement were modeled, yielding ranked 
lists of 1,564 and 1,760 U.S. communities, respec­
tively. Communities assigned the highest possible 
score in one or more of the ranked lists by the data 
envelopment analysis (DEA) model for commercial
ﬁsheries dependence or engagement are listed in 
Table 1.
The strengths and weaknesses of the DEA mod­
eling approach are discussed in the article, along 
with an evaluation of those situations in which it 
would be most beneﬁcial to apply, and those in 
which it would not be appropriate. DEA modeling 
is not a substitute for ethnographic analysis of com­
munities based on ﬁeld work, but it does present an 
enticing way to consider which communities might 
be selected for ﬁeldwork or proﬁling or as “ﬁshing 
communities.” Comparison of the DEA method’s 
top-ranked communities in Alaska to those selected 
by an indicators-based, threshold-trigger model for 
Alaska showed 71% overlap of selected communi­
ties, indicating a reasonable level of robustness of 
the rankings. The threshold-trigger model commu­
nities in Alaska were proﬁled in NOAA Technical 
Memorandum NMFS-AFSC-160 as described 
in the AFSC Quarterly Report for Jan-Feb-Mar 
2006 (see http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/Quarterly/
jfm2006/divrptsREFM7.htm). Proﬁles of the 
DEA model communities for Washington, Oregon, 
and California and other states, described in the 
AFSC Quarterly Report for Apr-May-Jun 2006 (see 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/Quarterly/amj2006/di­
vrptsREFM3.htm), will soon be released as NOAA 
Technical Memorandum NMFS-NWFSC-84. 
Drafts of these proﬁles are available at http://www.
AFSC Quarterly Report
39
nwfsc.noaa.gov/research/divisions/sd/community­
proﬁles/index.cfm. 
By Jennifer Sepez
Anthropology and Fisheries Management
Fisheries management in the United States 
has seen a growing contribution from the ﬁeld of 
anthropology. Understanding the cultures and 
communities of those involved in ﬁsheries is an 
important aspect of ecosystem-based management 
and contributes to the successful and productive 
management of marine ecosystems. Cultural and 
environmental anthropologists in many locations 
around the United States, including Alaska, are 
studying the people who ﬁsh, the things they know 
about ﬁsh, the ways they ﬁsh, and the communities 
that ﬁshing sustains.
Recognizing that the ﬁeld of ﬁsheries anthro­
pology is growing, Dr. Palma Ingles of the NOAA 
Fisheries Southeast Regional Oﬃce and Dr. 
Jennifer Sepez of the AFSC  compiled and edited 
a volume of the peer-reviewed anthropology journal 
NAPA Bulletin to showcase research and methods 
employed by anthropologists studying U.S. ﬁsh­
eries. NAPA is the National Association for the 
Practice of Anthropology, a section of the American 
Anthropological Association, and the bulletin is 
published by the University of California Press. 
Contributors include NOAA Fisheries anthropolo­
gists, representatives of state ﬁsheries agencies, aca­
demics, and contract researchers. 
By Jennifer Sepez
Developing an Alaska Fishery CGE Model
Fixed-price models such as input-output (IO) 
and social accounting matrix (SAM) models are 
often used for analysis of ﬁsheries. However, these 
models have several important limitations. In these 
models, prices are assumed to be ﬁxed, and no sub­
stitution is allowed between factors in production or 
commodities in consumption. As a result, in cases 
where the ﬁxed-price assumption may not be re­
alistic, these models tend to overestimate impacts. 
Computable general equilibrium (CGE) models 
overcome these limitations. In CGE models, prices 
are allowed to vary, triggering substitution eﬀects 
in production and consumption. The CGE model 
therefore enables analysts to easily examine the 
economic welfare implications of a policy change. 
Furthermore, the CGE approach is generally more 
appropriate than other regional economic models 
for analyzing the impacts of a change in productive 
capacity of resource-based industries.
This project, for the ﬁrst time in analysis of 
Alaska ﬁsheries, will build a multi-sector CGE 
model of the Alaska ﬁshery. The investigators will 
use IMPLAN and other available data. Once de­
veloped, the CGE model will be used to estimate 
the distribution and magnitude of economic im­
pacts associated with harvesting, processing, and 
support activities related to Alaska ﬁsheries. As 
of now, the ﬁshery-related data needed to develop 
the CGE model have been compiled. The remain­
ing steps include 1) developing a social accounting 
matrix (SAM) with the ﬁsheries-related data, 2) 
obtaining or estimating key parameters and coef­
ﬁcients for CGE modeling, and 3) developing the 
ﬁshery CGE.
By Chang Seung
Common Property, Information, Cooperation: 
Commercial Fishing in the Bering Sea
Substantial theoretical and experimental lit­
erature has focused on the conditions under which 
cooperative behavior among actors providing pub­
lic goods or extracting common-property natural 
Table 1. Top ranked ﬁshing communities involved in North Paciﬁc and/or West Coast ﬁsheries based on multiple quantitative 
indicators.
Alaska
Washington
Oregon
California
Other States
Akutan, Anchorage, Chignik, 
Cordova, Dillingham, Dutch 
Harbor, Egegik, Elﬁn Cove, 
Excursion Inlet, Halibut Cove, 
Homer, Kasilof, King Cove, King 
Salmon, Kipnuk, Kodiak, Naknek, 
Pelican, Petersburg, Point 
Baker, Sand Point, Sitka, Togiak, 
Unalaska
Anacortes, 
Bellingham, 
Blaine, 
Cathlamet, 
Olympia, 
Seattle, 
Tokeland, 
Westport
Astoria, 
Bandon, 
Garibaldi, 
Hammond, 
Harbor, 
Newport, 
Port Orford, 
Roseburg
Bodega Bay, 
Crescent City, Fields 
Landing, Fort Bragg, 
Moss Landing, San 
Diego, San Pedro, 
Santa Barbara, 
Tarzana, 
Terminal Island
Seaford, VA
40 
July-August-September 2007
resources is likely to occur. The literature identiﬁes 
the importance of coercion, small groups of actors, 
or the existence of social norms as being conducive 
to cooperation. We are investigating a natural ex­
periment in which information on extractive activi­
ties with respect to a common property resource is 
relayed to all players. These players operate under 
an overall harvest total allowable catch (TAC), and 
consequently, one player’s actions can have a delete­
rious eﬀect on all players. The case we investigate is 
incidental catch (termed bycatch) of halibut by the 
Alaskan ﬂatﬁsh ﬁshery, where participants volun­
tarily report bycatch information to an agent who 
then distributes data to the ﬂeet. Consequently, 
ﬁshermen know the extent to which other ﬁsher­
men are avoiding bycatch, and are thereby able to 
observe eﬀorts by other ﬁshermen to avoid bycatch 
and to extend the ﬁshing season for marketable ﬁsh 
species. Using a mixed logit model of spatial ﬁshing 
behavior our results show that cooperative behavior 
is prevalent early in the season, but signiﬁcant het­
erogeneity with respect to bycatch avoidance arises 
as bycatch TACs tighten. 
By Alan Haynie
Examining Dynamic Impacts of Alaska 
Fisheries within Time Series Modeling 
Framework
Professor 
Sung 
Ahn 
(Washington 
State 
University) and Dr. Chang Seung (ESSR Program) 
are developing a vector autoregressive (VAR) time-
series model to measure the time and magnitudes 
of the economic impacts of industries including 
seafood industry for Alaska. To validate the mod­
el, they have conducted out-of-sample forecasts for 
each of 17 aggregated industries. They have also 
developed procedures to generate impulse response 
functions (IRF) which measure the dynamic, tem­
poral impacts of each industry. The models employ 
various assumptions about the lag structure, and in­
clude exogenous variables such as landings by spe­
cies. Because the Alaskan economy is dependent on 
the rest of the United States (RUS) economy, the 
models include total U.S. employment (as a proxy 
for Alaska’s exports to the RUS). With this exog­
enous variable, it was found out that the mean abso­
lute percentage error (MAPE), which is one way of 
measuring the forecasting performance of the mod­
el, decreases for some sectors while the MAPE for 
other sectors increases slightly. Once completed, the 
VAR model will be able to calculate the temporal 
economic impacts of the seafood industry.
By Chang Seung
STATUS OF STOCKS & MULTISPECIES 
ASSESSMENT PROGRAM
Workshop on Forecasting Climate Impacts on 
Future Production of Commercially Exploited 
Fish and Shellﬁsh
The workshop “Forecasting Climate Impacts on 
Future Production of Commercially Exploited Fish” 
was held in Seattle on 19-20 July 2007. The work­
shop was sponsored by the North Paciﬁc Marine 
Science Organization (PICES) and the North 
Paciﬁc Research Board (NPRB). The workshop was 
a follow-up to a PICES Fishery Science Committee 
(FIS) sponsored workshop held in October 2006 at 
the PICES XV Annual Meeting in Yokohama, Japan 
on "Linking Climate to Trends in Productivity of 
Key Commercial Species in the Sub-arctic Paciﬁc.” 
Participants of the workshop represented a signiﬁ­
cant number of the most knowledgeable people who 
are researching the impacts of climate on ﬁsheries. 
Participants included an interdisciplinary team of 
38 scientists from six countries. Several scientists 
had strong links to the PICES organization includ­
ing members from the Physical Oceanography & 
Climate (POC), Biological Oceanography (BIO), 
and FIS committees, as well as members of the 
PICES interim Climate Forcing and Marine 
Ecosystem (CFAME) task team. The goal of this 
workshop was to develop a coordinated interna­
tional eﬀort to provide quantitative estimates of the 
impacts of climate change on major ﬁsh popula­
tions. Members from each nation discussed this goal 
and agreed that they would be interested in 
participating in this eﬀort. For the interim pur­
poses of this report we refer to the project as 
the PICES Panel on Fisheries and Climate 
Change (PPFCC). Oﬃcial establishment of this 
panel requires formal approval at some future 
PICES meeting. 
Participants discussed how PPFCC diﬀers from 
other national or international research programs 
focused on climate change impacts. PPFCC com­
plements several ongoing research activities within 
the PICES region and the sub-arctic as a whole. 
Several features of the program make it unique. 
AFSC Quarterly Report
41
First, PPFCC plans to provide quantitative esti­
mates of the impacts of climate change on ﬁsheries 
in the North Paciﬁc. Second, the program is a co­
ordinated interdisciplinary and multinational eﬀort 
that will involve the application of similar meth­
ods and forecasting approaches to provide an op­
portunity to compare responses of ﬁsh across their 
range. Third, PPFCC focuses on the response of 
major commercial ﬁsh and shellﬁsh species, and not 
the ecosystem response. Participants will develop 
forecasting tools that allow the inclusion of envi­
ronmental impacts on ﬁsh and shellﬁsh production, 
distribution and growth. PPFCC proposes to uti­
lize selected scenarios from the Inter-governmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) eﬀort to develop 
scenarios for regional oceanographic changes that 
will then be linked to changes in ocean forcing on 
upper trophic level species (see discussion below). 
PPFCC builds on the history of research regard­
ing mechanisms underlying production that set the 
stage for the development of quantitative climate 
change impacts on ﬁsheries scenarios.
Participants at the workshop not only recog­
nized the importance of ocean and climate eﬀects 
on recruitment, they also accepted the concept of 
decadal-scale variation. This is a very important ad­
vancement and a key result of the workshop.
LINKS TO OTHER PROGRAMS
PPFCC provides a critical link to other national 
and international research programs that are expect­
ed to be active in the PICES region in the next de­
cade. PPFCC builds on the work of the IPCC that 
will provide the climate change scenarios needed for 
modeling impacts on ﬁsheries. PPFCC may employ 
coupled bio-physical modeling approaches that are 
being developed through national programs such 
as the U.S. National Science Foundation’s Bering 
Sea Ecosystem Study (BEST), the U.S. GLOBEC 
Northeast Paciﬁc program (NEP), and the U.S. 
North Paciﬁc Climate Regimes and Ecosystem 
Productivity (NPCREP) program as well as inter­
national programs such as the GLOBEC interna­
tional studies of marginal seas. PPFCC scientists 
will coordinate with on-going research on upper 
trophic level response to environmental forcing, 
which is  occurring in most national research in­
stitutions. In particular, the PPFCC program will 
provide a ﬁrst order forecast for use in developing 
more complex process-oriented programs that seek 
to forecast the response of the whole ecosystem such 
as the NPRB Bering Sea Integrated Ecosystem 
Program (BSIERP) and NOAA’s Loss of Sea Ice 
(LOSI) program. PPFCC also provides a region­
al forecasting approach that can be used to guide 
comparative research across the northern hemi­
sphere which is sponsored by the Ecosystem Study 
of Sub-arctic and Adjacent Seas (ESSAS), and the 
U.S. Comparative Analysis of Marine Ecosystem 
Organization (CAMEO) program. The goals of 
this program are consistent with the climate fore­
casting element of the proposed PICES FUTURE 
research program and the U.S. Fisheries and the 
Environment (FATE) program.
Participants expect that the results of the 
PPFCC-coordinated research eﬀort will be utilized 
by a broad spectrum of individuals outside of the re­
search community. We anticipate that stakeholders 
who rely on ﬁsh and shellﬁsh resources will utilize 
our results to anticipate changes that would inﬂuence 
their businesses and communities. Fisheries manag­
ers will utilize the forecasts to evaluate whether ac­
tions are needed to sustain ﬁsheries in their regions. 
Conservation groups will be interested to better un­
derstand the regional and species-speciﬁc risks and 
challenges that climate change poses for species 
of interest. 
Several participants noted that the forecasts 
developed through this eﬀort will help to identify 
research gaps that could be the focus of interdisci­
plinary research programs involving ﬁeld work. Just 
as recognition of regime shifts was used to promote 
the development of large national and international 
interdisciplinary research programs, participants 
thought that the international research eﬀort to in­
vestigate the impacts of climate change on marine 
ﬁsh populations may promote the expansion of na­
tional and international research programs on cli­
mate change and marine ecosystems.
The workshop provided a forum for discussion of 
four components needed to complete the forecasts in 
a timely and coordinated fashion including: IPCC 
scenarios, predictions of oceanographic impacts, 
modeling approaches, and scenarios for natural re­
source use and enhancement. The group discussed 
the structure for future activities. The group re­
viewed the list of target species for the PPFCC 
eﬀort. After careful consideration, 23 species were 
selected for further consideration. Participants 
also reviewed the regional partitions proposed in 
42 
July-August-September 2007
Figure 4. Example of relative probabilities of randomized 
input values used in the simulation model to evaluate bycatch 
impacts on salmon populations.  
October 2006. Participants agreed to project im­
plications of climate change at 10-year and 30-year 
time horizons.
By Anne Hollowed
Multispecies Modeling Workshop
In August REFM scientists hosted a 4-day mul­
tispecies modeling workshop at the AFSC. The goal 
of the workshop was to review and develop techni­
cal aspects of ﬁtting statistical age-structured mul­
tispecies models. Three of these types of models are 
being developed for the eastern Bering Sea (EBS), 
Aleutian Islands, and Gulf of Alaska (GOA). The 
Aleutian Islands study is being developed by a 
University of Washington graduate student where­
as the GOA work is being done by a student at 
the University of Alaska. The EBS study extends 
from earlier studies published by REFM scien­
tists. Workshop participants from South Korea and 
from New England (Grand Banks) also presented 
approaches to multispecies modeling applications 
from their regions.
The common linkage over all regions and models 
was that conventional age-structured models were 
at the core of the approach. That is, conﬁguration 
options allow normal stock assessment data (e.g., 
observer size and age composition estimates, sur­
vey abundance indices) to be tuned independently 
among species included in the model. This provides 
a realistic diagnostic check for assumptions about 
individual stocks since they can be compared with 
standard single-species stock assessments. Also, this 
allows for the gradual introduction of trophic inter­
actions through the use of bioenergetics and stom­
ach content data. 
For the Aleutian Islands, the statistical model 
was the most highly developed since it implemented 
the ability to evaluate a variety of functional feed­
ing responses. In particular, the parameterization 
for these functional responses was done in a manner 
that allowed for robust estimation methods. Also, 
consumption rates as predicted from the model 
were used to compute ration, and the ration was 
subsequently tuned to information on the available 
bioenergetics for each species. Data availability and 
the complexity of the boundary current Aleutian 
Islands system were seen as problems that may re­
quire additional assumptions for parameter estima­
tion purposes. 
For the EBS, the data are more extensive with a 
somewhat simpler environmental setting. The devel­
opment of this model was closer to traditional mul­
tispecies virtual population analysis (VPA) methods 
where age-speciﬁc prey “suitabilities” were taken as 
values based on observed stomach content data. This 
model implements an algorithm that stabilizes the 
populations (which are generally conditioned on 
each other’s abundances) and allows for Bayesian 
evaluation of model uncertainties. Model develop­
ments underway include a careful evaluation of the 
impact of arrowtooth ﬂounder abundances in the 
EBS and the ability to use size-based stomach con­
tent data rather than approximated age. Also, there 
appears to be the potential to link growth data with 
temperatures and evaluate interannual variability in 
ration, particularly for EBS pollock.
By James Ianelli

Studies to Evaluate the Impact of Incidental 
Salmon Catch in Groundﬁsh Fisheries 
The regulations on incidental take of Paciﬁc 
salmon by Alaska groundﬁsh ﬁsheries are an impor­
tant part of the multispecies management system. 
These regulations are currently being revised due 
to new information collected over the past decade 
and due to changes in the magnitude and pattern of 
salmon catch. To evaluate these practices, methods 
that appropriately account for the impact incidental 
catches have on salmon populations are required. 
Recently, REFM Division scientists have developed 
a simulation model that is proposed for analyses that 
will be undertaken by the North Paciﬁc Fishery 
Management Council. The model is designed to 
account for the observed interannual variability of 
salmon run-sizes and allows for sources of variabil­
ity including the salmon age-composition, ocean 
AFSC Quarterly Report
43
survival, and run-size estimation uncertainty (e.g., 
Fig. 4). The model and results from an example 
case study was presented to the Council’s Salmon 
Bycatch Workgroup. Preliminary results show how 
variability propagates from these sources and that 
the identiﬁed sources of uncertainty make it pos­
sible to assess the impact of bycatch levels on salmon 
runs. This provides a tool that will allow managers 
to quantitatively assess alternatives and better un­
derstand the trade-oﬀs in evaluating eﬀective real-
time management systems, in particular, caps that 
limit incidental salmon takes.
By James Ianelli
AGE & GROWTH PROGRAM
A Bit of AFSC Ageing History
Determining ﬁsh ages from reading otoliths un­
derwent a revolution during the early 1980s when it 
was determined that older specimens of many spe­
cies aged from otolith surfaces were being under­
aged. At the AFSC, the Age and Growth Program 
began applying a new technique of ageing otoliths, 
the break and burn method, in 1981. The break and 
burn method entails taking a transverse cross sec­
tion by breaking (usually sawing) an otolith in half 
and then exposing the transverse surface to an alco­
hol ﬂame. This process makes ﬁner marks associated 
with later annual marks more visible than viewing 
from the otolith surface. Both the surface and break 
and burn methods are often used to best estimate a 
specimen’s age, but the percentage varies by species 
and to a large extent the year the otoliths were aged. 
For example, the percentages of otoliths aged with 
the break and burn method were typically low in 
the early 1980s, then increased and plateaued in the 
1990s. However, the percentage broken and burned 
for rockﬁsh is typically high for all years. 
The statistics for this aspect of ageing history at 
the Center are now available on the AFSC website 
at http://access.afsc.noaa.gov/al/collection_details/
collection_search.php. The site provides summa­
ries of ageing methods (surface, break and burn, or 
section) used to age ﬁsh otoliths. Result tables can 
be viewed showing the numbers read using each 
method,  by  year collected, by year read, or by 
individual collections. Results include specimens 
collected as far back as 1980 and are updated daily 
around midnight.
By Dan Kimura.
Estimated production ﬁgures for 1 January 2007 
through 30 September 2007. Total production 
ﬁgures were 30,577 with 8,785 test ages and 329 
examined and determined to be unageable.
Species
  Specimens Aged
Giant grenadier
359
Greenland turbot
502
Flathead sole
516
Alaska plaice
449
Dover sole
447
Northern rock sole
1,241
Yellowﬁn sole
496
Bering ﬂounder
258
Walleye pollock
11,131
Paciﬁc cod
4,999
Sableﬁsh
2,366
Atka mackerel
1,629
Paciﬁc ocean perch
2,316
Northern rockﬁsh
506
Rougheye rockﬁsh
1,502
Shortraker rockﬁsh
772
Blackspotted rockﬁsh
390
Warty sculpin
185
Yellow Irish lord
513
