UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20460
;(i.o
.
.t..~
~, 
~~~
"c~-'
"
~~,
OFFICE OF PREVENTION,
PESnCillES, AND TOXIC
SUBSTANCES
February 27, 2006
ACTION MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT:
Inert Reassessment -Tannin (CAS Reg. No. 1401-55-4)
FROM:
Pauline 
Wagner, 
Chief Q ~~ 
~ 
~~"'('~) "'2..-\ 
1.. , \ 0 (p
Inert Ingredient Assessment Branch
TO:
Lois A. Rossi, Director
Registration Division
I.
FQPA REASSESSMENT ACTION
Action:
Reassessment of one exemption from the requirement of a tolerance for
tannin. The reassessment decision is to maintain ''as-is'' the one exemption
from the requirement of a tolerance.
Chemical: Tannin
*Residues listed in 40 CPR 180.920 are exempt from the requirement of a tolerance when used in accordance with good agricultural
practice as inert (or occasionally active) ingredients in pesticide formulations applied to growing crops only.
Use Summary: Tannin is approved for use as a dispersing agent in pesticide
fo1lIlulations applied to growing crops only under 40 CPR 180.920. Tannins also occur
naturally in coffee and tea and nearly all wood and vegetation contain some fo1lIl of
tannin in the leaves, twigs, bark, wood, or fruit, including a variety of plants utilized for
food and feed (food grains, fruits, wines, teas, and forages).
List Reclassification Determination: 
The current List Classification for tannin is 3.
Because EP A has determined that there is a reasonable certainty.that no harm to any
population subgroup will result from aggregate exposure to tannin when used as a
dispersing agent in pesticide formulations applied to growing crops only, the List
Classification for tannin will change from List 3 to List 4B.
II.
MANAGEMENT CONCURRENCE
I concur with the reassessment of the exemption from the requirement of a
tolerance for the inert ingredient tannin, CAS Reg. No. 1401-55-4 and with the List
reclassification determination, as described above. I consider the one exemption
established in 40 CPR part 180.920 [formerly 40 CPR 180.1001(d)], to be reassessed for
purposes of FFDCA' s section 408( q) as of the date of my signature, below. A Federal
Register Notice regarding this tolerance exemption reassessment decision will be
published in the near future.
t!;1J.i1
a R~
Lois A. Rossi, Director
Registration Division
CC: Debbie Edwards, SRRD
Joe Nevola, SRRD
MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT:
FROM:
Reassessment 
of One Exemption from the Requirement of a Tolerance
For Tannin (CAS Reg. No. 1401-55-4)
Keri Grinstead ~JL~~~
Inert Ingredient Assessment Branch (IIAB)
Registration Division (7505C)
TO:
Pauline Wagner, Chief
Inert Ingredient Assessment Branch (IIAB)
Registration Division (7505C)
Back2round
Attached is the science assessment for tannin (tannic acid). It will be referred to
as tannin or tannic acid throughout this document. Tannin has one exemption from the
requirement of a tolerance under 40 CPR 180.920 when used as an inert ingredient
(dispersing agent) in pesticide formulations applied to growing crops only. This
assessment summarizes available information on the use, physical/chemical properties,
toxicological effects, exposure profile, environmental fate, and ecotoxicity of tannin. The
purpose of this document is to reassess the existing exemption from the requirement of a
tolerance for residues of tannin when used as an inert ingredient (dispersing agent) in
pesticide formulations as required under the Food Quality Protection Act (FQP A).
Executive Summary
This report evaluates the existing 40 CFR 180.920 exemption from the
requirement of a tolerance for tannin when used as an inert ingredient (dispersing agent)
in pesticide formulations applied to growing crops only.
Compounds considered to be tannins vary from simple phenols such as gallic acid
to macromolecules with molecular weights between 500 and 3000. Tannins occur
naturally in coffee and tea and nearly all wood and vegetation contain some form of
tannin in the leaves, twigs, bark, wood, or fruit. Tannins can also be found in a variety of
plants utilized for food and feed including food grains (sorghum, millets, barley, dry
beans, faba beans, peas, carobs, pigeonpeas, winged beans, and legumes), fruits (apples,
bananas, blackberries, cranberries, dates, grapes, hawthorns, peaches, pears, persimmons,
plums, raspberries, and strawberries), and in wines, teas, and forages (Chung et al. 1998).
Page 1 of 13
UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
Tannic acid is affirmed as Generally Recognized as Safe'CGRAS) by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) for use as a direct food additive Cwith limitations) in numerous
food and beverage products Csee Table 2).
Tannin, orally administered to rabbits, was absorbed by the gastrointestinal tract,
metabolized, and excreted within 24 hours. It has low acute, subchronic, and chronic oral
toxicities in animal studies, and is nonmutagenic and noncarcinogenic. In a teratologic
evaluation of tannic acid on rats and mice, no effects on nidation (implantation), maternal
or fetal survival, or abnonnalities in soft or skeletal tissues were seen at dosages of up to
135 mgikg bw/day (mice) and 180 mgikg bw/day (rats) for ten consecutive days during
pregnancy. In addition, a three generation rat reproduction study resulted in a NOAEL of
60 mgikg bw/day and a LOAEL of 117 mgikg bw/day (lower pup weights at weaning),
with no effects on fertility, gestation, viability, or lactation indices at any dose level.
Suppressed reproductive activity was observed in mice kept on a continuous 8% tannic
acid diet prior to and throughout the breeding cycle(s).
The environmental fate of tannin will limit its likelihood of reaching either
surface (drinking water) or ground water or bioaccumulating in the environment. Tannin
is expected to biodegrade in the environment with ultimate aerobic degradation estimated
to be weeks and primary degradation estimated to be days. Migration to groundwater
drinking water sources is possible in sandy soils, but will be limited in other soils by its
rate of primary degradation and its strong sorption to soils and sediment and, therefore,
exposures of concern via drinking water are likely to be low.
The primary route of exposure to tannin from its use as an inert ingredient in
pesticide formulations is expected to be through consumption of food to which pesticide
products containing tannin have been applied. Residential exposures (dermal and
inhalation) of concern are not expected based on its use pattern, nonvolatile nature, and
instability in the presence of light and oxygen. The exposure of the general population to
tannin from its use in pesticide products is expected to be small in comparison to
exposure from its natural occurrence in feed grains, wine, tea, fruits, and forage, and its
use as an FDA-approved direct food additive in numerous food and beverage products.
The rapid atmospheric oxidation, ready biodegradation, as well as the low toxicity and
rapid metabolism and excretion of tannin further decrease the likelihood of dietary
exposures of concern from tannin as an inert ingredient in pesticide formulations.
Tannin is considered to be moderately toxic to practically nontoxic to aquatic
organisms. Ecological concerns for listed and nonlisted species are not likely from its
use as an inert ingredient in pesticide formulations based on application rates of less than
10 pounds per acre.
Taking into consideration all available infonnation on tannin, it has been
detennined that there is a reasonable certainty that no hanD to any population subgroup
will result from aggregate exposure to tannin when used as an inert ingredient (dispersing
agent) in pesticide fonnulations when considering dietary exposure and all other non-
occupational sources of pesticide exposure for which there is reliable infonnation.
Page 2 of 13
Therefore, it is recommended that the one exemption from the requirement of a tolerance
established for residues of tannin, as listed in Table 1, can be considered reassessed as
safe under section 408(q) of the FFDCA.
I.
Introduction
This report provides a qualitative assessment for tannin, an inert ingredient used
as a dispersing agent in pesticide formulations. Tannin has one exemption from the
requirement of a tolerance under 40 CPR 180.920 when applied to growing crops only.
According to and/or cited by Rashid et al. (1985), "Tannic acid, the commercial
term for a mixture of large gallotannins, trigallic, m-digallic, and gallic acid (King and
Pruden 1970) is extracted from plant material." "Gallotannins are large polyphenolic
compounds consisting of glucose esterified to gallic acid" and "occur in 18% of all
dicotyledenous plants and play important roles in defense against attack by bacteria,
fungi, or herbivores (Swain 1979)."
Compounds considered to be tannins vary from simple phenols such as gallic acid
to macromolecules with molecular weights between 500 and 3000. Tannins occur
naturally in coffee and tea and nearly all wood and vegetation contain some form of
tannin in the leaves, twigs, bark, wood, or fruit. Tannins can also be found in a variety of
plants utilized for food and feed including food grains (sorghum, millets, barley, dry
beans, faba beans, peas, carobs, pigeonpeas, winged beans, and legumes), fruits (apples,
bananas, blackberries, cranberries, dates, grapes, hawthorns, peaches, pears, persimmons,
plums, raspberries, and strawberries), and in wines, teas, and forages (Chung et al. 1998).
There are two types of tannins: condensed tannins and hydrolyzable tannins.
Condensed tannins are those derived from flavonols and contain little or no carbohydrate.
Hydrolyzable tannins are esters of sugar hydrolyzed by acids, alkalis and enzymes into
glucose or other polyhydric alcohols and phenolic acids; they are further subdivided into
two groups based on the phenolic acids they contain (i.e., gallotannins or ellagitannins)
(International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) 1976). According to IARC
"tannic acid is the astringent or tanning principle occurring in the wood, bark, fruit,
leaves, and roots of a large number of plants." The Environmental Protection Agency's
Substance Registry System (SRS) lists the following synonyms for tannin: tannic acid,
tannins, quebracho wood extract, quebracho extract, Chinese tannin, glycerite, digallic
acid, gallotannicacid, gallotannin, and penta NM digalloyl glucose.
II.
Use Information
A. Pesticide Uses
Tannin is approved for use as a dispersing agent in pesticide fonnulations applied
to growing crops only. The exemption from the requirement of a tolerance for its use in
pesticide products applied to growing crops only is provided in Table 1 below.
Page 3 of 13
Table 1. Pesticide Uses
practice as inert (or occasionally active) ingredients in pesticide fonnulations applied to growing crops only.
B. Other Uses
Tannic acid is affinned as Generally Recognized as Safe (GRAS) by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for use as a direct food additive (with limitations) as listed in
Table 2. below. According to the 1996 Merck Index 12th Edition, uses of tannic acid
include: as a mordant in dyeing; in the manufacture of ink; sizing paper and silk; printing
fabrics; with gelatin and albumin for the manufacture of imitation horn and tortoise shell;
tanning; clarifying beer or wine; in photography; as a coagulant in rubber manufacturing;
in the manufacture of gallic acid and pyrogallol; and as a reagent in analytical chemistry.
Table 2. Direct Food Additive Uses/Limitations
173.310
Secondary Direct Food Additives Permitted in Food for Human Consumption
-boiler 
water additive
184.1097
Maximum level of use in food (as served)
(percent)
0.01
0.015
0.005
0.005
0.04
Direct Food Substances Affirmed as
Generally Recognized as Safe
Tannic Acid -for use in:
-baked 
goods and baking mixes
-alcoholic 
beverages
-nonalcoholic 
beverages and
beverage bases
-gelatins, 
puddings, and fillings
-frozen 
dairy desserts and mixes,
soft candy
-hard 
candy, cough drops
-meat 
products
-rendered 
animal fat
0.013
0.001
in accordance
with9CFR318.7
III.
Physical and Chemical Properties
Page 4 of 13
IV.
Hazard Assessment
A. Hazard Profile
This hazard assessment was developed primarily using a 1976 IARC report on
tannic acid, The Merck Index (12th Edition), a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on
Food Additives (.rECFA) report on tannin, Agency databases, and various studies/articles.
Tannin has low acute, subchronic, and chronic oral toxicities in animal studies,
and is nonmutagenic and noncarcinogenic. In developmental studies, no effects on
nidation (implantation), maternal or fetal survival, or abnonnalities in soft or skeletal
tissues were seen at dosages of up to 135 mgikg (mice) and 180 mgikg (rats). In
addition, a three generation rat reproduction study resulted in a NOAEL of 60 mgikg
bw/day and a LOAEL of 117 mgikg bw/day (lower pup weaning weights), with no
effects on fertility, gestation, viability, or lactation indices at any dose level. Reduced
fecundity was observed in mice fed a continuous diet containing 8% both prior to and
throughout the breeding cycle(s). The exposure of the general population to tannin from
its use in pesticide products is expected to be small in comparison to exposure from its
natural occurrence in feed grains, wine, tea, fruits, and forage, and its use as a direct food
additive in numerous food and beverage products.
B. Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics
Tannins occur naturally in coffee and tea and nearly all wood and vegetation
contain some form of tannin in the leaves, twigs, bark, wood, or fruit. Tannins can also
be found in fruits, wines, teas and in a variety of plants utilized for food and feed
including food grains and forages (Chung et at. 1998).
"Korpassy et al. 1951, found an increased concentration of tannic acid in the
blood of rabbits and dogs given tannic acid by stomach tube, with a maximum level after
three hours. Absorption of tannic acid from the colon, as shown by rising blood levels,
was demonstrated in rabbits, sheep, goats, rats and dogs" (as cited in IARC 1976).
According to Dollahite et aI., 1962, in rabbits, tannic acid was rapidly absorbed from the
Page 5 of 13
gastrointestinal tract into the bloodstream and rapidly detoxified or excreted. "Tannic
acid and gallic acid would possibly be combined by the proteins in the gastrointestinal
tract, thereby reducing the quantity available for uptake" and "in rabbits not given a lethal
dose of tannic acid, the serum tannic acid level is completely metabolized or eliminated
within 24 hours."
According to Chung et al. (1998), "Tannins fonn complexes with proteins, starch,
and digestive enzymes to cause a reduction in nutritional values of foods. They can cause
a browning reaction in foods through the action of polyphenol oxidase by darkening
reactions adversely affecting the acceptability of such foods." The antinutritional effects
seem to be predominantly related to condensed tannins probably due to hydrolyzable
tannins being present only in trace amounts in commonly consumed foods. "Tannins are
of nutritional concern for people whose diets depend largely on crops with high tannin
content. It is not advisable to ingest a large quantity of high tannin-containing foods;
tannins affect protein absorption and metabolism." "Animals fed on tannin-free diets had
higher feed consumption and weight gains, compared with those fed on a diet with
endogenous tannin or tannin supplementation for an extended period of time." "Rats
could tolerate up to 5% tannins mixed in a good ration. However, a much higher content
of tannins caused a marked growth depression." "Tannins are known to affect the
utilization of vitamins and minerals."
C. Toxicological Data
Acute Oral
Based on the oral LDso values, tannic acid is of low acute oral toxicity when
administered to rats.
Table 4. Rat Intragastric LDso Values
Aleppo
1550 mgikg
Tara
3700mg/kg
Chinese
2800 ffigikg
Sicilian sumac
2650 mgikg
Douglas fir
7500 ffig/kg
Subchronic Oral Toxicity
According to JECFA (Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives)
(1970), seven groups of male and female rats received 0, 8, 80, or 800 mgikg bw/day of
Aleppo or tara tannin in their diet for twelve weeks. No significant changes in body
Page 6 of 13
weight, food intake and food utilization, liver and kidney weights, or gross and
histopathology were seen (Food and Drug Res. Lab. 1964). "Similar studies at these
same levels using Chinese tannin (Food and Drug Res. Lab. 1965), Sicilian sumac tannin
(Food and Drug Res. Lab. 1967), and Douglas fir tannin (Food and Drug Res. Lab. 1967)
at these same levels produced comparable findings."
Chronic Oral Toxicity
No adverse effects (as judged by survival, growth, food consumption,
hematology, organ weights and gross and microscopic pathology) were noted in five
groups of male and female rats dosed with tannin (from Peruvian tara) at dietary levels of
0,0.117,0.125,0.234, or 0.25% (equivalent to 58.5, 62.5, 117.0, and 125 mgikg bw/day)
for two years (Rosner-Hixon Lab, 1965 as cited in JECFA 1970).
Five groups of male and female dogs received 0.0, 0.117, 0.125, 0.234, or 0.25%
tannin (equivalent to 58.5, 62.5, 117.0, and 125 mg/kg bw/day respectively) (from
Peruvian tara) in their diets for two years. No ill effects on behavior, food consumption,
hematology, organ function tests, or on organ weights and gross microscopic pathology
were noted at any dose level (Rosner-Hixon Lab, 1965 as cited in JECFA 1970).
Mutagenicity
In Ames testing using Salmonella typhimurium strains TA98, TAI00, and
T A1535, tannic acid was shown to be nonmutagenic both with and without activation
using 8-9 mix from rat and woodchuck liver (Rashid et al. 1985).
According to Chung et al. (1998), mutagenicity testing of tannic acid from tea
was shown to be nonmutagenic to S. typhimurium strains TA98, TAI00, TA1535, and
TA1538 with or without metabolic activation and those tannin fractions did not increase
tumor incidence in gavage-fed Swiss mice. In addition, "Tannic acid was found not to be
clastogenic to germ cells of male Drosophila melanogaster."
Carcinogenicity
"A recent study by Onodera et al. using F344 rats of both sexes showed that
tannic acid given ad libitum as 0.25 or 0.50% in distilled water for up to two years did not
significantly increase the incidence of any tumor. Thus, tannic acid has no carcinogenic
potential in F344 rat or modifying effects on development of spontaneous tumors"
(Chung et al. 1998).
Tannin isolated from bracken fern was determined to be noncarcinogenic in a 72
week study of rats fed a basic diet containing 0.1 % tannin for weeks 0-3, followed by
0.2% tannin for weeks 3-22, and then 0.4% tannin for weeks 22-72 (cumulative total
tannin dose of 22,500 mg/rat) (pamucku et at. 1980).
Page 7 of 13
Developmental/Reproductive Toxicity
Female mice were dosed via oral intubation with tannic acid at 1.35,6.27,29.1, or
135 mg/kg on days 6-15 of gestation. The final report concluded that "administration of
up to 135 mg/kg (body weight) of the test material to pregnant mice for 10 consecutive
days had no clearly discernible effect on nidation or on maternal or fetal survival. The
number of abnonnalities seen in either soft or skeletal tissues for the test groups did not
differ from the number occurring spontaneously in the sham-treated controls" (NTIS
1975).
Female rats were dosed via oral intubation with tannic acid at 1.8, 8.4,38.8, or
180 mg/kg on days 6-15 of gestation. The final report concluded that "administration of
up to 180 mg/kg (body weight) of the test material to pregnant rats for 10 consecutive
days had no clearly discernible effect on nidation or on maternal of fetal survival. The
number of abnormalities seen in either soft or skeletal tissues of the test groups did not
differ from the number occurring spontaneously in the sham-treated controls" (NTIS
1975).
A three-generation reproduction study was conducted on male and female rats
fed Peruvian tara tannin at dietary levels of 0.0 or 0.234% (117 mg/kg bw/day) and at 0.0,
0.058 (29 mg/kg bw/day), or 0.117% (60 mg/kg bw/day). No effects upon fertility,
gestation, viability, or lactation indices were seen at any dose level; however, pups in the
0.234% (117 mg/kg bw/day) dosing group had significantly lower weights at weaning.
The NOAEL for this study was 0.117% (60 mg/kg bw/day) (Rosner-Hixon Lab. 1969 as
cited in JECFA 1970).
Peaslee and Einhellig (1973b) reported that "White mice fed a continuous diet of
8% tannic acid in laboratory chow produced litters of smaller number, slower growth
rates, and lower body-weight plateau." In addition, "Females on this tannic acid diet
required a longer time to become impregnated." Mice were fed 8% tannic acid diets both
prior to and throughout the breeding cycle(s).
D. Special Consideration for Infants and Children
Results of developmental studies showed no effects on nidation (implantation),
maternal or fetal survival, or abnormalities in soft or skeletal tissues were seen at dosages
of up to 135 mg/kg (mice) and 180 mg/kg (rats). In addition, a three generation rat
reproduction study resulted in a NOAEL of 60 mg/kg bw/day and a LOAEL of 117
mg/kg bw/day (lower pup weights at weaning), with no effects on fertility, gestation,
viability, or lactation indices at any dose level. The use of tannin as an inert ingredient in
pesticide formulations would not contribute greatly to the natural levels present in
foodstuffs, which is expected to be orders of magnitude less than the levels seen in
reproductive/developmental studies. Based on this information, as well as its natural
occurrence as a normal component in the human diet and its long history of use as a
direct food additive in numerous foodstuffs, there is no concern, at this time, for
increased sensitivity to infants and children to tannin from its use as an inert ingredient
Page 8 of 13
(dispersing agent) in pesticide products. For these same reasons, a safety factor analysis
has not been used to assess risk and, therefore, the additional tenfold safety factor for the
protection of infants and children is also unnecessary.
v.
There are no available measured data, therefore, based on the estimated physical-
chemical and environmental transformation properties, tannin is not likely to persist in
aerobic environments, leach to ground water except in sandy soils or through preferential
plow, or bioconcentrate/bioaccumulate in the environment. Tannin is predicted to be
readily biodegradable with ultimate aerobic degradation estimated to be weeks and
primary degradation estimated to be days. Tannin is slightly to moderately soluble in
water, nonvolatile, and exhibits strong sorption to very strong sorption to soil (Log
Koc=4.912). Leaching to groundwater is likely in sandy or porous soils, however this is
mitigated in other soils due to biodegradation and sorption. The potential for tannin to
volatilize from surface waters is low and it undergoes rapid atmospheric oxidation in the
presence of hydroxyl radicals with a half-life of 0.96 hours if volatilization from soils or
water does occur.
While it is possible that tannin used for agricultural purposes could reach drinking
water (from surface water), the environmental contribution from the use of tannin in
pesticide products is likely to be small in comparison to the tannin that is found naturally
in the environment due to its natural occurrence in nearly all wood and vegetation.
Additionally, its instability in the presence of light and oxygen and rapid biodegradation
further decrease the likelihood of environmental and drinking water concentrations of
concern from its use as an inert ingredient in pesticide products.
VI.
Exposure Assessment
For the general population, the majority of exposure to tannin(s) comes from its
natural occurrence in coffee, wine, tea, food grains, fruits, and from its use as a direct
food additive in numerous food and beverage products. It is affirmed as GRAS by the
FDA as a direct food additive (see Table 2).
Tannin is approved for use as a dispersing agent in pesticide fonnulations applied
to growing crops only. The primary route of exposure from its use in pesticide products
is expected to be through consumption of food to which pesticide products containing
tannin have been applied. Dennal exposure from residential uses of pesticide products
containing tannin is possible; however, inhalation exposure is unlikely based on its
nonvolatile nature.
Migration of tannin to ground water (from surface water runoff) is possible, but
will be limited by its low solubility in water, strong sorption to soils and ready
biodegradation, therefore, exposures of concern from drinking water are likely to be low.
I all annotated values were calculated from the Agency's EpiSuite program at
http://www.epa.gov/oPDtintr/exRosure/docs/EPISuitedl.htm
Page 9 of 13
A22re2ate Exposure
In examining aggregate exposure, FFDCA section 408 directs EP A to consider
available information concerning exposures from the pesticide residue in food and all
other non-occupational exposures, including drinking water from ground water or surface
water and exposure through pesticide use in gardens, lawns, or buildings (residential and
other indoor uses).
For tannin, a qualitative assessment for all pathways of human exposure (food,
drinking water, and residential) is appropriate given the lack of human health concerns
associated with exposure to tannin when used as an inert ingredient in pesticide
formulations.
Cumulative Exposure
Section 408(b)(2)(D)(v) of the FFDCA requires that, when considering whether to
establish, modify, or revoke a tolerance, the Agency consider "available information"
concerning the cumulative effects of a particular pesticide's residues and "other
substances that have a common mechanism of toxicity."
Unlike other pesticides for which EP A has followed a cumulative risk approach
based on a common mechanism or toxicity, EPA has not made a common mechanism of
toxicity finding as to tannin and any other substances, and tannin does not appear to
produce a toxic metabolite produced by other substances. For the purposes of these
tolerance actions, therefore, EP A has not assumed that tannin has a common mechanism
of toxicity with other substances. For information regarding EP A's efforts to determine
which chemicals have a common mechanism of toxicity and to evaluate the cumulative
effects of such chemicals, see the policy statements released by EP A's Office of Pesticide
Programs concerning common mechanism determinations and procedures for cumulating
effects from substances found to have a common mechanism on EP A's website at
httQ:/ /www .eQa.Qov/Desticides/cumulative/.
Human Health Risk Characterization
Tannin is approved for use as a dispersing agent in pesticide formulations applied
to growing crops only. Tannin has low acute, subchronic, and chronic oral toxicities in
animal studies, and is nonmutagenic and noncarcinogenic. In developmental studies, no
effects on nidation (implantation), maternal or fetal survival, or abnormalities in soft or
skeletal tissues were seen at dosages of up to 135 mg/kg (mice) and 180 mg/kg (rats). In
addition, a three generation rat reproduction study resulted in a NOAEL of 60 mg/kg
bw/day and a LOAEL of 117 mg/kg bw/day (lower pup weaning weights), with no
effects on fertility, gestation, viability, or lactation indices at any dose level. Reduced
fecundity was observed in mice fed a continuous diet containing 8% both prior to and
throughout the breeding cycle(s). The exposure of the general population to tannin from
its use in pesticide products is expected to be small in comparison to exposure from its
natural occurrence in feed grains, wine, tea, fruits, and forage, and its use as a direct food
Page 10 of 13
additive in numerous food and beverage products. Considering its rapid atmospheric
oxidation, ready biodegradation, as well as its low toxicity and rapid metabolism and
excretion, dietary exposures of concern from the use of pesticide products containing
tannin are not anticipated. Residential exposures of concern are not expected from the
use of tannin as an inert ingredient (dispersing agent) in pesticide formulations.
Taking into consideration all available information, EP A has determined there is a
reasonable certainty that no harm to any population subgroup will result from aggregate
exposure to tannin when used as an inert ingredient in pesticide formulations when
considering the dietary exposure and all other non-occupational sources of pesticide
exposure for which there is reliable information. Therefore, it is recommended that the
one exemption from the requirement of a tolerance established for residues of tannin be
maintained and considered reassessed as safe under section 408(q) of the FFDCA.
x.
Ecotoxicitv and Ecolo2:ical Risk Characterization
Tannins may be considered moderately toxic to practically nontoxic to most
aquatic organisms based on measured effects data located in the Agency's Ecotox
Database (http://www.eDa.e:ov/ecotox/) and on the ester and phenol SAR (Structure
Activity Relationship) estimates.
Measured effects data for fish indicate 48h to 96h LCso's are on the order of
several mg/L to >100 mg/L depending on species and test conditions. Aquatic
invertebrate data is more limited, but indicate effects levels for population and behavior
in the low mg/L range (e.g., Daphnia magna effects level for behavior of <26 mg/L). A
single study on the bull frog for 12 hours under static conditions was inconclusive at
concentrations up to 1000 mg/L. Plant effects data for both aquatic (blue-green algae)
and terrestrial (agricultural crop) species reported no adverse responses up to the test dose
for terrestrial plants (note: test concentrations were not verified in the terrestrial plant
studies) and a decrease in algae population at 100 Jlmoles. No chronic effects data were
reported in Ecotox.
Depending on structural class (esters or phenols), predicted acute toxicity values
are approximately: 1400-2100 parts per million (ppm) for fish 96h LCso's, 260-49000
ppm for daphnid 48h LCso's, and 100-27500 ppm for green algae 96h ECso's. These
levels are unlikely to occur in surface waters as a result of the use tannin as an inert
ingredient in pesticide formulations. Chronic effects estimates range from approximately
70 mg/L of algae based on the ester SAR class and 330 mg/L for fish based on the phenol
SAR class. Even with frequent applications in agricultural or commercial/residential
settings at applications in excess of 10 pounds per acre, concentrations in surface water as
a result of pesticide use is unlikely to reach effects thresholds. Using mammalian data as
a surrogate for terrestrial organisms, tannin is unlike to result in adverse effects from
pesticide uses.
Tannin is not expected to bioaccumulate in the environment, therefore, based on
potential exposures and estimated toxicity to aquatic and terrestrial organisms (using
Page 11 of 13
available rat and mouse data as surrogate for all terrestrial animals), ecological concerns
for listed and nonlisted species are not likely from the use of tannin as an inert ingredient
in pesticide products.
Page 12 of 13
References:
Chung, King-Thorn; Wong, Tit Yee; Wie, Cheng-I; Huang, Yao-Wen; and Lin, Yuan;
Tannins and Human Health: A Review, Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition,
38(6):421-464 (1998).
Dollahite, James W.; Pigeon, Robert F.; and Camp, Bennie J.; The toxicity of Gallic
Acid, Pyrogallol, Tannic Acid, and Quercus havardi in the Rabbit, Am. J. Vet. Res.,
Nov., 1962,23,97, pp 1264-1267.
Environmental Protection Agency, EpiSuite program (V. 3.12),
http://www .epa.gov /opptintr/exposure/docs/EPISuitedl.htm )
Environmental Protection Agency Substance Registry System, httQ://www.eQa.gov/srs/
JECFA 1970, Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, World Health Organization, FAO
Nutrition Meetings Report Series No. 48A,
httQ:/ /www .inchem.orgldocuments/iecfa/iecmono/v48aie 
14.htm..
Merck 1996, The Merck Index (12th Edition), Merck and Co., Inc., 1996.
NTIS 1975, Terotologic Evaluation of FDA 71-56, Tannic Acid in Mice and Rats, Food
and Drug Research Laboratories, Incorporated, 31 January 1975, distributed by National
Technical Information Service (NTIS) U.S. Department of Commerce.
Pamucku, A, Mahir; Wang, Chin Yung; Hatcher, J.; Bryan, George T.; Carcinogenicity
of Tannin and Tannin-Free Extracts of Bracken Fern (Pteridium aquilinium) in Rats,
JNCI, Vol. 65, No.1, July 1980.
Peaslee, Margaret H. and Einhellig, Frank A., Reduced Fecundity in Mice on Tannic
Acid Diet, Compo gen. Pharmac., 1973,4, 393-397.
Rashid, Kamal A.; Baldwin, Ian T.; Babish, John G.; Schultz, Jack C.; Mumma, Ralph
0.; Mutagenicity Tests with Gallic and Tannic Acid in the SalmonellalMammalian
Microsome Assay, J. Environ. Sci. Health, B20(2), 153-165 (1985).
World Health Organization International Agency for Research on Cancer, !ARC
Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risk of Chemicals to Man, Some
Naturally Occurring Substances, Volume 10, Tannic Acid and Tannins, pp 253-262
1976.
Page 13 of 13
