NASA/TM—1999-209655
December 1999
L. Danielle Koch
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Evaluation of the Tone Fan Noise Design/
Prediction System (TFaNS) at the NASA
Glenn Research Center
The NASA STI Program Office . . . in Profile
Since its founding, NASA has been dedicated to
the advancement of aeronautics and space
science. The NASA Scientific and Technical
Information (STI) Program Office plays a key part
in helping NASA maintain this important role.
The NASA STI Program Office is operated by
Langley Research Center, the Lead Center for
NASA’s scientific and technical information. The
NASA STI Program Office provides access to the
NASA STI Database, the largest collection of
aeronautical and space science STI in the world.
The Program Office is also NASA’s institutional
mechanism for disseminating the results of its
research and development activities. These results
are published by NASA in the NASA STI Report
Series, which includes the following report types:
•
TECHNICAL PUBLICATION. Reports of
completed research or a major significant
phase of research that present the results of
NASA programs and include extensive data
or theoretical analysis. Includes compilations
of significant scientific and technical data and
information deemed to be of continuing
reference value. NASA’s counterpart of peer-
reviewed formal professional papers but
has less stringent limitations on manuscript
length and extent of graphic presentations.
•
TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM. Scientific
and technical findings that are preliminary or
of specialized interest, e.g., quick release
reports, working papers, and bibliographies
that contain minimal annotation. Does not
contain extensive analysis.
•
CONTRACTOR REPORT. Scientific and
technical findings by NASA-sponsored
contractors and grantees.
•
CONFERENCE PUBLICATION. Collected
papers from scientific and technical
conferences, symposia, seminars, or other
meetings sponsored or cosponsored by
NASA.
•
SPECIAL PUBLICATION. Scientific,
technical, or historical information from
NASA programs, projects, and missions,
often concerned with subjects having
substantial public interest.
•
TECHNICAL TRANSLATION. English-
language translations of foreign scientific
and technical material pertinent to NASA’s
mission.
Specialized services that complement the STI
Program Office’s diverse offerings include
creating custom thesauri, building customized
data bases, organizing and publishing research
results . . . even providing videos.
For more information about the NASA STI
Program Office, see the following:
•
Access the NASA STI Program Home Page
at http://www.sti.nasa.gov
•
E-mail your question via the Internet to
help@sti.nasa.gov
•
Fax your question to the NASA Access
Help Desk at (301) 621-0134
•
Telephone the NASA Access Help Desk at
(301) 621-0390
•
Write to:
           NASA Access Help Desk
           NASA Center for AeroSpace Information
           7121 Standard Drive
           Hanover, MD 21076
L. Danielle Koch
Glenn Research Center, Cleveland, Ohio
Evaluation of the Tone Fan Noise Design/
Prediction System (TFaNS) at the NASA
Glenn Research Center
NASA/TM—1999-209655
December 1999
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Acknowledgments
I would like to recognize Dr. Edmane Envia for his kind guidance in preparing this report and for use of pertinent
graphics, data, and analysis results.
Available from
NASA Center for Aerospace Information
7121 Standard Drive
Hanover, MD 21076
Price Code: A03
National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA 22100
Price Code: A03
NASA/TM1999-209655
1
Evaluation of the Tone Fan Noise Design/Prediction System (TFaNS)
 at the NASA Glenn Research Center
L. Danielle Koch
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Glenn Research Center
Cleveland, Ohio 44135
Abstract
Version 1.4 of TFaNS, the Tone Fan Noise
Design/Prediction System, has recently been evaluated at
the NASA Glenn Research Center.  Data from tests of the
Allison Ultra High Bypass Fan (UHBF) were used to
compare to predicted farfield directivities for the radial
stator configuration.  There was good agreement between
measured and predicted directivities at low fan speeds
when rotor effects were neglected in the TFaNS
calculations.  At higher fan speeds, TFaNS is shown to be
useful in predicting overall trends rather than absolute
sound pressure levels.
Introduction
The interaction of fan wakes with downstream stator
vanes is a significant source of tone noise in modern
turbofan engines. Accurate fan noise prediction codes are
invaluable tools for engineers working to minimize tone
noise through changes in blading and duct geometry. Until
noise predictions can be generated quickly using
computational aeroacoustic methods, system predictions
that couple results from source and radiation codes are
currently the design engineer’s only alternative to more
simple approaches. TFaNS, 
the 
Tone 
Fan 
Noise
Design/Prediction System, is one such code that has
recently been evaluated at the NASA Glenn Research
Center and results of that evaluation will be presented here.
TFaNS was developed by Pratt and Whitney under
contract to the NASA Glenn Research Center.  It is a suite
of coupled codes for computing upstream and downstream
propagating sound pressure levels, as well as far-field
directivities.  TFaNS consists of five main computer
codes: AWAKEN:  CFD/Measured Wake Postprocessor
Version 1.0, SOURCE3D:  Rotor Wake/Stator Interaction
Code Version 2.5,  Eversman Inlet Radiation Code
Version 3.0, Eversman Aft Radiation Code Version 3.1,
and CUP3D:  Fan Noise Coupling Code Version 2.1.
SOURCE3D is a modified version of the BBN/V072
Rotor Wake/Stator Interaction Code.  Both codes are well
documented in References 1-5.  Both SOURCE3D and
V072 model the blades as twisted flat plates and the duct
as a constant area annulus.  V072 assumes axial flow
through the duct while SOURCE3D can include solid
body swirl in the region between the rotor and the stator.
Unlike V072, SOURCE3D creates rotor and stator
acoustic properties files, which are needed as input into
the CUP3D program.  The acoustic properties files contain
rotor and stator scattering coefficients and source vector
mode amplitudes for noise emanating from the stator
(References 6-7).
Both of the Eversman Radiation Codes have also been
modified to work within TFaNS.  The TFaNS version of
the inlet and aft radiation codes are able to run multiple
modes and harmonics assuming unit mode amplitude
input.  Acoustic properties files are also output for use in
the CUP3D program.  The Eversman Radiation Codes are
well documented, and the reader is advised to look to
Reference 2 for more detailed information.
The two remaining codes are unique to TFaNS.
CUP3D is a program that will couple the results from
isolated blade row and radiation codes.  AWAKEN is a
tool that will create the SOURCE3D input file if the user
chooses to input wake data from either CFD predictions or
from measurements rather than using the wake models
available in the SOURCE3D program.
The evaluation conducted at the NASA Glenn
Research Center compares results from the latest version
of TFaNS (Version 1.4) to experimental data collected
from the Allison Ultra High Bypass Fan (Reference 8).
Three conditions were studied:  approach, cutback, and
takeoff.  Comparisons were also made to predictions made
earlier by Envia and Nallasamy (Ref. 9) and to results
from the previous version of TFaNS (Version 1.3).
Modeling
The Ultra High Bypass Fan, a low tip speed fan stage
designed by Allison for NASA Glenn Research Center,
was used in this study.  This fan had four stator
configurations and experiments were conducted to study
the effect of swept and leaned stator vanes.  For the study
presented here, only the baseline configuration with radial
vanes in the forward position was modeled with TFaNS.
A schematic of this baseline configuration can be seen in
NASA/TM1999-209655
2
Figure 1, which also shows the bounds of the
computational domains.  Coordinates defining the
flowpath were taken from Table I and from Figures 39 and
40 of Reference 10.
Care was taken in creating the input files for
SOURCE3D and the inlet and aft radiation programs.  To
simplify the duct geometry as required by the
SOURCE3D code, the real duct geometry was modeled as
a constant area annulus.  The inner and outer radii of that
annulus were set equal to the values of the stator leading
edge hub and tip positions, respectively.  This was the
most reasonable choice considering the significant area
change along the flowpath and the fact that the source
region was located at the stator leading edge.
Interface planes upstream and downstream of the rotor
and stator must be specified within the SOURCE3D input
file in order to create the acoustic elements needed by
CUP3D.  An arbitrary reference plane was established at
the stator leading edge and the duct radius there, used in
non-dimensionalization, was 11.00 inches.  Interface
Plane 1 was chosen to be 1.00 inch upstream of the rotor
leading edge.  Interface Plane 2, located between the rotor
and the stator, was 1.397 inches upstream of the stator
leading edge, and Interface Plane 3 was chosen to be
downstream of the stator trailing edge, 2.734 inches from
the reference plane (Figure 1).
Two inlet and one exhaust mesh were created for the
forward and aft radiation portions of this problem.  The
input plane for the first inlet mesh was coincident at
Interface Plane 1 described above (Figures 2a, 2b, and 2c).
This mesh was used for cases for which the presence of
the rotor acoustic element was taken into account.  The
input plane for the second inlet mesh was coincident at
Interface Plane 2 and was used for cases coupled without
the rotor acoustic element (Figures 3a, 3b, and 3c). Only
one exhaust mesh was used in all coupling cases, and the
input plane for this mesh was coincident at Interface
Plane 3 (Figures 4a, 4b, and 4c).
Farfield Boundary for
Inlet Noise Computations
Farfield Boundary for
Exhaust Noise Computations
Baffle for Inlet Noise
Computations
Baffle for Exhaust
Noise Compuations
OGV
Plane 1
Plane 2
Plane 3
Fan
Figure 1.  Ultra High Bypass Fan Baseline Configuration
and Computational Domain Boundaries
Figure 2a.  Inlet Mesh with Input Plane Upstream of the
Rotor Leading Edge; Detail of Mesh Within the Duct
Figure 2b. Inlet Mesh with Input Plane Upstream of the
Rotor Leading Edge; Detail of Mesh Near the Duct
Figure 2c. Inlet Mesh with Input Plane Upstream of the
Rotor Leading Edge; Detail of the Farfield Mesh
NASA/TM1999-209655
3
Figure 3a.  Inlet Mesh with Input Plane Between the Rotor
and the Stator; Detail of Mesh Within the Duct
Figure 3b. Inlet Mesh with Input Plane Between the Rotor
and the Stator; Detail of Mesh Near the Duct
Figure 3c. Inlet Mesh with Input Plane Between the Rotor
and the Stator; Detail of the Farfield Mesh
Figure 4a.  Exhaust Mesh with Input Plane Downstream of
the Stator Trailing Edge; Detail of Mesh Within the Duct
Figure 4b. Exhaust Mesh with Input Plane Downstream of
the Stator Trailing Edge; Detail of Mesh Near the Duct
Figure 4c. Exhaust Mesh with Input Plane Downstream of
the Stator Trailing Edge; Detail of the Farfield Mesh
NASA/TM1999-209655
4
Results
Comparisons of predicted sound pressure level sideline
directivities to measurements are shown in Figures 5-7.
Results from CUP3D had to be post-processed since noise
at a constant radius rather than at a specified sideline are
normally written to the output file.  Two sets of data are
shown in each of the plots—tone data and the broadband
noise level at 2 BPF measured at a sideline 88 inches from
the fan centerline. All predictions should be clipped at the
broadband levels indicated since tone noise below these
levels are unrealistic.  Comparisons are presented for three
operating conditions:  takeoff, cutback, and approach.  The
rotor speed for each case is 9013 rpm, 7291 rpm, and 5206
rpm, respectively.
The graphs in Figure 5 compare the 2 BPF
measurements, the predictions from Envia and Nallasamy
reported in Reference 9, and the TFaNS (Version 1.4)
predictions.  The predictions by Envia and Nallasamy are
labeled “V072 + Eversman” in the graphs since they were
generated by combining the results from V072 and the
stand-alone versions of the Eversman radiation codes.
The effects of the rotor were neglected in these TFaNS
(Version 1.4) calculations.
Comparison of the three graphs in Figure 5 show that
the best agreement between the data and the predictions
occurs at the approach condition.  As fan speed is
increased, 
both 
sets 
of 
calculations 
progressively
overpredict the farfield noise.  This degradation is due
mainly to the inadequacy of the source model within the
V072 and TFaNS programs.  The simple model used does
not represent the effects of the transonic flowfield at the
higher rotor speeds.  Differences between the two
predictions are a result of the ways in which the radiated
source is coupled.  TFaNS combines the inlet and aft
radiated noise internally.  Noise reflected from rotor and
stator elements are included when the radiated source is
coupled.  These reflections are neglected when the V072
results are coupled.
Figure 6 shows the comparison between the data and
results obtained from TFaNS Versions 1.3 and 1.4.
Corrections to the coding account for the improvements
seen between the predictions from Versions 1.4 over
Version 1.3, which employ identical physical models of
the problem.  Changes to the code improved the
predictions particularly at approach conditions, with
smaller differences seen at the higher tip speeds.
Finally, Figure 7 shows a comparison between the data
and three different cases run with TFaNS (Version 1.4).
Those cases labeled “w/o Rotor” are solutions obtained
without including the rotor acoustic properties files in the
coupling scheme.   The input  plane for  the inlet  radiation
Figure 5.  Comparison of Predicted and Measured Farfield
Sound Pressure Levels at Takeoff, Cutback, and Approach
Conditions: TFaNS vs. Reference 9 Predictions
Figure 6.  Comparison of Predicted and Measured Farfield
Sound Pressure Levels at Takeoff, Cutback, and Approach
Conditions:  TFaNS Version 1.3 vs. Version 1.4
NASA/TM1999-209655
5
Figure 7.  Comparison of Predicted and Measured Farfield
Sound Pressure Levels at Takeoff, Cutback, and Approach
Conditions:  Swirl Effects
code for these cases lies between the rotor and the stator
(Figure 3).  The remaining two cases were run
incorporating   the  rotor  acoustic   properties  files  in  the
program, CUP3D.   The first of these cases did not include
solid body swirl in the region between the stator and the
rotor and is labeled “w/o Swirl.” As the name implies, the
case labeled “w/ Swirl” does include swirl as solid body
rotation in this region.  For both of the cases including
rotor effects, the input plane for the inlet radiation code
was located upstream of the rotor leading edge (Figure 2).
As seen before in Figures 5 and 6, agreement between the
calculations and the data is best at the approach conditions
and progressively deteriorates as rotor speed is increased.
Inclusion of the rotor, with or without swirl, does not
improve the agreement between the data and the
predictions for any of the fan speeds studied.
Similar findings were presented by Topol in Reference
7 for the 22” Advanced Ducted Propeller (ADP) tested in
the NASA Glenn 9 x 15 Wind Tunnel.    Topol gives
several explanations for the weak agreement between the
data and the predictions from TFaNS Version 1.4 that
include rotor effects.  While 2D aerodynamics can be
successfully combined with 3D acoustics in the
SOURCE3D program for low rotor speeds, this technique
breaks down as frequencies increase.  The mismatch
causes inaccuracies in the rotor transmission and
scattering coefficients, resulting in inflated noise
predictions.  Noise is overpredicted in part, too, by
limitations in the panel method used to calculate the
unsteady pressure distribution on the rotor blade.  As
described in detail in Appendix I of Reference 7, the
number of panels needed to accurately calculate the blade
unsteady surface pressure distribution becomes prohibitive
as the relative freestream Mach number approaches the
sonic condition.
Conclusions
The evaluation of Version 1.4 of  TFaNS at NASA
Glenn Research Center has shown that TFaNS is a useful
noise prediction code particularly at low rotor tip speeds.
Recent changes to the code have improved prediction
accuracy at  low speeds, if the influence of the rotor is
omitted from the coupling scheme.  At higher tip speeds,
TFaNS (Version 1.4) may still prove to be useful in
predicting overall trends, although absolute noise levels
calculated may be higher than measurements may show.
References
1. D. A. Topol, “Development and Evaluation of a
Coupled Fan Noise Design System,” 1997, AIAA
97–1611.
2. D. A. Topol and W. Eversman, “TFaNS Tone Fan
Noise Design/Prediction System Vol. II:  User’s
Manual, 
TFaNS 
Vers. 
1.4,” 
1998, 
NASA
CR–208883.
3. H. D. Meyer, “Source Methodology for Turbofan
Noise 
Prediction 
(SOURCE3D 
Technical
Documentation), 1997, NASA CR–208877.
4. D. A. Topol and D. C. Mathews, “Rotor Wake/Stator
Interaction 
Noise 
Prediction 
Code, 
Technical
Documentation and User’s Manual,” 1993, NASA
Contract NAS3–25952.
5. H. D. Meyer and E. Envia, “Aeroacoustic Analysis of
Turbofan Noise Generation,” 1996, NASA CR–4715.
6. D. 
A. 
Topol, 
“TFaNS 
Tone 
Fan 
Noise
Design/Prediction System  Vol I: System Description,
CUP3D Technical Documentation and Manual for
Code Developers,” 1998, NASA CR–208882.
7. D. 
A. 
Topol, 
“TFaNS 
Tone 
Fan 
Noise
Design/Prediction System  Vol III:  Evaluation of
System Codes,” 1998, NASA CR–208884.
NASA/TM1999-209655
6
8. R. P. Woodward, D. M. Elliott, C. E. Hughes, and J.
J. Berton, “Benefits of Swept and Leaned Stators
for Fan Noise Reduction,” 1998, NASA TM1998-
208661.
9. E. Envia and M. Nallasamy, “Design Selection and
Analysis of a Swept and Leaned Stator Concept,”
1998, NASA TM1998–208662.
10. W.N. Dalton, D. B. Elliott, and K. L. Nickols,
“Design of a Low Tip Speed Fan for Noise
Suppression,” 1999, NASA CR–208682.
This publication is available from the NASA Center for AeroSpace Information, (301) 621–0390.
REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE
2. REPORT DATE
19. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
 OF ABSTRACT
18. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
 OF THIS PAGE
Public reporting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 1 hour per response, including the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,
gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collection of information.  Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this
collection of information, including suggestions for reducing this burden, to Washington Headquarters Services, Directorate for Information Operations and Reports, 1215 Jefferson
Davis Highway, Suite 1204, Arlington, VA  22202-4302, and to the Office of Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project (0704-0188), Washington, DC  20503.
NSN 7540-01-280-5500
Standard Form 298 (Rev. 2-89)
Prescribed by ANSI Std. Z39-18
298-102
Form Approved
OMB No. 0704-0188
12b. DISTRIBUTION CODE
8. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION
 REPORT NUMBER
5. FUNDING NUMBERS
3. REPORT TYPE AND DATES COVERED
4. TITLE AND SUBTITLE
6. AUTHOR(S)
7. PERFORMING ORGANIZATION NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
11. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
12a. DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
13. ABSTRACT (Maximum 200 words)
14. SUBJECT TERMS
17. SECURITY CLASSIFICATION
 OF REPORT
16. PRICE CODE
15. NUMBER OF PAGES
20. LIMITATION OF ABSTRACT
Unclassified
Unclassified
Technical Memorandum
Unclassified
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field
Cleveland, Ohio  44135–3191
1. AGENCY USE ONLY (Leave blank)
10. SPONSORING/MONITORING
 AGENCY REPORT NUMBER
9. SPONSORING/MONITORING AGENCY NAME(S) AND ADDRESS(ES)
National Aeronautics and Space Administration
Washington, DC  20546–0001
December 1999
NASA TM—1999-209655
E–12011
WU–522–81–11–00
12
A03
L. Danielle Koch
Noise; Acoustics; Fan; Rotor; Stator
Unclassified -Unlimited
Subject Categories: 07, 64 and 71
Distribution:   Nonstandard
Evaluation of the Tone Fan Noise Design/Prediction System (TFaNS) at the
NASA Glenn Research Center
Responsible person, L. Danielle Koch, organization code 5940, (216) 433–5656.
Version 1.4 of TFaNS, the Tone Fan Noise Design/Prediction System, has recently been evaluated at the NASA Glenn
Research Center.  Data from tests of the Allison Ultra High Bypass Fan (UHBF) were used to compare to predicted
farfield directivities for the radial stator configuration. There was good agreement between measured and predicted
directivities at low fan speeds when rotor effects were neglected in the TFaNS calculations. At higher fan speeds, TFaNS
is shown to be useful in predicting overall trends rather than absolute sound pressure levels.
