Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Appendix B 
South Cascades 
Late-Successional Reserve 
Assessment 
Chapters 3, 4, and 5 
 B-1 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
B-2  
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
CHAPTER 3: EXISTING CONDITIONS 
CONTEXT OF THE SOUTH CASCADES LSR NETWORK 
INTRODUCTION 
The South Cascade LSRs are part of a regional network designed in association with other land 
allocations (riparian reserves, National Parks, Wildernesses, botanical areas, etc.) to provide 
functional late seral habitat, including long-term dispersal and migratory pathways. 
In a regional perspective, the south Cascades provide a link and are a north-south transition 
area between the Sierra Nevada Mountains of northern California and the northern Cascade 
Mountains of Oregon and Washington. The Siskiyou Mountains run generally east-west, and 
provide connectivity between the coastal and inland south Cascade mountain areas. The 
Columbia and Klamath Rivers, the only major rivers which signi›cantly breach the Cascade 
and Coast ranges, allow mixing of inland and coastal species and genetic varieties. These links 
allow movement of species and genetic material north and south and east and west in response 
to changes in climate such as occurred during the ice ages and the xerothermic period. These 
links are still important in the evolutionary process and health of the Paci› c Northwest ﬁ ora and 
fauna. 
The habitat within the South Cascades LSRs serves as source areas for spotted owls and 
other late-successional and old growth dependent species. LSR 222 is the largest contiguous 
Reserve within the range of the northern spotted owl. Since species depend on habitat, a 
variety of habitats present over time and space provides for a broad range of species, including 
rare and sensitive species and those associated with late seral stages. Successional and 
disturbance processes have provided a varied seral stage mix and a functional landscape 
pattern. However, the effects of ›re, the most inﬁuential process, have been altered and will 
likely continue to be modi›ed well into the future. 
Management will focus on the amount and distribution of late seral habitat, number and size 
of trees, both live and dead, down woody material on the forest ﬁoor and in streams, and 
canopy density, continuity, and layering. Over decades, the needs of indicator species will be 
determined. In the meantime, elements of older forests will be maintained and created. 
PHYSIOGRAPHIC PROVINCES 
The Umpqua, Rogue River, and that portion of the Willamette National Forest within LSR 222, 
along with the Roseburg and Medford Districts of the BLM, are climatically different from the 
Willamette National Forest north of LSR 222, the Eugene District of the BLM, and forests farther 
north in the Western Cascade Oregon Province. 
This climatic difference may be explained by geography. In southwestern Oregon, the Siskiyou 
Mountains occur adjacent to the coast, with peaks up to 7000 feet. These peaks effectively 
block marine inﬁuences and allow high growing season temperatures, frequent frosts, high 
evaporative demand, and lower precipitation. The impacts are especially felt on the Rogue 
River NF and the southern districts of the Umpqua NF. The coastal mountain peaks north of 
 B-3 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Port Orford and west of Cottage Grove are barely 4000 feet in elevation and allow the inﬁ ow of 
moderating, moist marine air. For example, in 1982, the temperatures for June, July, and 
August, averaged 2 degrees higher in Prospect, compared to Dorena, and the number of 
days between the last spring frost and the ›rst fall frost was 106 and 160, respectively. The 
average annual precipitation in Dorena was 51 inches, compared with 44 inches in Prospect. 
The climate in southwest Oregon is Mediterranean. This break in climate occurs along the 
Calapooya Divide. Essentially all of the Rogue River and Siskiyou National Forests, the 
Medford District of the BLM, and all of the Umpqua National Forest except for the Cottage 
Grove Ranger District, reﬁect this climate. This is characteristic of the Klamath Province. The 
portion of the LSR 222 to the east of the Calapooya Divide (in the Willamette National Forest) 
appears to be in a rain shadow, and also exhibits the vegetation characteristics of a drier 
climate. 
These climatic differences are reﬁected in limited tree growth, reduced canopy cover in mature 
forests (average of 55 percent in southwest Oregon vs. 70 percent in western Oregon), and 
›re regime differences that have been documented with ›re history studies. Southwest Oregon 
›res occur with higher frequency and lower intensity compared with ›re regimes in western 
Oregon. Levels of down wood appear to be less in southwest Oregon, suggesting higher rates 
of decomposition compared with areas to the north and greater consumption by ›re. 
Ecological processes on the Rogue River NF, Medford and Roseburg Districts of the BLM, and 
the North Umpqua, Diamond Lake, and Tiller Ranger Districts of the Umpqua NF, are more 
closely aligned with those of the Siskiyou NF, and these areas fall more appropriately into the 
Klamath Province and allied Mediterranean ecosystems. 
The existing condition section on insects and diseases also suggests that incidence and 
severity in the South Cascades LSRs represents more closely the conditions found in the 
Eastern Oregon Cascades and Oregon and California Klamath Provinces. 
PAST LAND USES 
Vegetative structure, function, and pattern in the South Cascades LSRs have been inﬁuenced 
by humans. The most important of these human inﬁ uences are ›re management, including 
both the deliberate setting of ›res by Indians and post-1900s ›re suppression activities, and 
timber harvest. 
Several major Indian groups were present in the larger geographic area where the South 
Cascades LSRs occur: they include the Upper Umpqua, Upland Takelma, Klamath, the 
southern Molala, and possibly the Shasta peoples. Major economies of these groups were 
based on hunting and gathering in the meadows, forests, and marshlands, and the ›sheries 
of the Klamath Basin, Umpqua, and Rogue Rivers. Anadromous ›sh supplemented their diets. 
Trout were ›shed from the lakes and streams. A variety of large and small game were hunted. 
Plant food sources included acorns, camas bulbs, serviceberry, blackberry, and sugar pine 
seeds, and the inner bark of ponderosa pine. One of the most important plant food sources 
were the extensive huckleberry patches along the Rogue-Umpqua divide and in the high 
Cascades. The huckleberry ›elds were perpetuated by the almost yearly setting of ground ›res. 
While other uses of ›re by Indians are less well documented than in other areas, it is believed 
that these peoples used ›re to maintain travel corridors and maintain open understories to 
enhance hunting and gathering activities. 
 B-4 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Early Euro-American residents of the Rogue and Umpqua Valleys viewed the forests of the South 
Cascades as barriers to settlement and concentrated their efforts on developing transportation 
routes through them. Hudson Bay Company trappers used trails built and maintained by Indians. 
Military roads linking the east and west sides of Oregon were built and improved. Discovery of 
gold in the John Day River country of northeastern Oregon led to the building of a road through 
the northern portion of the area in 1864. After eventually falling to disuse, this route would 
become the Diamond Lake Road in the early twentieth century. 
The building of travel routes opened the area to grazing, lumbering, and settlement. Large 
herds of sheep used the area, especially in the time prior to and at the turn of the century. One 
of the major duties of those hired to work on the Crater National Forest, created in 1907, was 
the administration of grazing regulations. Cattle were also grazed on forested lands, especially 
at lower elevations. Large sugar pines provided lumber for the booming mining area near 
Jacksonville, Oregon. The thriving fruit orchard industry in the Rogue Valley increased the area 
population, increasing the demand for drinking and irrigation water, and for wood products. 
Several irrigation pipelines were constructed from Cascades lakes and springs to the valley ﬁ oor. 
Many small lumber mills were in operation and railroads were built into the southern portion of 
the area to move logs and lumber to the mills and population centers. 
Extensive areas of timber harvest occurred as early as the 1920s within the LSR network. 
Access to railheads slowed harvest rates until the 1950s but as the demand for wood products 
increased, roadbuilding increased, and many areas were entered for harvest. Clearcut harvest 
created small patches of early seral conditions throughout much of the LSRs. Currently, early 
seral conditions in the LSRs range from 19 to 36 percent. Selective cutting of individual trees 
continued to occur on many sites; species composition shifted as a result of partial harvest, 
extensive road networks were built, and ground disturbance was often intense on some sites. 
Large forest ›res in the early 1900s led to increased emphasis by government agencies on ›re 
suppression. By the 1940s, with access to the forest increased, and ›re › ghting techniques 
improved, ›re suppression was highly effective. Excluding ›re from stands within the LSRs has 
resulted in altered stand composition and structure. 
Road improvements also opened the area for recreation. People visited, camped at, and 
developed the mineral springs found in the southern portion of the area. Farther north, 
huckleberry picking became an important pastime for residents of the Rogue and Umpqua 
Valleys; hundreds of people would camp during the late summer at —resorts“ established in the 
area between 1910 and the 1930s. Campgrounds were established and facilities were built to 
cater to the recreationists who used the area directly or who passed through on their way to 
Crater Lake National Park. 
The introduction of an exotic fungus also inﬁuenced human activities in the area. White pine 
blister rust was established in western white pine and sugar pine stands in the South Cascades 
LSRs by the early 1920s. Union Creek became the center for a massive effort at eradicating 
Ribes, the gooseberry or currant bushes that are the alternate host for the introduced fungus 
white pine blister rust. Hundreds of men were employed during the 1930s and 1940s to grub out 
the bushes on the steep, brushy slopes of the Cascades in this area. 
 B-5 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
PRESENT LAND USES 
Table 6 presents a summary of present land uses within each LSR. It is organized by LSR, 
administrative unit, and the ROD section, —Multiple Use Activities Other Than Silviculture“ (ROD 
C-16). It can be used as an overview, and to compare how individual units are currently treating 
these topics. 
The information was collected with visits to specialists on individual units, during the period 
from December 1996 through January 1997. Resource specialists were asked about present 
land uses, and whether there were any known inconsistencies with LSR objectives. None of 
the current uses were judged by these specialists to have adverse effects on LSR objectives. 
However, current land uses, particularly ›rewood harvest and mushroom permits, should 
continue to be examined for consistency with standards and guidelines and LSR objectives. 
Some management activities in LSRs or riparian reserves may seem to conﬁict with objectives 
if they are analyzed only at the site scale, or in the short term. Analysis of management actions 
should include both the short term and long term temporal scale, and the site and landscape 
spatial scales in order to assess consistency with LSR or riparian reserve objectives. See also 
the section, —Treatments and Criteria for Multiple Use Activities Other than Silviculture“, later in 
this document. 
 B-6 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 table
 B-7 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 table
 B-8 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
INDIVIDUAL LSR CONTEXT 
LSR 224 
This LSR is made up primarily of Medford Bureau of Land Management lands with a small 
component of land on the Rogue River National Forest. The elevation ranges approximately 
from 1500 feet to over 4000 feet. Lands not capable of supporting late seral conditions 
comprise a small, but unknown percent of the area. 
Existing Conditions 
This area has approximately 43.3 percent of the land in late seral conditions, but only a very 
small percent in interior habitat. Most of the late seral stands are in the White Fir Series. Forty-
nine percent is considered nesting, roosting, or foraging habitat (Table 8). 
Species 
Elk Creek supports populations of coho and chinook salmon and steelhead. This LSR presently 
supports 30 northern spotted owl activity centers. Only 6 activity centers have greater than 40 
percent of their home range as suitable owl habitat. Other animals of interest include the Fisher. 
Plant species of interest include Baker‘s Cypress, and Pygmy monkey- ﬁower. Habitat diversity 
is increased at the lower elevations by oak woodlands and dry meadows; rocky bluffs are 
present at the highest elevations. 
Surrounding Ownership and Land Allocations 
Adjacent lands include Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management matrix lands to 
the west, south, and east. To the north, the Rogue River National Forest is allocated to 
LSR. Several sections of Rogue River National Forest land are located inside the LSR, yet 
designated as matrix land. Other ownership‘s include commercial forest land (Boise Cascade), 
private land and county lands. 
Connections 
Important to this LSR is Elk Creek, which serves as a connection between the Rogue River and 
the upper elevations of the area. The northern boundary of this LSR is adjacent to the southern 
boundary of LSR 222, extending the transition connection between the southern Mediterranean 
climate and the mesic climate characteristic of the area north of 222. Older forest habitat 
connections are often broken by early seral patches. The area between LSR 224 and LSR 
223 to the west is part of an area that was identi›ed by the Interagency Scienti› c Committee 
(Thomas, 1990) as an area of concern wherein Northern Spotted Owl dispersal capabilities 
should be a management priority. 
Connectivity —hotspots“ become apparent when viewing larger scale maps. The distribution 
and juxtaposition of seral stages within the BLM administered —checkerboard“ land is perhaps 
not good enough to allow the LSRs to fully function as habitat reserves for the full array of late 
successional species known to exist in the assessment area. These areas are not necessarily 
currently incapable of providing for dispersal of species such as spotted owls, but due to the 
relatively high percentage of early seral stands, movement of less mobile species across these 
areas is probably precluded. 
 B-9 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Geology and Climate 
This LSR is characterized by mountainous terrain with long rounded ridgetops, steep slopes, 
and moderate to high stream gradients. Climate is Mediterranean, with cool moist winters, and 
hot, dry summers with extended periods of drought. Growing conditions are slowed by low 
precipitation during the summer. 
EXISTING VEGETATION 
PLANT SERIES 
Plant series is a major strati›cation of habitat. Series are named after the dominant climax 
plant species. For example, the Western Hemlock Plant Series will grow to be dominated by 
large western hemlock if undisturbed by ›re, ﬁoods, slides, etc. Series is an expression of 
site potential and provides the basis to determine the desired future condition of late seral 
plant communities. The Series have characteristic disturbance regimes and associated patch 
dynamics. Series also provide information on speci›c structures and species composition. 
Forests of the South Cascades LSR Network are comprised of at least ten series (Table 9). The 
most common are Western Hemlock (42 percent of area), White Fir (24 percent of area), and 
Douglas-›r (12 percent of area) (McCrimmon and Atzet 1990). Less well represented series 
are Silver Fir, Shasta Red Fir, Mountain Hemlock, Western Redcedar, Oregon White Oak, 
Lodgepole Pine, and Ponderosa Pine. 
The LSR network in this assessment spans a wide range of environments, and this is reﬁected 
by the many plant series that are represented (Map 3). The northern portion of LSR 222 is 
predominantly Western Hemlock Series, reﬁecting a cool, moist climate. Western Redcedar 
Series is present in the wettest areas. The Silver Fir Series occurs at the highest elevations. 
East of the Calapooya Divide a rain shadow appears to exist; here, as well as in other dry areas, 
the Oregon White Oak Series and Douglas-›r Series occur in small pockets. In the southern 
portion of LSR 222, and LSR 224 the Western Hemlock Series is replaced by the White Fir 
Series. Douglas-Fir Series becomes more dominant and the Oregon White Oak Series occurs 
more frequently. In LSR 227, Douglas-›r predominates at the low elevations and transitions 
to White Fir Series as the elevation increases. Along the crest of the Cascades and eastward, 
the Shasta Red Fir Series becomes dominant, with pockets of Lodgepole Pine and Mountain 
Hemlock Series east of the Cascades. LSR 226 is predominantly a mix of White Fir and 
Western Hemlock Series to the north, and White Fir Series in the south. Shasta Red Fir Series 
becomes dominant as elevation increases, and Mountain Hemlock Series occurs at the highest 
elevations. LSR 225 is similar to LSR 226; a mix of Western Hemlock and White Fir Series 
predominates at the lower elevations, with Shasta Red Fir Series occurring at higher elevations, 
and Mountain Hemlock Series at the highest elevations (See Map 3). 
 B-10 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
CHAPTER 4: DESIRED FUTURE CONDITIONS 
INTRODUCTION 
Late-Successional Reserves are designed to maintain a functional, interacting, late-
successional and old-growth forest ecosystem (ROD, C-11). This assessment makes the 
assumption that if the structural components are in place, the ecological processes and 
functions associated with late-successional forest ecosystems will continue. These structural 
components include large trees, multiple-canopy stands, snags, down wood, logs in streams, 
and small openings. 
Time is an important element in the health of the late-successional forest. For example, 
where areas of large trees, snags, and down wood are lacking due to past practices, the LSR 
allocation, allowing as it will the growth of forest stands over time, will tend to increase those 
components. Nevertheless, the overall goal for Late-successional Reserves as stated in the 
ROD takes an active managerial stance to —protect and enhance“ the Reserves. 
The desired future conditions described in this assessment will not be attained for many 
decades, or possibly more than a century. The amount of treatments proposed for exemption 
from further REO review, or the amount of projected treatments overall, are not intended to 
represent the long term activity levels needed to reach desired future conditions. The natural 
growth and evolution of forest stands and habitat over time will be a major factor in attaining 
desired conditions. Projected amounts of treatment are intended to represent a conservative 
management approach based on the limits of existing data and experience in managing for 
late-successional conditions. 
Two desired future conditions were developed by the South Cascades LSR Assessment team 
that follow directly from the overall goal and the existing conditions: one for the amount of late 
seral forest, and one for the amount of high ›re risk fuels. These were judged to be speci›c, 
measurable, and directly related to LSR objectives. 
DESIRED FUTURE CONDITION FOR LATE SERAL VEGETATION 
Terrestrial areas in LSRs 222, 225, 226, and the western portion of 227 have a desired 
condition of 75 percent late seral vegetation. This drops to 55 percent in LSR 224, and 50 
percent in the eastern portion of LSR 227. 
Riparian reserves in these LSRs have a desired condition of 75 percent late seral vegetation. 
There may be riparian reserves adjacent to smaller, intermittent streams that cannot maintain 
this level of late seral vegetation due to ›re regimes and site character (e.g. LSR 224). 
Administrative units should address this issue during the watershed analysis process. 
Stands include large trees, snags, canopy gaps, patchy understory for developing multiple 
canopy layers, large woody material, and future understory trees. While the percentage of late 
seral vegetation is the measurable objective, the following are also included as components 
of the desired condition: 
 B-11 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Vegetation structure and pattern are diverse 
Forest vegetation structure and pattern are diverse. Patch size, plant species composition, 
and other late successional characteristics meet the habitat requirements for late successional 
associated species. Forest and riparian reserve vegetation structure and pattern contribute to 
landscape level land management objectives. 
Habitat for early/mid successional species is maintained 
Habitat for early and mid-successional species is maintained when LSR populations of those 
species are important for viability of the species over a broader geographic area, or if any of 
those species should be locally endemic to these LSRs. This is appropriate for special habitats, 
such as meadows, or where development of habitat for late-successional species is not 
substantially delayed. Otherwise, most early/mid successional species habitat is expected to be 
maintained outside of LSRs. 
Connectivity exists between and within watersheds 
Connectivity of terrestrial, riparian, and aquatic conditions is promoted between and within 
watersheds. Late seral vegetation provides connected and resilient watershed processes within 
and between watersheds. Within watersheds, the terrestrial, riparian and aquatic system are 
connected. Aquatic systems consist of a diversity of species, populations, and communities that 
may be uniquely adapted to these speci›c structures and processes. 
LSRs offer protection for all stream types, and provide core areas of high quality stream habitat. 
Figure 14 describes general riparian and stream conditions in properly functioning watersheds 
(See Appendix A). 
Snags and down wood levels maintain species diversity 
Levels of snags and down wood are high enough, variable enough, and change enough, in time 
and space, to maintain site productivity and species diversity in terrestrial, riparian, and aquatic 
communities. Abundance and distribution of snags and down wood ameliorates changes in 
habitat condition and climatic anomalies. 
Terrestrial habitats maintain healthy, source populations of late seral and old 
growth associated species 
Patch size, amount of interior habitat, plant species composition, and other late seral 
characteristics offer core areas of high quality habitat. High amounts of source and refuge 
habitats for late seral and old growth associated species are found throughout the landscape. 
Wet area habitats maintain high levels of source populations 
Aquatic and terrestrial habitats of native species dependent on wet areas are restored and 
maintained. Structures and processes are in place to maintain high levels of source populations 
(ROD, B-11). 
 B-12 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 figure 14
 B-13 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
RATIONALE FOR LATE SERAL DFC 
Historic amounts of late seral habitat have been estimated for southwestern Oregon, and range 
from 40 to 70 percent (REAP, 1994). The assessment team assumes that late seral processes 
were functioning in this range. These estimates are for the total landscape. Since harvest will 
now be concentrated in non-LSR areas, these areas will contain substantial amounts of early 
and mid-seral forest. Further, the focus of LSRs is to enhance late seral habitat. Therefore, the 
high end of the historic range is recommended as a DFC for these LSRs. The Visual Dynamics 
Development Tool (VDDT) was used to verify the estimates of sustainable late seral vegetation 
in these LSRs (Appendix H). Those results show that the DFCs listed above are reasonable 
for each LSR overall. However, there is a wide range of sustainability within each LSR. The 
numbers are used to compare LSRs and watersheds. They are not to be used for every stand 
or area. 
INDICATORS FOR LATE SERAL DFC 
Percentage of capable, terrestrial LSR acres in late seral condition. 
Percentage of capable, riparian reserve LSR acres in late seral condition. 
Indicators will be displayed by LSR and ›fth ›eld watershed. Data source for both is the seral 
map produced from a satellite vegetation size/structure pixel layer for Forest Service lands 
and the Forest Operations Inventory and MICROSTORMS for BLM lands. See Appendix D for 
classi› cation assumptions. 
DESIRED FUTURE CONDITION FOR HIGH FIRE RISK FUELS 
No more than 28 percent of LSR acres are in high ›re risk condition at any one time. Stands 
that develop after ›re include large trees, snags, canopy gaps, patchy understory for developing 
multiple canopy layers, large woody material, and future understory trees. While the percentage 
of high risk fuels is the measurable objective, the following is included as part of the desired 
condition: 
Features of the natural disturbance regime are maintained 
Fire return intervals, strati›ed by geographic area and aspect, should approximate those found 
in Table 22, and be representative of natural disturbance regimes, to the extent practicable. 
Wild›res, when they occur, are low to moderate intensity over about 75 percent of the area. 
Features of the natural disturbance regime operate at levels that maintain species, habitat 
diversity, and encompass less than natural levels of stand replacement events. 
Large blocks of late seral habitat have ›re risk levels that approximate those prior to the advent 
of › re exclusion. 
 B-14 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
CHAPTER 5: TREATMENT CRITERIA AND NEEDS 
TREATMENTS AND CRITERIA TO REDUCE RISKS OF LARGE-SCALE 
DISTURBANCE 
INTRODUCTION 
Prescribed burning is considered a silvicultural treatment, and may be bene›cial to the creation 
of late-successional forest conditions (ROD, C-12). Prescribed ›re, or other risk management 
activities, should occur ›rst in the high risk areas. There are four categories of activities to lower 
risk and reintroduce ›re into South Cascades LSRs (TABLE 53): 
• 
Reduce large scale ›re risk with the creation of shaded fuel breaks; 
• 
Reduce the amounts of high risk fuels in stands under 80 years old; 
• 
Reduce the amounts of high risk fuels in stands over 80 years old; 
• 
Reduce moisture competition for large pine in stands over 80 years old. 
REDUCE LARGE FIRE RISK WITH FUEL BREAKS 
Objective 
The objective is to protect large blocks of late seral habitat from, and minimize the risk of, large 
scale ›re; while minimizing treatment risk to that habitat. Another objective is to increase the 
ability to safely and effectively conduct initial attack ›re control activities. It is not the intent of 
fuel breaks to remove all LWM. The objective is to focus on the reduction of smaller fuels and to 
create conditions that lower the intensity of ›re approaching the fuel break. 
Negative short-term effects to late-successional forest-related species are outweighed by the 
long-term bene›ts to such species and will not lessen short-term functionality of the LSR as a 
whole. 
Agencies having an interest in LSR projects proposed under these criteria should continue to be 
given the opportunity to participate in project development. 
Timber volume production is only incidental to these objectives and is not, in itself, one of the 
objectives of the treatment. Creation or retention of habitat for early successional forest-related 
species is not a treatment objective. 
Appropriate Treatments 
Young stand thinning, density management, and/or prescribed ›re are all appropriate activities 
to meet fuel break objectives. 
Landscape Criteria and Priorities 
Fuel break treatments will occur ›rst in the high ›re risk areas. Two components, fuel models 
and ›re behavior, have been combined to help determine where that risk is high. Map 8 displays 
these high risk areas. Veri›cation of high risk fuels will be needed in the watershed preattack, or 
equivalent plan. 
The fuel breaks are intended to break the high risk area into 4000-6000 acre blocks, thus 
 B-15 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
reducing the risk of a large scale incident burning even larger watersheds. Figure 17 shows the 
intended size of blocks to protect across the landscape. It is not intended as an exact display 
of actual locations. Watershed level or project preattack, or equivalent plans will propose actual 
locations. 
Fire behavior is the most important component. Fire occurrence may vary over time due 
to changes in lightning and recreation patterns. Due to this changing pattern, and practical 
treatment operations, treatment should not be precluded in areas of low-moderate risk if ›re 
behavior is indicated as high. 
Implementation of fuel breaks within late seral stands would result in habitat degradation within 
the fuel breaks and increase the amount of edge in cases where the fuel breaks go through 
intact stands. This impact would not be as great in cases where the fuel breaks go along 
existing edges of intact stands. Therefore, avoid locations which would split large blocks of late 
seral habitat. Place fuel breaks only along the edges of signi›cantly large patches of late seral 
habitat/suitable NRF where a high risk of large scale loss exists. 
Attempt to locate fuel breaks on the landscape near concentrations of early or mid-seral stands. 
Where spotted owl dispersal habitat is heavily dependent on concentrations of mid seral stands 
that are also candidates for fuel break treatment, do not concentrate these treatments in time, 
but spread out these treatments to minimize possible short-term impacts to dispersal habitat. 
Give priority to treatment near the rural interface and high density recreation areas. 
Give priority to treatment in or near recent stand replacement events. See also the Salvage 
section. 
See also section on Treatment Amounts for —between watershed“ priorities and additional 
consideration of tradeoffs between treatment and late seral habitat. 
 B-16 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 figure 17
 B-17 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Stand Criteria 
Fuel Break Width 
The fuel breaks should be approximately 400 feet (horizontal distance) wide and located on 
defendable ground, such as roads and ridgetops. For practical reasons, fuel break treatments 
may go through pockets of less than high ›re risk. Figures 10-12 display the desired stand 
condition after treatment. 
Interlacing Crowns and Understory Trees 
Where there are interlacing crowns, remove only those green trees needed to eliminate the 
interlacing. Thin understory to a spacing of not less than six feet between crowns. 
Prescribed Burning 
Where fuel breaks are created using young stand thinning or density management, follow those 
treatments with prescribed burning within the fuel break. 
LWM Guidelines 
LWM guidelines in fuel breaks are determined by levels of acceptable fuel risk. Leave LWM in 
the following ranges: 
•  in 0-9“ diameter material, leave 2-10 tons per acre; 
•  in 9-20“ diameter material, leave 10-15 tons per acre; and, 
•  in 21“+ diameter material, leave 5-10 tons per acre, for a total of 17-35 tons per acre, where 
this material does not compromise the integrity of the fuel break. 
Brush Piles 
For connectivity, provide dispersed, variable spaced small piles (3-5 feet high and 6-10 feet 
in diameter) where they do not compromise the integrity of the fuel break. Hand-piling small 
(<9“) fuels into well-dispersed brush piles will provide habitat for various small mammals, birds, 
reptiles, amphibians, arthropods, fungi, mosses, lichens, bacteria and viruses. A wide variety of 
life forms respond favorably to the presence of concentrations of woody debris; hiding, denning 
and nesting cover, as well as foraging opportunities are afforded there. Providing those habitat 
values via the management of dispersed brush piles in ridge top fuel breaks greatly increases 
the probability that many of the species associated with late seral forests will be able to 
successfully negotiate and cross, if not forage, or even place a den or nest there. 
Snags and Stumps for Bats 
Since large snags are the best habitat, do not cut them all. Meet fuel break requirements, yet 
leave some of the largest snags. It has recently been learned through radio-tracking studies that 
several species of forest-dwelling bats utilize large snags on ridges. They are apparently drawn 
to these structures because of the favorable temperature regimes afforded within. Snags on 
ridges, especially the larger, taller ones intercept signi›cantly greater amounts of solar radiation 
than do similar sized snags on lower slope positions. The larger a snag is the more solar 
radiation it can directly intercept and the lower its surface area-to-volume ratio is, which results 
in a slower rate of heat loss. These larger ridge top snags can provide thermally
 advantageous roosting and maternity colony sites that smaller ridge top and similar-sized but 
lower slope position snags cannot. 
 B-18 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
When cutting snags or trees on ridgetops, cut stumps as high as reasonably possible. It has 
also been recently learned that stumps with adequate amounts of thick bark (usually Douglas
›r) located where they are exposed to direct sunlight, can provide roosting sites for bats. 
Thermal advantages similar to those seen in ridge top snags seem to be present in these 
stumps. It is the crevices within and behind the thick bark that the bats are using. The taller a 
stump, the more it offers the same type of niches as do the snags. Hence, the recommendation 
that any large trees or snags needing to be felled get cut off as high above ground as is 
reasonably possible. 
Emphasizing the retention of the largest snags available, where the snag does not compromise 
the fuel break integrity, as well as sawing trees and snags far above the ground, will greatly 
decrease the negative affects the establishment of these fuel breaks might otherwise have on 
forest-dwelling bats. 
Large Hardwoods 
Emphasize the retention of large hardwoods in ridge top fuel breaks. The retention of large 
hardwoods in ridge top fuel breaks is emphasized because of their general longevity and 
propensity to form cavities. Numerous forest-dwelling species directly and indirectly depend on 
natural cavities in trees; many of those species are not only associated with late seral forests, 
but play integral roles in forest ecology. Where the cavity-prone large hardwoods are present, or 
are likely to be present in the future if smaller hardwoods on site are retained, emphasize their 
retention. 
Nonnative Plants and Noxious Weeds 
Avoid direct and indirect introduction of nonnative plants and noxious weeds. If it is determined 
that it will be bene›cial to establish vegetation on a fuel break, use only local, native seed 
sources. 
Ground-breaking equipment used in the preparation and maintenance of these fuel breaks 
should be thoroughly washed, outside of the LSR, before being brought to the work site. 
Fire Management Plan 
The Fire Management Plan included in this assessment provides additional criteria for › re and 
fuel related activities. 
 B-19 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
 B-20 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 figure 19
 B-21 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Treatment Amounts and Implementation Schedule 
Estimate of Maximum Treatment Area 
An estimate of the maximum extent of fuel break treatments on the LSR landscape was 
assessed by a GIS procedure. The size of blocks to protect by fuel breaks was considered by 
the core team to be roughly equivalent to the sub-basin layer on the Umpqua National Forest, 
about 6,000 acres (Figure 17). These watersheds are smaller than the ›fth-› eld watersheds 
(HUC5), and larger than HUC6 watersheds. The watershed boundaries are generally on 
ridgetops, where most of the fuel breaks are expected to be placed. In addition, fuel breaks 
are most feasible along existing roads. Therefore, 200‘ buffers were placed along each side 
of sub-basin watershed boundaries, and intersected with roads, high ›re risk areas, late seral 
vegetation, and suitable owl habitat. This results in a very high estimate, since funding levels, 
access, and other ecological and practical project considerations will necessarily limit the 
amount of this treatment. However, it does provide a ›rst estimate of the maximum amount that 
might be done for the purposes of estimating potential impacts of the treatment. The results 
from the Umpqua are extrapolated to the rest of the LSR network proportional to LSR size 
(Table 45). 
The amounts in Table 45 are exempted from further REO for a period of ›ve years. For tracking 
purposes, these amounts are displayed by LSR administrative unit. If proposed treatments 
would exceed the amount listed by individual LSR administrative unit, coordination with other 
units in that LSR will be needed to assure that the amount listed as exempt from 
REO review is not exceeded for that LSR as a whole. table 45
 B-22 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Treatment Habitat Impacts 
There are approximately 16,000 acres within a 400 foot wide strip centered on the ridges which 
delineate the recognized subbasins on the Umpqua portion of LSR 222. Full implementation of 
the fuel break prescription in all high and moderate ›re risk acres in that strip would result in a 
total of approximately 13,500 acres being treated. Of that 13,500 acres of moderate and high 
›re risk, 7500 acres are currently considered to be suitable NRF habitat (3.6 percent of all NRF 
in the Umpqua portion of LSR 222), and 5200 acres are classi›ed as late seral (3.5 percent 
of all late seral stands in the Umpqua portion of LSR 222). Implementation of the fuel break 
prescriptions in late seral stands would result in habitat degradation within the fuel breaks and 
it would increase the amount of edge in cases where the fuel breaks go through intact stands. 
This impact would be not be as great in cases where the fuel breaks go along existing edges of 
intact stands. In addition, rather than constructing a large network in only a few years, spreading 
the construction of fuel breaks over time would lessen the impact. 
Research conducted within and adjacent to the South Cascades LSR network indicates that 
spotted owls avoid suitable NRF that has been —degraded“. This effect appears to last for 
decades. Because of the potential to degrade 3-4 percent of the currently suitable NRF (at least 
within the Umpqua NF portion of LSR 222) and, because fragmentation of late seral stands 
is a regionally recognized concern, it is recommended that fuel breaks not be located where 
large blocks of late seral stands would be split. Also, it is recommended that fuel breaks only be 
placed along the edges of signi›cantly large patches of late seral habitat/suitable NRF where a 
high risk of large scale loss exists. 
The overall extent of the impact to current amounts of NRF and late seral stands that would 
result from full implementation of the fuel break concept as proposed on the Umpqua portion of 
LSR 222 is dif›cult to estimate because the information required for the analysis was not readily 
available from the other administrative units. Because of this, the effects of implementing a fuel 
break proposal similar to the one used in the example for the Umpqua NF portion of LSR 222 
could not be evaluated. However, an estimate extrapolated from the Umpqua portion is provided 
in Table 45. 
 B-23 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
REDUCE FUEL LOADING IN STANDS UNDER 80 YEARS 
Objective 
The objective is to make stands less susceptible to large-scale disturbances while accelerating 
development of late-successional conditions and minimizing treatment risk to late seral habitat. 
The objective is to increase the ability to safely and effectively conduct initial attack › re control 
activities. The objective is to focus on the reduction of smaller fuels. 
Prescribed burning is intended to reintroduce ›re into the ecosystem in high risk areas on the 
upper third of slopes with the objective of reducing the risk of large scale stand replacement 
›res. 
With the use of these treatments, fuels across the landscape will begin to approximate amounts 
typical of pre-›re exclusion conditions, and the potential for large scale disturbance will be 
reduced. 
Negative short-term effects to late-successional forest-related species are outweighed by the 
long-term bene›ts to such species and will not lessen short-term functionality of the LSR as a 
whole. 
Agencies having an interest in LSR projects proposed under these criteria should continue to be 
given the opportunity to participate in project development. 
Timber volume production is only incidental to these objectives and is not, in itself, one of the 
objectives of the treatment. Creation or retention of habitat for early successional forest-related 
species is not a treatment objective. 
Appropriate Treatments 
Appropriate treatments to reduce fuel loading include young stand thinning, density 
management, and/or by the use of prescribed ›re. 
Landscape Criteria and Priorities 
Treat areas of high ›re risk fuels or east of the Cascades in LSR 227 (Map 8). 
Treat where the highest probability exists of high intensity wild›re spreading into late seral 
habitat. 
Identify high priority blocks for treatment. 
Prescribed burning projects should be planned in such a way that present year projects 
are adjacent to past year accomplishments. In this way, large areas will bene›t from the 
reintroduction of ›re. A scattering of small areas would not be as effective. 
Priority will be younger stands, dry sites (90-270 degree aspects, upper slopes), plant series 
with pines, and areas adjacent to fuel breaks. 
Treat around, but outside of, owl activity centers to minimize future risk to core from ›re 
disturbance. 
 B-24 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Stand Criteria 
For young stand thinning, use REO exemption criteria 4/20/95. 
For density management, use REO exemption criteria 7/9/96. Per REO exemption letter, avoid 
thinning where mid-seral stands under 80 years old are, or soon will be, nesting, roosting, and 
foraging habitat. 
See also root disease guidelines, page 138. 
For prescribed ›re, also follow guidelines from prescribed › re plan. 
Use Snag and LWM criteria, page 130. 
Treatment Amounts and Implementation Schedule 
Of the 192,000 acres of early/mid seral stands estimated to be in high ›re risk areas, treat 
54,000 acres (upper third of slopes) over a 20 year period, or 2700 acres per year (Table 46). 
These amounts are exempt from REO review for a period of ›ve years. For tracking purposes, 
these are displayed by LSR administrative unit. If proposed treatments would exceed the 
amount listed by individual LSR administrative unit, coordination with other units in that LSR will 
be needed to assure that the amount listed as exempt from REO review is not exceeded for that 
LSR as a whole. 
Note: Treatments in this assessment are organized by primary objective. As such, there are 
signi›cant overlaps between these acres and those identi›ed elsewhere in this assessment. 
Speci›cally, there are overlaps with stands under 80 years old identi›ed with a primarily 
objective of density management, and with stands under 80 years old with a density 
management emphasis in pine stands. table 46
 B-25 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
REDUCE FUEL LOADING IN STANDS OVER 80 YEARS 
Objective 
The goal of prescribed burning in the LSRs is to: 
1. Protect or enhance stand conditions for old growth associated species, and 
2. Reduce the risk of large scale, high intensity disturbances. 
Prescribed ›re is recognized as a valuable tool to meet LSR objectives, especially in southwest 
Oregon where ›re is such an integral part of ecosystems function. With the use of these 
treatments, fuels across the landscape will begin to approximate amounts typical of pre-›re 
exclusion conditions, and the potential for large scale disturbance will be reduced. Reducing the 
potential for large scale disturbance will lower smoke emissions, and reduce the cost of wild›re 
suppression. 
Negative short-term effects to late-successional forest-related species are outweighed by the 
long-term bene›ts to such species and will not lessen short-term functionality of the LSR as a 
whole. 
Agencies having an interest in LSR projects proposed under these criteria should continue to be 
given the opportunity to participate in project development. 
Appropriate Treatments 
Both management ignited and naturally ignited prescribed ›re are appropriate methods. 
Landscape Criteria and Priorities 
Treat areas of high ›re risk fuels or east of the Cascades in LSR 227 (Map 8). 
Treat to protect the largest blocks of late seral habitat. Where areas of ›re refugia are identi›ed  
in watershed analyses, ›re is not recommended. 
Focus treatments in areas furthest removed from known owl sites. 
Prescribed burning projects should be planned in such a way that present year projects  
are adjacent to past year accomplishments. In this way, large areas will bene›t from the  
reintroduction of ›re. A scattering of small areas would not be as effective. 
Priority will be younger stands, dry sites (90-270 degree aspects, upper slopes), plant series  
with pines, and areas adjacent to fuel breaks. 
Stand Criteria 
For prescribed ›re, follow guidelines from prescribed › re plan. 
Maintain variability within stand. Application of prescribed ›re will vary in extent and frequency 
of application, and intensity of burning. The variability in applications should be related to the 
›re return intervals for the speci›c area, current ecosystem needs, and the wild›re risk analysis 
contained in this assessment. 
 B-26 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Treatments will focus on the reduction of smaller fuels. The objective is not elimination of LWM. 
Both types of ignition need a project speci›c prescribed burn plan that meets current agency 
direction. In addition, a prescribed natural ›re plan must be approved prior to the use of naturally 
ignited prescribed ›re. 
Prescribed ›re operations will implement the same suppression guidelines as wild›re 
suppression activities to minimize adverse impacts to late-successional habitat. 
Prescribed ›re projects and prescriptions will be designed to contribute to attainment of aquatic 
conservation strategy objectives. 
Keep as many large trees as possible, i.e. keep the percentage of the burned area below 15 
percent in high intensity ›re behavior and create snags, canopy gaps, and patchy understory for 
developing multiple canopy layers, large woody material, and future understory trees. 
The stand is at risk due to an overstocked understory, or is in an area where ›re exclusion has 
increased fuel loading to the point of potential extreme › re behavior. 
A number of treatments may be utilized to reduce fuel loading and reduce the risk of large scale 
›re. Underburning could be used where stand densities, presence of ladder fuels, and ›re 
intolerant species don‘t make it impractical. In cases where underburning is impractical, hand 
piling of fuels can be used to reduce the risk of stand replacement ›re, when high fuel loads are 
concentrated in contiguous stands. These treatments should be designed to retain an adequate 
amount of large woody material. The upper third of southerly slopes should receive priority for 
treatment. Suf›cient snags of various species and size should be retained to ensure future 
recruitment of large woody material. 
Treatment Amounts and Implementation Schedule 
Of the 189,000 acres of late seral stands estimated to be in high ›re risk areas, treat 48,000 
acres (upper third of slopes) over a 20 year period, or 2400 acres per year (Table 47) 
These amounts are exempt from REO review for a period of ›ve years. For tracking purposes, 
these are displayed by LSR administrative unit. If proposed treatments would exceed the 
amount listed by individual LSR administrative unit, coordination with other units in that LSR will 
be needed to assure that the amount listed as exempt from REO review is not exceeded for that 
LSR as a whole. 
 B-27 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 table 47
 B-28 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
RISK MANAGEMENT IN STANDS OVER 80 YEARS WITH PINE 
Objectives 
The objective of treatments is to reduce moisture competition to favor the native pine species. 
This will serve to maintain the seral pine component and associated habitat by enhancing the 
vigor of trees. This will help avoid undesirable losses due to bark beetles. See also applicable 
objectives in the 7/9/96 REO exemption criteria. 
Appropriate Treatments 
Remove competing vegetation not exceeding 24“ diameter near important dominant and 
predominant pines. 
Landscape Criteria and Priorities 
In the South Cascades LSRs, pines will generally be found in low elevations and in the Oregon 
White Oak Plant Series north of the Rogue-Umpqua Divide, and at mid to low elevations south 
of the Rogue-Umpqua Divide in the Douglas-›r, Oregon White Oak, and White Fir Plant Series. 
In some areas, moisture stress related to high stocking levels is placing large numbers of 
important older pines at risk. 
This treatment is particularly important in landscapes where pines provide important, possibly 
the only, large tree structure (e.g. Oregon White Oak Series). Although this treatment may be 
done is certain late-seral and old-growth stands, owl home ranges will generally be avoided. 
Stand Criteria 
Follow applicable portions of the 7/9/96 REO exemption criteria for commercial thinning. For 
prescribed ›re, also use guidelines from the prescribed › re plan. 
Follow the —Guidelines to Reduce Risks...“ portion of the ROD standards and guidelines (ROD 
C-12,13). Clear around important dominant and predominant overstory pines where these 
trees are clearly at risk due to stocking levels (as evidenced at least in part by past mortality), 
the expected mortality would signi›cantly reduce the functionality of the stand as habitat for late-
successional forest related species in the short and long-term, and the mortality is not needed to 
contribute to a current snag de›cit. 
Remove competing vegetation, as needed, up to 24“ diameter to the drip line plus 20 feet. 
In those situations where risk of mortality is caused predominantly by trees greater than 24“ 
diameter, individual trees may be killed and left standing. 
When not using prescribed ›re, leave all snags and LWM, subject to operational safety 
concerns, unless precluded by criteria under —Reduce Fuel Loading in Stands Over 80 Years“ 
elsewhere in this chapter. 
This treatment may also be applied to complex mid-seral stands less than 80 years old where 
all other conditions above are met. 
 B-29 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Treatment Amounts and Implementation Schedule 
Table 48 provides an estimate of the maximum amount of candidate acres. For a variety of  
reasons, many of the estimated 115,500 acres will not be treated. Project level analysis is  
expected to show that some of these acres will not need additional treatment to maintain  
late seral characteristics. Some will be in spotted owl territories and be avoided. In addition,  
signi›cant acres will be dropped from further consideration due to economics, road access,  
logging systems, non-treatment recommendations in riparian reserves, other standards and  
guidelines, and REO 7/9/96 criteria. 
A conservative, closer estimate of actual treatment is approximately 10 percent of this, or 
11,500 gross acres. This amount of treatment would result in a cleared area equivalent of 1,390  
acres. These amounts are exempt from further REO review for a period of 5 years. 
Treatment proposals exceeding this rate remain subject to REO review. 
For tracking purposes, these amounts are displayed by LSR administrative unit. If proposed  
treatments would exceed the amount listed by individual LSR administrative unit, coordination  
with other units in that LSR will be needed to assure that the amount listed as exempt from 
REO review is not exceeded for that LSR as a whole. 
 B-30 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 table 48
 B-31 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
TREATMENTS AND CRITERIA FOR SALVAGE 
INTRODUCTION 
This section includes criteria, which, if followed together with the Standards and Guidelines for 
Salvage found on pages C-13 through C-16 in the ROD, will result in an exemption, for a limited 
time and amount of treatment, from the necessity of REO review for salvage activities. 
As such, these criteria allow only very conservative amounts of salvage. These criteria are not 
standards and guidelines, and projects meeting LSR salvage standards and guidelines, but not 
›tting these criteria, should continue to be forwarded to the REO for review. 
BACKGROUND 
Salvage inside LSRs was recognized as a contentious issue in Forest Ecosystem Management:  
An Ecological, Economic, and Social Assessment (FEMAT, July 1993). Three prescriptions were  
considered at that time, from no salvage to salvage with minimal guidelines. Prescription 2,  
limited salvage in LSRs, was carried forward and incorporated in the ROD. 
The advantages were listed in FEMAT: 
—Valuable trees that are dead can be used for commercial purposes with the attendant  
employment and economic bene›ts. These logs cannot be exported and so must be processed  
within the region. Increased ›re danger or risk to insect and disease resulting from large  
accumulations of dead trees can be reduced in an economically feasible fashion. 
Avoided are the perceptions of economic waste if patches of dead trees are not salvaged.“  
(FEMAT, II-18). 
The disadvantages were also described: 
—There is potential risk to watersheds from roads and soil disturbance associated with salvage  
operations. If hypotheses about effects of management prove incorrect, salvaged areas may  
be adversely affected in terms of their short and long-term contributions to the achievement  
of Late-Successional Reserves. Certain segments of the public will be distrustful of agency  
motives whenever salvage is allowed inside a Reserve, particularly when such salvage occurs  
in portions of the Reserve that contain (or contained) trees considered to be true ”old growth‘ or  
”ancient forest‘.“ (FEMAT, II-18). 
The ROD provides direction for salvage and states, —Salvage guidelines are intended to prevent  
negative effects on late-successional habitat, while permitting some commercial wood volume  
removal.“ (ROD C-13). The core team has not found a biological rationale for salvage. The  
following approaches and criteria for salvage are meant to minimize effects to late-successional  
species. The decision to salvage must be based on site-speci›c conditions, with the  
understanding that salvage operations should not diminish late-successional habitat suitability  
now or in the future. Standards and Guidelines for salvage are found on pages C-13 through C 
16 in the ROD. 
It is hoped that the following approaches, criteria, and process considerations will eliminate the  
need for each interdisciplinary team to reconsider the philosophical debate concerning whether  
salvage is generically appropriate in LSR allocation, and instead concentrate on if and where  
salvage helps meet Plan and LSR objectives for a given stand replacement event. 
 B-32 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
TWO APPROACHES TO SALVAGE 
In this assessment, criteria for two conservative approaches to the salvage of dead wood are 
recommended: 
•  an Area Salvage Approach that suggests a landscape perspective to determine leave needs 
for large dead wood, and, 
•  a Fire Risk Reduction Approach through the use of fuel breaks after stand replacement 
events. 
These are considered by the core team to be complementary approaches after large stand 
replacement events. They may be effectively used together in such a project. After small 
stand replacement events, they are considered to be alternative approaches. The use of 
both approaches on any one acre, conducted in subsequent years, could raise an issue of 
cumulative effects due to repeated entry. 
AREA SALVAGE APPROACH 
The following are background, rationale, criteria, and examples for this approach. 
Background 
This LSR assessment shows that approximately 20 to 36 percent of the South Cascades LSR 
network currently supports early seral vegetation. Most of these acres are in plantations, which 
are generally low in down wood and snags because of management objectives and activities 
prior to the allocation to LSR. Increasing the dead wood in these managed early and mid-seral 
portions of the landscape will be accomplished primarily during density management thinning 
treatments in those stands needing such, and with the mortality process over time. 
Where stand replacing events convert late seral stands to early seral stands, the issue of where 
and how much of the dead material to leave is presented. 
Since the early seral portion of the landscape is generally low in dead wood, there is more early 
seral on the landscape than desired, and because the natural process following stand replacing 
events leaves much higher levels of dead wood than management practices have left in the 
past, the area salvage approach focuses on retaining most of the dead wood input following 
stand replacing events, while taking a landscape look to determine snag needs for a given site. 
Salvage decisions must also recognize the increased risk of reburn following stand replacing 
events, and that adjoining late seral stands likely have increased fuel levels because of ›re 
exclusion over the past 60 years. 
In the natural process, stand replacing ›re events add large amounts of dead wood to the 
system (Spies, Franklin, and Thomas, 1988). A conservative approach to salvage needs to 
recognize the contribution of these peak events, and leave a substantial portion of that material 
in place to provide for habitat needs through early, mid-seral, and into late-seral stages. A review 
of the research on decay rates of snags and down wood suggests that much of the material 16 
inches or greater in diameter would remain on a site (unless a subsequent reburn occurs) until 
the next forest stand could begin to input this size of material again. 
 B-33 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Overview of the Area Salvage Approach 
The ROD clearly indicates that —typical levels“, not all material, need to be left (ROD, C-15). 
It suggests salvage is appropriate to remove those levels, or concentrations, above typical. 
The problem then is to de›ne typical levels for this LSR network. Although we do not know of 
numerous plots measuring added dead wood immediately following stand replacing events in 
these LSRs, we suggest that there are data available. The live tree data from ecology plots can 
be used to de›ne —typical levels“, since this live biomass represents that material available to 
stand replacing events in the near future. Since ›re exclusion has resulted in additional dead 
wood primarily in the smaller size classes, and because the smaller size classes are typically 
consumed in the stand-replacing portions of ›re, we can use the larger diameter live tree data 
from ecology plots to represent —typical“ levels of additional dead wood following stand replacing 
events (Table 49 and Table 50). 
In this approach, median density within the high intensity (>10 acre, <40% canopy) portions of 
stand replacement events are compared to the median live trees/acre for the applicable plant 
series. Median density, and not the mean, is suggested to represent —typical“ levels, due to the 
sometimes non-normal distribution across the unmanaged landscape. 
Where density in the stand replacement area exceeds the live tree density of the plant series, a 
salvage opportunity generally exists, since the density exceeds the —typical“ density of the plant 
series across the landscape. 
The amount of dead wood removal is then de›ned by the difference between the density in the 
stand replacement area and the density of the —typical“ levels of dead wood following stand 
replacement events, determined from the landscape plant series information. For example, if the 
density of the stand replacement area were 20% above that of the typical density, that amount 
could be removed, leaving the typical density after treatment. Since reducing snag density on 
each acre would be operationally hazardous, small patch clearcuts or group selection cuts are 
used, limited to 20% of the stand replacement area. 
Likewise, where density in the stand replacement area is lower than the —typical“ density of 
the plant series across the landscape, salvage is not generally indicated. However, since the 
decision to salvage is not determined solely by this —compare the numbers“ procedure, but by 
additional landscape and site factors, exceptions to both cases are expected. Examples are 
provided. 
Objectives 
1. The purpose of these criteria are to provide an approach to salvage for the South Cascades 
LSR network that is responsive to the ROD standards and guidelines; one that maintains 
most of the large amounts of dead wood that are contributed to the landscape following 
stand replacement events; and one that results in an exemption from further REO review for 
conservative amounts of salvage. 
2. These criteria apply within the entire South Cascades LSR network. They may not always 
apply to a given project. It may be more appropriate to seek REO review at the time of project 
development where speci›c vegetation types, local issues, or objectives do not ›t within these 
criteria, or where silvicultural prescriptions are needed other than as described below. 
3. Exempted salvage must still comply with all pertinent S&Gs in the ROD and with other 
statutory and regulatory requirements (e.g. National Forest Management Act, Federal Land 
 B-34 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Management Policy Act, National Environmental Policy Act, Endangered Species Act, 
Clean Water Act). Interagency cooperation, monitoring, and adaptive management are key 
components of the ROD and were key assumptions underlying the development of these 
criteria. Agencies having an interest in LSR projects proposed under these criteria should 
continue to be given the opportunity to participate in project development. Additionally, › eld units 
are strongly encouraged to engage in intergovernmental consultation when developing projects. 
4. Creation or retention of habitat for early successional forest-related species is not a treatment 
objective. 
Landscape Decision Process Criteria for Area Salvage 
Summarize Candidate Stands 
1. Determine the stand replacement (>10 acres and <40% canopy closure) area(s) of the event. 
2. Sample to determine the median density of live trees and newly created dead wood in the 
replacement area(s) of the event, by plant series. Where the stand replacement event includes 
allocations other than LSR, sample the entire LSR portion of the stand replacement area. 
Compare to Reference Conditions 
3. To get an initial indication of salvage treatment opportunity, compare the median density in 
each Plant Series of the stand replacement area(s) to the median density of the —typical“ levels, 
for each Plant Series in Table 49 or Table 50. 
If the median density, by Plant Series in the potential treatment area is higher than the median 
of that Series from the table, then the initial indication is that a salvage opportunity exists. 
Likewise, if the density in the stand replacement area(s) is less dense than the median from the 
tables, it would suggest that salvage is not initially indicated for that Plant Series. 
Consider Additional Factors 
4. Regardless of what is initially determined in step 3, consider additional landscape and other 
site factors when deciding whether or not to salvage. Consider the location and concentrations 
of dead wood as it relates to slope position, aspect, ›re history and risk, speci› c wildlife 
needs, adjoining allocations, access, logging systems and costs, reforestation and restoration 
opportunities, etc. 
Decide about Salvage Treatment 
5. Line of›cer makes a project decision after consideration of all the issues, consistent with all 
applicable standards and guidelines. 
 B-35 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Treatment Standards for Area Salvage 
1. Due to the safety concerns associated with operations within snag patches, use small patch 
clearcuts or group selection type harvests, rather than a partial harvest spread across the stand 
replacement area. 
2. To enhance connectivity for certain small mammals and other species, keep treatment patch 
size small. For example, ten, ›ve acre units are preferable to one, ›fty acre unit. 
3. Use the following table to determine the maximum salvage treatment area: 
Where replacement area density is 
above reference density by this 
percentage, 
Then remove no more than this percentage 
of the total stand replacement acres in LSR. 
0-10% 
10% 
11% 
11% 
12% 
12% 
13% 
13% 
14% 
14% 
15% 
15% 
16% 
16% 
17% 
17% 
18% 
18% 
19% 
19% 
20% or greater 
20% 
Where replacement area density is below reference density by any percentage, then 
remove no more than 10% of the total stand replacement acres in LSR. 
4. Vary the size of material left in the stand replacement area (ie. do not remove only few acres 
of the largest diameter material, or large acres of the smallest diameter material). Keeping in 
mind the variability of natural stands, maintain variability within the stand replacement area. 
Maintain approximately 10 percent of the area in patches of the highest pre-treatment density, 
and 10 percent of the area in patches of the lowest pre-treatment density. 
5. The retained wood should be in various sized patches in environments where it is most likely 
to persist, for example, in riparian areas, bottom thirds of slopes, and on north and east aspects. 
6. Within the limits of acceptable ›re risk, in areas capable of northern spotted owl habitat (ie. 
not 
Lodgepole Pine Series), and where no dead wood biomass created by the stand replacement 
event is 16 inches dbh or greater, leave 13-15 percent cover in 4“ diameter and larger dead 
wood to meet the habitat needs of the small mammal prey base. Leave mostly the larger 
diameter material, keeping in mind the objective (Carey, A.B., and M. L. Johnson, 1995). Retain 
existing piles, and/or pile some of the remaining down logs to enhance site conditions. 
7. To the extent practicable, leave and protect from disturbance, all snags and LWM that were 
present prior to the stand replacement event. 
 B-36 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
8. Impacts to LWM decay classes III, IV, and V during salvage harvest will negatively effect 
habitat quality. These pieces still function as refuge habitat for some late successional species. 
Use yarding techniques to minimize disturbance to this LWM. 
9. Reforestation using genetically selected trees may not always provide the greatest bene›ts 
to old-growth development and stand heterogeneity. Consider allowing natural seeding where 
seed sources are present. 
10. Roads inﬁuence habitat fragmentation, can change the character of favorable disturbances, 
and provide corridors for spread of undesirable species. Road construction is not recommended 
with the exception of short, temporary native surface roads which can be obliterated within the 
same operating season. Where road construction is needed, these roads should be obliterated 
prior to the end of the project. Road construction within Riparian Reserves should follow 
watershed analysis recommendations and Riparian Reserve standards and guidelines. 
Approach is Conservative 
This approach is conservative in at least three ways: 
•  Use of the median as a reference will generally result in no more than half of the stand 
replacement areas being salvaged. 
•  Where densities exceed the reference median by more than 20%, the area of salvage is 
limited to a maximum of 20%. In the other case, where densities are lower than the median 
of the reference plant series, and other factors still lead the decision maker to salvage, these 
criteria limit the salvage to 10% of the stand replacement area. 
•  These criteria limit the REO exemption to ›ve years, and to a cumulative, maximum salvage 
treatment area of 1% of LSR, by administrative unit. 
 B-37 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Examples of Landscape Decision Process for Area Salvage 
These examples are not meant to be exhaustive. They attempt to clarify the above process 
criteria, demonstrate the importance of the interdisciplinary process, clarify that salvage is a 
treatment decision of a line of›cer, and highlight the conservative nature of salvage treatments 
using these criteria. As indicated earlier, these criteria, (and examples) may not apply to all 
projects, therefore, projects consistent with ROD standards and guidelines, yet not following 
these criteria, should still be forwarded to REO for review. 
Example 1. 
Summary of Candidate Stands 
A 35 acre ›re, all in LSR, created 10 acres of stand replacement area. The stand replacement 
portion was within the ABCO plant series, in the southern portion of the LSR network. Eleven 
plots were taken to estimate live tree and newly created dead wood density within the 10 acre 
stand replacement portion. The median density was 19 per acre, in live trees and newly created 
snags or LWM. It ranged from 16-23.9“ DBH. 
Comparison to Reference Condition 
Table 50 suggests the median for this DBH range, in the ABCO series, is 24 per acre. The 
initial indication is that since the candidate stand is under the reference density, no salvage be 
conducted. 
Additional Considerations 
The nearby vicinity and surrounding landscape (approximately 10,000 acres) contain a high 
percentage of previously managed early and mid-seral stands, which contain few snags and 
little down wood. 
Salvage Treatment Conclusion 
Salvage is not indicated. 
Example 2. 
Summary of Candidate Stands 
A 50 acre ›re, all in LSR, created 10 acres of stand replacement. The stand replacement portion 
is within the PSME plant series, in the northern portion of the LSR network. The summary of 
eleven plots within the stand replacement portion showed a median density of 50 snags and live 
trees/acre, ranging from 20-36 inches DBH. 
Comparison to Reference Condition 
Table 49 suggests the median density for this DBH range is 38 per acre. Since the candidate 
stand is 32% more dense than the reference condition, the initial indication is that a salvage 
opportunity exists that might remove up to 20% of the area, or 2 acres. 
Additional Considerations 
The nearby vicinity was mostly late seral, which contained snags and LWM consistent with late 
seral stands. 
Salvage Treatment Conclusion 
Using these criteria, salvage of up to 2 acres is a treatment opportunity. 
 B-38 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Example 3. 
Summary of Candidate Stands 
A 5,000 acre ›re created 1,000 acres of stand replacement, with 600 acres of that in a 
Wilderness Area, and 400 acres in LSR. The stand replacement portion was in the northern 
portion of the LSR network, and included two different plant series, 700 acres in ABCO and 300 
acres in PSME. 
Thirty plots were taken within the LSR in each plant series. The median density was 42 per 
acre in ABCO, and 45 per acre in PSME, in stems 16“ DBH and greater. The DBH range in both 
series was from 16“-24“ and greater. 
Comparison to Reference Condition 
Table 49 suggests the median reference density for the ABCO series with diameters greater 
than 16“ is 52 per acre. The candidate stands are 20% less dense than the reference, therefore 
the initial indication is for no salvage in the ABCO portion. 
Table 49 suggests the median reference density for the PSME series with diameters greater 
than 16“ is 49 per acre. The candidate stands are 8% less dense than the reference, therefore 
the initial indication is for no salvage in the PSME portion. 
Additional Considerations 
Within the Wilderness, the ›re has created signi›cant new inputs of dead wood that will not be 
salvaged. 
Within the LSR, the ABCO potential salvage areas are not in the vicinity of spotted owl nests, 
have access such that additional road construction would not be required, and includes portions 
of higher density than the overall median. 
Within the LSR, the PSME potential salvage areas are on upper slopes in the high Cascades 
lightning zone, and require only temporary road construction for access. 
Salvage Treatment Conclusion 
Since the ›re has created signi›cant new inputs of dead wood in Wilderness that will not be 
salvaged, the decision maker may conclude that salvage is an opportunity, limited to 10% of the 
ABCO area in LSR. Likewise in the PSME area, the decision maker may conclude that salvage 
is an appropriate treatment, limited to 10% of the PSME area in LSR. 
On the other hand, since the risk of reburn may remain high in the adjacent Wilderness, and 
reburn may result in signi›cant reduction to the newly created dead wood, the decision maker 
may conclude that salvage in the LSR is not an appropriate treatment. 
Example 4. 
Summary of Candidate Stands 
A 5,000 acre ›re created 1,000 acres of stand replacement, with 600 acres of that in a Matrix 
allocation, and 400 acres in LSR. The stand replacement portion was in the northern portion of 
the LSR network, and included two different plant series, 700 acres in ABCO and 300 acres in 
PSME. 
Thirty plots were taken within the LSR in each plant series. The median density of trees and 
newly created dead wood was 62 per acre in ABCO, and 59 per acre in PSME, in stems 16“ 
DBH and greater. The DBH range in both series was from 16“-24“ and greater. 
 B-39 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Comparison to Reference Condition 
Table 49 suggests the median reference density for the ABCO series with diameters greater 
than 16“ is 52 per acre. The candidate stands are 19% more dense than the reference, 
therefore the initial indication is to salvage in the ABCO portion. 
Table 49 suggests the median reference density for the PSME series with diameters greater 
than 16“ is 49 per acre. The candidate stands are 20% more dense than the reference, 
therefore the initial indication is that a salvage opportunity exists in the PSME portion. 
Additional Considerations 
Within the Matrix, the ›re has created signi›cant new inputs of dead wood that are likely to be 
salvaged. 
Within the LSR, the ABCO potential salvage areas are near spotted owl nests, in riparian areas 
or on the lower third of slopes where lightning ›re starts are less frequent, and would require 
additional road construction. 
Within the LSR, the PSME potential salvage areas are on mid-slopes on northerly aspects. 
Salvage Treatment Conclusion 
Since the ›re has created signi›cant new inputs of dead wood in Matrix, where signi›cant 
amounts of salvage are expected, the decision maker may conclude that salvage within the 
LSR is not a prudent treatment. 
Example 5. 
Summary of Candidate Stands 
A 150 acre ›re, all in LSR, created 100 acres of stand replacement area. The stand replacement 
area is within the ABCO plant series, in the southern portion of the LSR network. 
Fifteen plots were taken to estimate live tree and newly created dead wood density in the 
100 acre replacement area. The median density was 27 per acre, all in standing snags. The 
diameters were all 24 inches DBH, or larger. 
Comparison to Reference Condition 
Table 50 suggests the median reference density for the ABCO series, southern portion, greater 
than 24“ DBH, is 28 per acre. The initial indication is that since the candidate stand is below the 
reference density, salvage is not indicated. 
Additional Considerations 
The stand replacement area is on the upper third of south-facing slopes. The snags have 
interlacing, dead crowns. It is in the high Cascades lightning zone. The surrounding landscape 
is largely composed of late seral stands. 
Salvage Treatment Conclusion 
Even though the density is below the reference condition, the decision maker decides that the 
risk of reburn is high enough that an area salvage worth considering, limited to 10% of the area, 
or 10 acres. In addition, the project team considers the addition of fuel breaks within the stand 
replacement area. 
 B-40 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Example 6. 
Summary of Candidate Stands 
A 75 acre ›re, all in LSR, created 25 acres of stand replacement area. This portion was all 
within the TSHE series, in the northern portion of the LSR network. Eleven plots were taken 
to estimate the live tree and newly created dead wood density within the 25 acre replacement 
area. The median density was 76 snags per acre, all larger than 22 inches DBH. 
Comparison to Reference Condition 
Table 49 suggests the median for this DBH range, in the TSHE series, is 38 snags per acre 
larger than 22 inches DBH. Since the candidate stand is twice as dense as the reference level, 
the initial indication is that a salvage opportunity exists, to remove a maximum of 20% of the 
area, or 5 acres. 
Additional Considerations 
The candidate stand is near signi›cant amounts of industrial forest land, mostly early seral, 
without much large wood. The area is not known for high ›re starts, and there is not a rural 
interface ›re issue. There are cooperative restoration opportunities that might be partially funded 
with timber sale proceeds. Spotted owl sites exist in the adjacent, unburned stand. 
Salvage Treatment Conclusion 
Even though the numbers suggest that a salvage opportunity is warranted, the line of› cer might 
conclude that —keeping the pieces“ suggests no treatment in this situation. 
 B-41 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
Table 50: —Typical Levels“ of Density In Stand Replacing Areas of Stand Replacement 
Events, by Plant Series, Southern Portion of LSRA Network (Cascades portion, Rogue 
River NF Data) 
Plant Series 
Live and Dead Wood Per Acre by DBH Class. 
16-19.9“ 
20-23.9“ 
24“+ 
# of plots 
Shasta Red Fir, ABMAS 
9 
median 
9 
4 
23 
mean 
13 
8 
21 
range 
0-20 
0-29 
0-52 
Mountain Hemlock, 
TSME 
17 
median 
14 
14 
33 
mean 
14 
16 
31 
range 
0-37 
0-47 
0-60 
White Fir, ABCO 
92 
median 
13 
11 
28 
mean 
16 
12 
29 
range 
0-70 
0-47 
0-72 
Douglas-› r, PSME 
13 
median 
7 
6 
16 
mean 
19 
9 
12 
range 
0-80 
0-37 
0-23 
Western Hemlock, TSHE 
22 
median 
12 
10 
32 
mean 
13 
12 
29 
range 
0-43 
0-46 
0-48 
Oregon White Oak, 
QUGA49 
median 
7 
6 
16 
mean 
19 
9 
12 
range 
0-80 
0-37 
0-23 
Lodgepole Pine, PICO50 
median 
14 
4 
4 
Ponderosa Pine, PIPO51 
median 
7 
6 
16 
mean 
19 
9 
12 
range 
0-80 
0-37 
0-23 
49 Data were too limited for this Plant Series. This Series is most closely represented by the Douglas-› r Series, 
therefore those numbers are used in this table. 
50 Data were too limited for this Plant Series. Numbers were estimated to reﬁect the expected values for this 
Series. For the eastern portion of LSR 227, use guidelines from the Winema NF LSR Assessment. 
51 Data were too limited for this Plant Series. This Series is most closely represented by the Douglas-› r Series, 
therefore those numbers are used in this table. For the eastern portion of LSR 227, use guidelines from the 
Winema NF LSR Assessment. 
 B-42 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
FUEL BREAK SALVAGE APPROACH 
This approach focuses on reducing the increased ›re risk associated with the large amounts 
of dry, dead fuels present after stand replacement events. It is intended to be used in addition 
to the fuel break network suggested in the section, —Treatments and Criteria to Reduce Risk of 
Large Scale Fire“. The objective is to reduce the continuous area of high risk fuels by strategic 
placement of fuel breaks within the high intensity (stand replacement) portions of large ›res. 
It may be used to help mitigate the increased long term ›re risk associated with leaving the 
large amounts of snags associated with the area salvage approach. TABLE 53 summarizes the 
treatment and criteria. The criteria are those listed on page 151, —Reduce Large Fire Risk with 
Fuel Breaks.“ Figure 21 presents an example. 
 B-43 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 figure 21
 B-44 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
POTENTIAL SALVAGE TREATMENT AREAS (1996) 
The Umpqua, Willamette, and Rogue River National Forest portions of the South Cascades LSR 
network experienced lightning-caused ›res in 1996 (Table 51 and Figure 11). These are the current 
potential salvage areas within the South Cascades LSRs. 
While project planning and NEPA decisions will determine speci›c treatment needs, the most acres that 
could be treated can be estimated here. Of the 6000 acres in 17 ›res during 1996, a maximum of about 
table 51
 B-45 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
TREATMENT AMOUNTS AND IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE 
The extent of stand replacement events within the next few years cannot be predicted, however, 
exemption from further REO review for a reasonable, yet conservative amount of salvage 
treatment is requested. 
Exemption is requested for all salvage treatments combined, to not exceed approximately one 
percent (7,100 acres) over 5 years. This amount is expected to be enough for most situations, 
but would require review for very large stand replacement events. For tracking purposes, this 
amount is segregated by LSR administrative unit. If proposed treatments would exceed the 
amount listed by individual LSR administrative unit, coordination with other units in that LSR will 
be needed to assure that the amount listed as exempt from REO review is not exceeded for that 
LSR as a whole. table 52
 B-46 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
TREATMENTS AND CRITERIA FOR MULTIPLE USE ACTIVITIES 
OTHER THAN SILVICULTURE 
Non-silvicultural activities are on-going and new ones may be proposed within the LSR 
boundaries. —As a general guideline, nonsilvicultural activities located inside Late Successional 
Reserves that are neutral or bene›cial to the creation and maintenance of late-successional 
habitat are allowed.“ (ROD C-16). Although non-silvicultural activities do not require REO review, 
projects must be consistent with the ROD. The ROD provides good direction on these types of 
activities (C-16 through C-19). 
During the period from December 1996 through January 1997, visits were made to individual 
land management units to collect details on existing land uses and additional items of note. See 
Table 6 for the summary of —Multiple Use Activities Other Than Silviculture“. At that time, none of 
the current uses were judged to have adverse effects on LSR objectives. 
There may, however, be some site-speci›c areas that are outside of ACS or LSR objectives. 
These will need to be reviewed at a ›ner scale, either in watershed analyses or environmental 
assessments. 
ROAD CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE 
Substantial road related restoration is needed in LSR 222 due to increased slides the past two 
winters. Deferring road maintenance may have adverse effects on LSR objectives as impaired 
drainage increases the potential of roadbed slumps and increased sediment delivery to streams. 
When deferred maintenance keeps roads closed, this will affect the ability to respond rapidly to 
›re, increasing the chance of large scale ›re. 
Access and Travel Management Plans are also needed. 
Improvements are planned by Fed. Highway Administration on the Elk Cr. Road in LSR 224. 
This project does have some impact on the riparian area. 
During road upgrades and maintenance, consider the following: 
•  Facilitate the upstream/downstream movements of species with culvert size and placement 
(or other stream crossing structures) decisions. 
•  Increase the frequency of drainage dips or culverts to reduce changes in drainage patterns. 
•  Stockpile down wood from hazard removal sites and place in areas near wetlands, ponds, 
and lakes where past management has reduced dead and down wood. 
•  Modi›cation or removal of culverts and water diversion structures where possible to restore 
aquatic connectivity. 
ROAD DECOMMISSIONING 
The objectives of road decommissioning include: 
•  reducing the length of the road-related drainage network; 
•  improving habitat connectivity for amphibian and other species; 
•  restoring riparian and aquatic conditions; 
•  increasing terrestrial late seral patch size; and, 
•  reducing sediment delivery from roads and upslope areas. 
These objectives are derived from ACS riparian and › sheries goals. 
 B-47 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
In addition to the objectives, there are other considerations when planning road systems and 
road decommissioning. Access to non-federal land needs to be considered. In addition, access 
may be needed for ›re suppression, outdoor recreation, restoration projects, other LSR projects, 
or projects in other land allocations. 
Nevertheless, there are opportunities to reduce the amount of existing roads within the South 
Cascades LSR network. Priority consideration for decommissioning and improvements in 
existing roads should be given to: 
1.  Roads within riparian reserves in key watersheds; particularly where roads have major 
inﬁuences on ground water, drainage patterns, ﬁows and sedimentation on wetland, pond, 
spring, and seep habitats. 
2.  Roads within riparian reserves not in key watersheds; but where roads are within 600 feet 
of ponds, wetlands, springs, seeps and lakes, especially upslope of wet areas and where 
roads bisect a system of wetlands, ponds, or where roads exist between streams, wetlands, 
or ponds. 
3.  Roads outside of riparian reserves in key watersheds. 
4.  Roads within watersheds that have road density below 3 miles/square mile. The rationale is 
to improve or reinforce areas that are considered close to —fully functioning“ based on road 
density. 
5.  Roads where density in the transient snow zone is greater than 3 miles per square mile; 
and, 
6.  Roads where density in the nontransient snow zone is greater than 3 miles per square mile. 
DEVELOPMENTS 
Pelican Butte Ski Area, LSR 227 
There is a proposed ski area at Pelican Butte on the Winema National Forest. Most of the facility 
would be outside of LSR 227, but access and potentially some development may be proposed 
within the LSR. The implications will be addressed with REO separately from this assessment. 
West›r Administrative Site, LSR 222 
The reconstruction of the West›r Administrative Site will require an additional 1/2 to 1 acre 
clearing for expansion of the parking lot. 
RANGE MANAGEMENT 
Tiller Ranger District on the Umpqua National Forest has an environment assessment in 
progress. Some potential conﬁicts with LSR objectives due to traditional use areas, riparian 
concerns, and introduction of nonnative species. 
Generally, livestock grazing is incompatible with desired vegetative conditions in wet areas. 
Consider excluding livestock from wet areas and their associated riparian reserves. Restore 
vegetative condition through planting if natural reproduction is unlikely. Maintaining or 
restoring riparian and forest vegetative structure including height, canopy cover, and vigorous 
 B-48 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
reproduction in herb, shrub, hardwood and conifer tree layers, is desired to meet LSR and ACS 
objectives. 
RIGHTS-OF-WAY, CONTRACTED RIGHTS, EASEMENTS, SPECIAL USE PERMITS 
A proposed ﬁood control dam on Elk Creek is half-build, but the project is currently on hold due 
to ›sh blockage issue. Other special use permits are inconsequential. 
NONNATIVE SPECIES 
Roads have provided pathways for nonnative and noxious weed introductions and spread within 
the LSRs. See Table 6 and the Existing Conditions section —Nonnative Species“ for additional 
information. 
Plans for addressing negative impacts on native species in wet areas need to be developed 
(ROD C-19). Several of the following recommendations are outside the direct authority of 
the federal land management agencies. Work cooperatively with the State of Oregon when 
considering the following restoration items: 
•  Reduce water levels in ponds and wetlands to depths unsuitable for ›sh and bull frogs. 
•  Eliminate ›sh stocking in lakes determined to be important in habitat value or spatial 
connectivity. 
•  Control bull frog populations through removal of adults and egg masses. 
•  Reduce the potential for disease, parasite and nonnative species spread with the use of 
clean equipment policies (e.g. for multiple drafting set up portable tanks with one clean draft 
line to water). 
FUELWOOD, AMERICAN INDIAN USES, MINING, LAND EXCHANGES, HABITAT 
IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS, SPECIAL FOREST PRODUCTS, RECREATION USES, 
AND RESEARCH 
None of these current uses have adverse effects on LSR objectives. There may be some 
sitespeci›c areas that are outside of ACS or LSR objectives. Some will need to be reviewed 
at a ›ner scale either in watershed analyses or project environmental assessments. Firewood 
harvest and mushroom permits, in particular, should continue to be examined for consistency 
with standards and guidelines and LSR objectives. Generally, though, most sites occupy such a 
small area that, overall, the ecological functions the LSRs will not be disrupted. 
 B-49 
Appendix B-LSR Assessment Ch. 3, 4, and 5 
B-50  
