loidea as a sister-group to the Papilionoidea
and Hesperoidea, it is possible that Vogel’s
organ is a degenerate ‘bat detector’. Our
discovery may help to bring to light the evo-
lutionary origin of this group of butterflies.
Jayne E. Yack*, James H. Fullard†
*Department of Biology and College of Natural
Sciences, Carleton University, 
Ottawa, Ontario K1S 5B6, Canada
†Department of Zoology and Erindale College,
University of Toronto, Mississauga, 
Ontario L5L 1C6, Canada
e-mail: jyack@ccs.carleton.ca
1. Fullard, J. H. in Comparative Hearing: Insects (eds Hoy, R. R.,
Popper, A. N. & Fay, R. R.) 279–326 (Springer, New York, 1998).
2. Conner, W. E. J. Exp. Biol. 202, 1711–1723 (1999).
3. Silberglied, R. E. in The Biology of Butterflies (eds Vane-Wright,
R. I. & Ackery, P. R.) 207–223 (Academic, London, 1984).
4. Yack, J. E. & Fullard, J. H. Ann. Entomol. Soc. Am. 86, 677–682
(1993).
5. Ribaric, D. & Gogala, M. Acta Entomol. Slov. 4, 5–12 (1996).
6. Scoble, M. J. Bull. Br. Mus. Nat. Hist. (Entomol.) 53, 251–286
(1986).
7. Scoble, M. J. & Aiello, A. J. Nat. Hist. 24, 159–164 (1990).
8. Jacobs, K., Otte, B. & Lakes-Harlan, R. J. Exp. Zool. 283,
270–285 (1999).
9. Hoy, R. R., Nolen, T. & Brodfuehrer, P. J. Exp. Biol. 146,
287–306 (1989).
10.Kristensen, N. P. & Skalski, A. W. in Handbook of Zoology,
Arthropoda: Insecta, Part 35, Vol. 1, Lepidoptera: Moths and
Butterflies (ed. Kristensen, N. P.) 7–25 (de Gruyter, Berlin, 1998).
11.Novacek, M. J. Nature 315, 140–141 (1985).
12.Vogel, R. Z. Wiss. Zool. 100, 210–244 (1912).
13.Otero, L. D. Bol. Entomol. Venez. 5, 128–138 (1990).
decagonal symmetry for the entire cluster
(Fig. 1a) which enables the decagons to
have identical subtiles, as suggested by the
Gummelt coverage model, ensuring that the
overlap rules required by this model are
satisfied. 
However, it is hard to see how a struc-
ture with such extensive broken symmetry
can be energetically stable. Figure 1b shows
a typical Z-contrast image of clusters that
do not have strong broken symmetry. In a
Z-contrast image, the intensity is directly
correlated with the mean-square atomic
number (Z), so that transition metal (TM)
columns are seen with much higher inten-
sity than Al columns.
The superimposition in Fig. 1c shows
that the structure of the decagon proposed
by Steinhardt et al. does not match our Z-
contrast image in significant ways: the four
proposed TM columns causing the broken
symmetry are definitely absent from our
image. In addition, our image reveals the
presence of ten closely spaced TM column
pairs in the outermost ring of the cluster, as
indicated by double blue arrows in Fig. 1b.
These are only single TM columns in the
model of Steinhardt et al. 
Turning to the central ring, our image
clearly shows its underlying ten-fold sym-
metry. It is seen as a ring, with an intensity
varying between that of an Al column (red)
and a TM column (yellow). This is incon-
sistent with Steinhardt et al.’s triangular
arrangement. This intensity pattern shows
that there are ten closely spaced atomic
columns around the central ring with a
composition intermediate between that of
an Al column and a TM column. However,
there are many clusters with broken sym-
metry in the central ring. 
Figure 2 is a typical Z-contrast image of
such a cluster where the intensity in the
central ring shows broken decagonal sym-
metry. The intensity distribution shows that
266
NATURE | VOL 403 | 20 JANUARY 1999 | www.nature.com
principal obtectomeran groups originated
around the late Palaeocene epoch (~60 mil-
lion years ago)10, by which time microchi-
ropteran bats had evolved echolocation11.
We conclude that predation by bats imposed
a great selection pressure on the evolution of
ears in Lepidoptera.
Butterflies are the largest and most
diverse group of diurnal Lepidoptera, and
the selection pressures generally proposed
for their diurnality include various physio-
logical and ecological factors, but not selec-
tion pressure by bats. Given the significant
impact of bats on other obtectomeran taxa,
we suggest that diurnality in non-hedylid
butterflies was also an anti-bat strategy,
promoted by selection for individuals that
avoided bats by appearing during the day.
The butterfly, in effect, was therefore
‘invented’ by the bat.
Is the earless condition of other (non-
hedylid) butterflies primitive or secondarily
derived? Consider the Vogel’s organ, a
forewing structure of unknown function that
is distributed sporadically with varying
degrees of development among certain
Papilionoidea12,13. Our comparative anatomi-
cal studies show that the hedylid ear and
Vogel’s organ are homologous structures.
Given the current placement of the Hedy-
brief communications
Alloys
Atomic structure of the
quasicrystal Al72Ni20Co8
Steinhardt et al.1 reported experimental evi-
dence in support of the coverage model2–4
by presenting a structure for the high-per-
fection decagonal quasicrystal Al72Ni20Co8.
The coverage model describes the decagon-
al quasicrystals by a single type of tile, a
decagon, the basic 2-nm cluster of which is
allowed to overlap so as to cover the surface.
Although their Z-contrast image (also
referred to as a high-angle annular dark-
field image) supports the coverage model,
we find that the atomic structure they pro-
pose for the decagon has significant short-
comings which are inconsistent with our
Z-contrast images.
The correct atomic structure of the
decagon is critical to understanding how
and why quasicrystals form. We have inves-
tigated the same high-perfection decagonal
quasicrystal Al72Ni20Co8 (provided by A. P.
Tsai) by Z-contrast imaging, but at a higher
spatial resolution (~0.13 nm) than Stein-
hardt et al.1.
The main feature in the proposed struc-
ture of the decagon1 is the extensive broken
Figure 1 Comparison of the proposed “best-fit candidate model”1 for the 2-nm cluster of the high-perfection decagonal quasicrystal
Al72Ni20Co8 with our higher resolution Z-contrast image. a, The proposed model contains broken decagonal symmetry for the entire clus-
ter: see, for example, the four yellow columns indicated by green arrows. b, Z-contrast image of a 2-nm cluster of the same high-perfec-
tion decagonal quasicrystal Al72Ni20Co8 along the ten-fold axis. The bright yellow features show the locations of highest intensity
corresponding to high transition-metal (TM) occupancy. Al columns have lower intensity and are seen as red features: see, for example,
the ten red spokes around the central ring. These spokes connect the central ring to the ring of ten TM columns (yellow) and show the
basic ten-fold symmetry of the cluster. c, The model cluster of Steinhardt et al. superimposed on our Z-contrast image shows that their
four proposed TM columns indicated by green arrows are not present.
Figure 2 Cluster showing broken decagonal symmetry within the
central ring, but there are still ten columns present, five of which
have higher intensities (yellow), indicating high TM occupancy,
whereas the other five show high Al occupancy (red). One of the
five TM columns is a single column; the others form closely
spaced column pairs, very similar to those in the outer 2-nm ring. 
© 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd
there are still ten closely spaced columns at
the central ring, but now only five have
higher intensities indicating high TM occu-
pancy, whereas the intensity of the remain-
der is closer to that of an Al column. This
indicates that the broken symmetry at the
central ring is due to chemical ordering,
and that there are ten sites, but with differ-
ent TM and Al occupancies. This is also
inconsistent with the triangular arrange-
ment proposed by Steinhardt et al.
There are significant differences between
the structure model proposed by Stein-
hardt et al. and our atomic-resolution Z-
contrast image. Although these do not
invalidate the coverage picture, they do
prevent our understanding the formation of
quasicrystals.
We believe that the closely spaced col-
umn pairs in the central and outermost
rings that were not predicted by the struc-
ture model of Steinhardt et al. are the key to
understanding the formation of decagonal
quasicrystals. They not only show that the
structures of the decagonal quasicrystals
and their crystalline approximants are more
similar than Steinhardt et al. suppose, they
also highlight the critical differences. On
this basis, we have proposed a growth
mechanism5 that explains why these clusters
prefer to overlap and follow the Gummelt
coverage picture. Our growth model pre-
dicts that the overall structure will show
ideal quasicrystal tiling, in the Gummelt
coverage picture, when all clusters have
strong chemical ordering in the central
rings. If the clusters have no chemical
ordering, the model predicts a random
tiling. For real quasicrystals, their structure
might be a mixture of both cases.
Yanfa Yan*, Stephen J. Pennycook 
Solid State Division, 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory, 
Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA
*Present address: National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 80401, USA
e-mail: yanfa_yan@nrel.gov
1. Steinhardt, P. J. et al. Nature 396, 55–57 (1998); correction
Nature 399, 84 (1999).
2. Gummelt, P. Geometriae Dedicata 62, 1–17 (1996).
3. Steinhardt, P. J. & Jeong, H.-C. Nature 382, 433–435 (1996).
4. Jeong, H.-C. & Steinhardt, P. J. Phys. Rev. B 55, 3520–3532 (1997).
5. Yan, Y. & Pennycook, S. J. Mater. Sci. Eng. (in the press).
Steinhardt et al. reply — The purpose of our
Letter1 was to present experimental support
for the quasi-unit cell picture of quasicrys-
tals. This model proposes that the atomic
structure can be reduced to a single repeat-
ing cluster satisfying certain ‘overlap rules’
(sharing of atoms by neighbouring clus-
ters). We proposed that the quasicrystalline
phase of AlNiCo can be decomposed into a
repeating decagonal atom cluster (20 Å in
radius). Yan and Pennycook do not refute
the quasi-unit cell concept — they also pro-
pose a repeating cluster obeying the same
overlap rules. However, they propose a dif-
ferent atomic decoration for the repeating
cluster that is ten-fold symmetric, whereas
our decoration explicitly breaks ten-fold
symmetry. This is important because our
symmetry breaking corresponds precisely
to the symmetry breaking of the overlap
rules, and hence provides key evidence for
the quasi-unit cell picture.
Yan and Pennycook’s decoration is moti-
vated by their impressive high-angle annu-
lar dark-field (HAADF) imaging, obtained
with higher resolution than we had avail-
able. As they show, the imaging disagrees
with the sites of four columns of transition
metal (TM) atoms in our proposal (shown
by arrows in their Fig. 1). However, we find
that the problem can be resolved by a mod-
est rearrangement of the previous decora-
tion, switching 8 out of 100 atoms and
retaining the broken ten-fold symmetry.
The improved model in Fig. 1 has all the
same qualitative properties as the original
in ref. 1, matches the new HAADF (includ-
ing Yan and Pennycook’s Fig 2.) and even
more recent high-resolution transmission
electron microscopy (HRTEM) imaging,
and has a density and stoichiometry that fits
measured values to better than 2 per cent.
As more data become available (for
example, from X-ray diffraction), further
small refinements to our current best-fit
decoration may be required, but the ten-
fold symmetry breaking should remain as
an essential property. The broken symmetry
is necessary to explain three established fea-
tures of AlNiCo: the broken symmetry
consistently observed in through-focus
HRTEM imaging of the clusters2; the bro-
ken symmetry found within the central ring
of most clusters in HAADF imaging, such
as our Fig. 1 and Yan and Pennycook’s Fig. 2
(ref. 2) (the very rare, more symmetric
brief communications
NATURE | VOL 403 | 20 JANUARY 1999 | www.nature.com
267
rings, as shown in their Fig. 1, can be
explained as defects; ref. 2 and M. Widom,
personal communication); and the appar-
ent quasiperiodic correlation in the broken
symmetry direction on moving from cluster
to cluster in HAADF images (see Fig. 1 of
ref. 1), as is found for a configuration of
overlapping decagons.
None of the features can be explained by
symmetric clusters, even if chemical disor-
der is introduced to randomly break the
ten-fold symmetry. M. Widom and co-
workers (personal communication) have
completed a total-energy-based prediction
of the structure of AlNiCo, making no prior
assumption about the existence of repeating
20-Å clusters. Yet decagonal clusters with
broken ten-fold symmetry emerge as the
lowest-energy configuration with nearly
identical assignments of Al and TM posi-
tions, as in our improved model.
Paul J. Steinhardt*, H.-C. Jeong†, 
K. Saitoh‡, M. Tanaka‡, E. Abe§, 
A. P. Tsai§
*Department of Physics, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA
†Department of Physics, Sejong University,
Kwangjin, Seoul 143-747, Korea
‡Research Institute for Scientific Measurements,
Tohoku University, 2-1-1 Katahira, 
Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8577, Japan
§National Research Institute for Metals, 
1-2-1 Sengen, Tsukuba, 
Ibaraki 305-0047, Japan
1. Steinhardt, P. J. et al. Nature 396, 55–57 (1998); correction
Nature 399, 84 (1999).
2. Abe, E. et al. http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/cond-mat/9907160
Figure 1 Improved decoration of the quasi-unit cell for AlNiCo
compared to lattice image. Problematic TM sites in our earlier
model1 have been removed. The figure includes atoms added by
overlap of neighbour clusters; these lead to the formation of
neighbour TM column pairs, as seen near the centre. Large cir-
cles represent Ni (red) or Co (purple) and small circles represent
Al. Solid circles represent c40 and open circles represent 
c41/2 along the periodic c-axis.
Biological rhythms
Circadian clocks 
limited by noise
Circadian rhythms, which provide internal
daily periodicity, are used by a wide range
of organisms to anticipate daily changes in
the environment1. It seems that these
organisms generate circadian periodicity by
similar biochemical networks within a sin-
gle cell2. A model based on the common
features of these biochemical networks
shows that a circadian network can oscillate
reliably in the presence of stochastic bio-
chemical noise and when cellular condi-
tions are altered. We propose that the ability
to resist such perturbations imposes strict
constraints on the oscillation mechanisms
underlying circadian periodicity in vivo.
There is evidence that clock networks
share common features in a wide range of
organisms, from cyanobacteria to mam-
mals2. For instance, all networks seem to
include an interaction between two types of
component (Fig. 1a): positive elements (or
activators, such as KaiA in Synechococcus,
Wc1-2 in Neurospora, Clc and Cyc in
© 2000 Macmillan Magazines Ltd
