PROGRESS ARTICLE
nature materials | VOL 3 | NOVEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/naturematerials 
759
Quasicrystals as cluster aggregates
Quasicrystals are solids that exhibit symmetries long thought forbidden in nature. Since their discovery 
in a rapidly solidiﬁ ed Al–Mn alloy in 1984, the central issue in the ﬁ eld has been to understand why they 
form. Are they energetically stable compounds or stabilized by entropy? In recent years, major strides 
have been made in determining atomic structure, largely by direct imaging using advanced electron 
microscopy. One system is now known to be energetically stabilized, and quasicrystals are therefore 
ﬁ rmly established as a new physical state of matter. They represent a unique packing of atomic 
clusters some tens of atoms in size, with substantial localized ﬂ uctuations, referred to as phasons. 
Understanding phasons may in future allow their unique macroscopic properties to be tailored for 
useful materials applications.
EIJI ABE1*, YANFA YAN2 AND 
STEPHEN J. PENNYCOOK3*
1National Institute for Materials Science, 1-2-1 Sengen, 
Tsukuba 305-0047, Japan.
2National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, Colorado 
80401, USA.
3Condensed Matter Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National 
Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA.
*e-mail: abe.eiji@nims.go.jp; pennycooksj@ornl.gov
Quasicrystals are aperiodic solids that exhibit rotational 
symmetries incompatible with conventional periodic 
lattice order, for example, icosahedral symmetry in 
three dimensions and tenfold symmetry in the plane. 
The ﬁ rst example1 was obtained as a metastable 
icosahedral conﬁ guration in a rapidly solidiﬁ ed 
Al–Mn alloy (Fig. 1a). Soon after this discovery, 
thermodynamically stable quasicrystals were found 
in several other alloys2–4. At present both metastable 
and stable quasicrystalline phases can be formed in 
a variety of metallic alloys5, and certain stable phases 
can be grown into a single grain several millimetres 
(Fig. 1b) or even centimetres in size. It would appear 
obvious, therefore, that quasicrystals can represent a 
free-energy minimum state at a given temperature. 
Such highly perfect quasicrystalline materials exhibit 
a striking diffraction pattern (see Fig. 2); namely, 
(i) a large number of diffraction peaks, (ii) peak 
sharpness comparable to that from nearly perfect 
crystals such as silicon, and (iii) all peaks are 
located at their ideal positions, consistent with 
the quasicrystalline symmetry within the limits of 
instrumental resolution.
These diffraction features, in particular the sharp 
diffraction peaks (represented by delta-functions) 
that had been believed to be possible only for periodic 
crystals, can no longer be explained with the model 
structures discussed in early times. Representative early 
0.1   m
µ
1 mm
a
b
Figure 1 Morphologies 
of faceted single grains of 
icosahedral quasicrystals. 
a, Scanning electron 
microscope image of 
icosahedral-symmetry grains 
formed in a rapidly solidiﬁ ed 
Al-6at.%Mn alloy (courtesy 
of An-Pang Tsai, unpublished 
results). b, Optical micrograph 
of a large dodecahedral grain 
of Zn56.8Mg34.6Ho8.7 quasicrystal 
successfully grown from the 
melt via a slow-cooling method 
(courtesy of Ian Fisher & 
Paul Canﬁ eld63).
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group
PROGRESS ARTICLE
760 
nature materials | VOL 3 | NOVEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
models are an icosahedral glass model6 that assumes 
only a short-range icosahedral order distributed 
randomly to form the solid, and the so-called Pauling’s 
model7 that uses multiply twinned conﬁ gurations 
of giant cubic crystals to generate a pseudo-ﬁ vefold 
symmetry pattern. Nowadays we interpret this 
interesting long-range order as true quasiperiodicity8, 
which is not a simple periodic arrangement of a unit 
cell as a normal crystal, but instead is composed of 
an array of two length-scales as represented by the 
Fibonacci sequence (Fig. 3). This is a precisely deﬁ ned 
sequence that is able to generate the delta-function 
diffraction peaks and account for the experimental 
observations. In time, this revolutionary discovery 
led to a redeﬁ nition of the term ‘crystal’ to mean any 
solid giving essentially discrete diffraction peaks, as 
declared by the International Union of Crystallography 
in 1991. Microscopic unit cells that repeat periodically 
are not necessary any longer for a material to be 
called a crystal, and within the family of crystals we 
now distinguish between periodic and aperiodic 
(incommensurate) solids based on their diffraction 
features. The term quasicrystal is a short form for 
‘quasiperiodic crystal’, and never means an imperfect, 
pseudo-crystal as one might guess from the expression. 
Rather, quasiperiodicity represents just as rigorous 
an ordering as periodic order, even though in many 
systems the rules for deﬁ ning the ordering remain to 
be discovered9. In any case, it is important to recognize 
that quasicrystals indeed represent a well-ordered 
condensed state of matter that has been generally 
accepted as a new form of solid; a third phase following 
the classical crystalline (periodic) 
and amorphous (random) solids.
“Where are the atoms?” This has been the 
fundamental key question since it was used as the 
title of an early article10. It is important from the 
perspective of basic physics, but also if the unique 
physical properties of quasicrystals are ever to be 
understood and controlled to provide new materials 
with useful properties, as has long been the case with 
crystalline and amorphous materials. We describe 
quasicrystal structure based on a quasiperiodic lattice 
(quasilattice), which is constructed by a set of two or 
more unit cells, and a proper atomic decoration of it. 
Diffraction intensity calculations of any quasicrystal 
model structures are carried out in the framework 
of hyperspace crystallography11,12, a mathematical 
recipe that treats a quasicrystal as a periodic 
structure embedded in a hyperspace (for example, 
a cubic lattice deﬁ ned in six dimensions generates 
the icosahedral quasilattice in three dimensions; 
an example of generation of a one-dimensional 
quasiperiodic order from a two-dimensional square 
lattice is shown in Fig. 3). As an effective guide for 
local atomic decorations, though Pauling’s model7 
was found to be invalid, the giant cubic crystals he 
used have signiﬁ cant implications. One commonly 
ﬁ nds multiple-shell icosahededral atomic clusters 
in many of the giant crystals (Fig. 4) that occur near 
to compositions known to form quasicrystals13–15, 
prompting the idea that these clusters are also the 
building blocks of quasicrystal structures. In this 
sense, quasicrystals can be viewed as the consequence 
of linking the basic clusters in a quasiperiodic way 
— a quasicrystalline cluster aggregate16. This concept 
is supported by hyperspace crystallography that 
clearly correlates such cubic crystals as a variant 
structure of quasicrystals13.
But, unlike the structure determination of crystals, 
in the case of quasicrystals a unique structural 
solution cannot be easily obtained solely based on 
the standard X-ray diffraction experiments. This is 
due to the local isomorphic nature of a quasilattice8. 
To illustrate this feature of a quasicrystal, consider 
the one-dimensional quasiperiodic lattice in Fig. 3; 
several quasiperiodic arrangements of S and L can 
be generated when the square lattice is uniformly 
translated along the E⊥ direction, and they are locally 
isomorphic to the original. Each gives rise to identical 
diffraction intensity distributions17. That is, multiple 
structural solutions — arrangements of clusters 
— intrinsically occur from the diffraction data. 
Atomic-resolution electron microscope images are 
unique in this regard, as they directly represent the 
local atomic structure and can therefore investigate 
details of the cluster packing and relevant local 
atomic conﬁ gurations. Electron diffraction is also 
available to probe the average features seen in an 
image, in a comparable manner to X-ray diffraction. 
The picture that is emerging from these studies 
supports the picture of a quasicrystal as a cluster 
aggregate: a quasilattice successfully decorated by 
atomic clusters that have the same point symmetry 
of the quasicrystals.
Nevertheless, there is still signiﬁ cant information 
lacking concerning the local packing of the clusters. 
In real quasicrystalline material, are the clusters always 
placed at the ideal quasiperiodic positions? What types 
of characteristic disorder (defects) do they possess? 
These local structure issues are especially important 
for quasicrystals, because they have direct inﬂ uence 
on physical properties such as conductivity, and also 
on their thermodynamic stability, which in turn is 
important for understanding why quasicrystals form. 
Yet these issues have not been clariﬁ ed sufﬁ ciently 
because of experimental limitations of standard X-ray 
techniques and conventional high-resolution electron 
microscopy. Below we describe some recent insights 
made into these critical issues, which have been 
Figure 2 Electron diffraction 
patterns taken along the 
tenfold symmetry axis of 
the Al72Ni20Co8 decagonal 
quasicrystal, one of the best 
quasiperiodic ordered materials 
available today.
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group
 PROGRESS ARTICLE
nature materials | VOL 3 | NOVEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/naturematerials 
761
provided through direct structural observations by 
advanced transmission electron microscopy.
CLUSTER PACKING AND STABILTY OF QUASICRYSTALS
Decagonal quasicrystals18 are the planar realization of 
a quasiperiodic order, whose structure is described 
as a periodic stack of quasiperiodic layers and is 
composed of decagonal columnar clusters as a 
building unit. Because of their two-dimensional 
character, quasiperiodic planar arrangements of atoms 
can be directly addressed through high-resolution 
electron microscope observations viewing along the 
tenfold-symmetry axis. Individual decagonal clusters 
appear as decagons in the projected images, so that 
their packing, or tiling, may be directly observed19. 
(Note that for icosahedral quasicrystals, the atomic 
images are the projections of three-dimensional 
quasiperiodic structures so that individual icosahedral 
clusters cannot be distinguished; see ref. 20, for 
example). Previous observations, mostly made on 
Al–transition metal decagonal alloys, provided 
evidence that their structures are quasiperiodic 
arrangements of the decagonal tiles. All models 
assumed either tenfold or ﬁ vefold symmetric atomic 
conﬁ gurations within the clusters; typical and well-
known examples are the large decagonal clusters with 
a diameter of 2 nm, commonly found in Al-Ni-Co, 
Al-Cu-Co and Al-Pd-Mn decagonal alloys19,21,22. 
These cluster symmetries, in particular the tenfold 
rotation axis, originated not from conﬁ dent 
experimental evidence, but rather from the notion 
that the symmetry of every component cluster 
should directly reﬂ ect the entire symmetry seen 
in the diffraction pattern, in other words, that the 
microscopic and macroscopic symmetry should be 
the same, similar to the unit cell concept for a regular 
crystal. Hence there still remained ambiguities in terms 
of detailed atomic distributions within the clusters.
Some decagonal quasicrystalline samples were 
found to have a cluster arrangement similar to a 
Penrose pattern23, a planar tiling composed of two 
different tiles with matching rules. The matching 
rule is a strict mathematical rule that forces the tiles 
to join uniquely into a perfect quasiperiodic pattern; 
however, such a rule is purely mathematical and does 
not provide any physical insight on why the atoms 
should favour such a complicated structure. It cannot 
explain how quasicrystals arise as a minimum free-
energy state against competing periodic crystals. 
As an alternative to the two-tile Penrose tiling (or 
its subset tiling composed of multiple shapes of 
tiles), Burkov24 described the quasiperiodic pattern 
in a broader sense that discards the matching rule, 
describing the model structure of Al-Cu-Co as a 
random packing of decagon clusters having tenfold 
symmetry. The clusters are allowed to overlap with 
their neighbours, in the sense that they partially share 
atoms with neighbouring clusters. In random packing, 
there are no rules that force the clusters into a unique 
arrangement, and hence many possible conﬁ gurations 
appear due to a large degree of freedom on how to 
join or overlap the neighbour decagons — many 
degenerate ways of packing are an unavoidable 
consequence of this model. This idea, in turn, suggests 
that conﬁ gurational entropy might be an important 
factor causing quasicrystals to be more stable than 
crystals. The so-called random tiling model would 
give signiﬁ cant contributions of conﬁ gurational 
entropy25, and seems to be consistent with the fact that 
the stable quasicrystalline phases discovered so far 
occur only at high temperatures5, and most transform 
into periodic structures at lower temperatures. 
In the random-packing picture, resultant structures 
should appear to have a considerable amount of 
chemical disorder — most atomic sites are mixed 
with constituent atoms. Atomic disorder is, of course, 
another contribution to conﬁ gurational entropy26.
More recently, however, a striking feature of 
cluster packing has become apparent through 
investigations of a decagonal Al72Ni20Co8 (so-called 
Ni-rich Al-Ni-Co phase5,27). This material exhibits 
the highest quasicrystalline structural perfection 
available today, as conﬁ rmed from microscopic26 to 
macroscopic scales28, and therefore is an excellent 
candidate to investigate the intrinsic features of a 
quasiperiodic structure. The insights have come 
from the use of Z-contrast scanning transmission 
electron microscopy29,30, an alternative to classical 
high-resolution phase-contrast transmission electron 
microscopy (see Box 1); the ﬁ rst application of the 
technique to the quasicrystal31–33 provided immediate 
insights into the veiled structural details. The ﬁ rst 
signiﬁ cant breakthrough to emerge is a breaking of 
the tenfold symmetry within the 2 nm decagonal 
cluster, see Fig. 5a. The brightest spots in the Z-
contrast image represent atomic columns of Ni or 
Co (Ni and Co are neighbouring elements in the 
periodic table and are not distinguishable). In the 
cluster centre they are clearly not arranged in a tenfold 
form, but appear to show only mirror symmetry. 
Moreover, such local broken symmetries in every 
decagon are found to be not in random orientations 
but in accord with a perfect quaisperiodic pattern33. 
The pattern can be well represented by the novel 
form of decagon packing proposed by Gummelt34 
L
L
S
S
S
L
L
L
L
L
S
L
⊥
E
E
||
Figure 3 Generation of 1D 
quasiperiodic order from a 2D 
square lattice. The slope of 
the square lattice with respect 
to the E// direction is –1/τ, 
where τ is an irrational number 
(= (1+√5)/2) known as the 
golden mean. By projecting 
the 2D lattice points (open 
circles) contained within an 
acceptance window bound 
by the red lines along the E⊥ 
direction, a 1D quasiperiodic 
lattice (ﬁ lled circles) is obtained 
along the E// direction. This 
is a Fibonacci sequence of 
the two length-scales L and 
S. Translation of the lattice 
along E// corresponds to spatial 
translation of the quasicrystal, 
distortion along E// corresponds 
to a phonon. Translation along 
the E⊥ direction causes some 
external lattice points to move 
into the acceptance window 
and some of the original points 
to move outside the window. 
As an example, if the blue 
lattice point comes into the 
window a new local sequence 
LSL (blue) is generated instead 
of the original LLS sequence. 
This is a phason ﬂ ip, a special 
kind of diffusive motion that 
is speciﬁ c to a quasicrystal; 
details are described in the text.
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group
PROGRESS ARTICLE
762 
nature materials | VOL 3 | NOVEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
This technique provides atomic-resolution images by effectively illuminating each atomic column one-by-one as a finely 
focused electron probe (< ~2 Å) scans across the specimen, generating an intensity map at the annular detector (Fig. B1). 
The atomic images may, to a good approximation, be interpreted assuming independent scattering from individual 
atomic columns, and hence the observed intensity distribution (I(R)) can be simply described by a convolution between 
a probe-intensity function (P(R)) and a scattering object function (O(R)) (the mathematical definition of incoherent 
imaging30);
 
I (R) = O(R) ⊗ P (R)   
 
 
 
(1)
Here, O(R) represents the columnar scattering cross-section that contributes to the annular detector. By detecting high-
angle scattering (s > ~1Å–1), the intensity at the detector is dominated by phonon scattering events; that is, thermal diffuse 
scattering (TDS). An Einstein model of independently vibrating atoms is usually sufficient to describe the multiphonon 
contribution that dominates high-angle diffuse scattering and to estimate the integrated intensity reaching the detector. 
Therefore, the intensity of each illuminated atomic column will be directly related to the TDS cross-section (σTDS), which 
is given by integrating an absorptive form factor65 (f΄HA (M,s)) over the angular range of the detector30:
 
f΄HA(M,s) ≈ σTDS ∝ ∫detector f 2(s)[1–exp(–2Ms2)]d2s 
 
(2)
where the f(s) is the atomic form factor for elastic scatterings (with s = θ/2λ, θ is a scattering angle, λ is the electron 
wave-length) and M is the Debye–Waller factor defined by mean-square thermal vibration amplitude of the atoms. 
Because σTDS is proportional to the square of f(s) (equation (2)), ADF-STEM provides a significant atomic-number-
dependent contrast29 (Z-contrast). Furthermore, σTDS is a function of M (see the upper-right hand side of Fig. B1), and 
hence the ADF-contrast is also sensitive to the Debye–Waller factors54 at individual atomic sites (columns).
Box 1: Annular-dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy 
(ADF-STEM).
Convergent electron beam
Scanning
Intensity (arb.units)
Angular distributions of
thermal diffuse scattering
M
1.0
2.0
0
s (   –1)
Å
M = 0 0.25 0.5
1.0
1.5
Annular detector
Intensity mapping
 at  the detector
~1.4 Å
Figure B1 Schematic drawing of atomic-resolution ADF-STEM. The resolution is primarily determined by the size of the convergent 
electron beam. The intensity of electrons reaching the annular detector (f΄HA (M,s), given in equation (2)) is dominated by TDS, and 
depends strongly on Z. The angular distribution depends on the M values; M-dependent changes of f΄HA (M,s)65 are shown for an 
aluminium atom.
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group
 PROGRESS ARTICLE
nature materials | VOL 3 | NOVEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/naturematerials 
763
(Fig. 5b). In Gummelt’s construction plan, decagons 
are not tenfold symmetric, and they overlap with 
their neighbours according to the well-deﬁ ned 
rule (overlap rule) that is equivalent to the Penrose 
matching rule, and forces the decagons into a perfect 
quasiperiodic arrangement.
This remarkable mathematical proof at last 
has led to a physically plausible picture for the 
origin of quasicrystals. A subsequent but important 
proof by Steinhardt and Jeong35 has shown that the 
overlap rule realizes the condition that the density 
of the decagons is maximized. Suppose the atomic 
conﬁ guration within a decagon, that is, the atomic 
cluster in the form of Gummelt’s decagon33,36, is 
energetically favoured. Then, quasicrystals occur as a 
consequence of simple energetics, following ‘density 
maximization of energy minimized clusters’. 
The fact that the Al72Ni20Co8 structure appears to 
be the realization of a unique packing of symmetry-
breaking clusters (Gummelt’s decagon) therefore 
suggests that the phase is dominantly stabilized by 
energy; if there were signiﬁ cant entropy contributions, 
a considerable amount of random structural disorder 
or deviations from an ideal tiling would be observed. 
Symmetry-breaking atomic decorations on the 2 nm 
decagonal cluster of the Al72Ni20Co8 in fact provide a 
remarkably better ﬁ t to electron microscope images on 
some details, such as triangular arrangements of 
Al atoms36 around the cluster centre and closely spaced 
(~0.13 nm) pairs of transition metal atoms32, which did 
not exist in any previous tenfold symmetric models.
Strong supporting evidence on the cluster 
stability comes from a ﬁ rst-principles total energy 
calculation37,38, which demonstrates that the symmetry-
breaking cluster is energetically more favoured than 
any symmetric-based models. Shown in Fig. 5c are 
three representative cluster models37 for three different 
symmetries; mirror symmetry, ﬁ vefold rotation 
symmetry and tenfold rotation symmetry (in the 
calculations, Ni atoms were used for all transition 
metal atoms). Note that the three structures in the 
calculations have the same unit-cell dimension and 
the same number of each atom species, so that their 
total energies can be directly compared. We ﬁ nd 
that the structure with broken symmetry, the mirror 
symmetry, has the lowest energy, about 12 eV per unit 
cell lower than the structure with tenfold symmetry, 
and 5 eV per unit cell lower than the structure with 
ﬁ vefold symmetry. This is clear evidence that the 
symmetry-breaking cluster is energetically more 
favoured than any symmetric cluster. Remember that 
most of the decagons identiﬁ ed in Fig. 5a reveal the 
symmetry-breaking feature; the broken symmetry 
provides an atomistic explanation for Gummelt’s 
overlap rule and gives insight at a fundamental level 
into why these decagonal clusters would form a 
perfect quasiperiodic arrangement, even though the 
detailed atomic conﬁ gurations in each cluster slightly 
differ depending on their local environments36.
Al72Ni20Co8 has turned out to be a quasiperiodic 
intermetallic compound with nearly perfect 
atomic order — it is deﬁ nitely not comparable to 
order–disorder type alloys, which take the form of 
a disordered solid solution at high temperature to 
account for signiﬁ cant entropy contributions. 
Good chemical order between the Al and transition 
metal, directly observed in the Z-contrast images, 
seems to be consistent with the fact that the 
present highly perfect Al-Ni-Co structure occurs 
only for a narrow composition range, within a 
few atomic percent for both the Al and transition 
metal contents39. If the structure could tolerate a 
considerable amount of chemical disorder, essential 
for a random-packing model, then the single-phase 
region would extend to a much wider composition 
range at high temperatures — this is evidently not 
the case. In this sense, the Al72Ni20Co8 compound is 
close to its ideal stoichiometry, being tuned in favour 
of structural energy. This may well be explained by 
optimized average valence electron concentration 
per atom (e/a)5, which is known as Hume–Rothery’s 
empirical rule40 that concerns structural stability of 
ordered alloys in terms of Brillouin-zone/Fermi-
surface interactions. When the composition deviates 
from the ideal stoichiometry, Al-Ni-Co alloys form 
several types of less-ordered quasicrystalline phases5,41 
with diffraction patterns that show a strong diffuse 
background and broadened Bragg peaks — direct 
signs of signiﬁ cant disorder. For such disordered 
quasicrystals, their average structures may be 
well described by random packing of clusters20. 
The apparent high symmetry of these patterns is 
then a result of averaging over the local random 
disorder. Structural variations of the basic cluster 
(at some conditions, ﬁ vefold symmetric decagonal 
clusters occur for the decagonal Al-Ni-Co alloys42) 
will then simply depend on the alloy composition and 
annealing temperature, in the same way as ordinary 
crystalline alloys behave, and can be depicted through 
equilibrium phase diagrams. Nevertheless, we now 
Multiple-shell icosahedral atomic cluster
+
+
Figure 4 Atomic conﬁ gurations 
commonly found in Cd6X 
intermetallic compounds. 
X = Ca, Sr, Y and most of 
the rare-earth elements. 
The structure is a typical 
example of a giant cubic crystal 
constructed by a body-centred-
cubic type packing of large 
icosahedral atomic clusters. 
These clusters are believed to 
be a building block of Cd5.7X 
(X = Ca and Yb) icosahedral 
quasicrystal structures64.
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group
PROGRESS ARTICLE
764 
nature materials | VOL 3 | NOVEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
see that the best quasicrystalline sample appears to be 
a highly ordered intermetallic compound with only 
a minimal amount of disorder on the atomic scale, 
within the resolution limit of the STEM imaging 
~0.1 nm. The fundamental reason for the existence of 
such well-ordered quasicrystals is that their structure 
is energetically favoured. Only rarely do practical 
experimental conditions allow the perfect structure to 
be realized, and therefore most quasicrystalline phases 
do not reach that degree of perfection. The situation 
seems to be quite analogous to that of normal crystals; 
that is, highly perfect, almost defect-free single crystals 
can only be grown for a limited range of materials 
under carefully controlled conditions.
LOCALIZED BEHAVIOUR IN CLUSTER COMPOUNDS
Clusters outlined by high-symmetry polyhedra are a 
good representation of short-range atomic order in 
quasicrystals, and are also found in some crystalline 
compounds with giant unit cells. In this section, 
we brieﬂ y describe how these clusters not only 
provide effective motifs to represent the geometrical 
substructure of quasicrystals or giant crystals, but they 
also deﬁ ne the length scales of characteristic localized 
ﬂ uctuations, which in turn have a critical effect on the 
conduction properties. In the case of quasicrystals, 
these localized ﬂ uctuations may be described in terms 
of phason43–45 ﬂ uctuations speciﬁ c to quasiperiodic 
order, as will be demonstrated below. But the 
concept of a localized ﬂ uctuation has a more general 
importance to a broad class of structurally complex 
systems, in which the cluster substructure essentially 
dominates their major physical properties46.
Even though the best quasicrystalline materials 
show delta-function-like diffraction peaks, sharp 
enough to compare with the best crystals, we may 
still expect substantial diffuse scattering to originate 
from phason-related ﬂ uctuations or disorders47–50. 
Here, a phason43–45 is a unique elastic degree of 
freedom that arises as a consequence of deﬁ ning 
the quasicrystal through an n-dimensional 
hyperspace lattice (n > 4); see Fig. 3. Suppose that the 
square lattice (hypercrystal) is elastically excited to 
give a non-uniform translation of the lattice points. 
Along the E// direction it corresponds to phonons as 
in the normal crystals, whereas along the E⊥ direction 
it gives rise to an extra degree of freedom, phasons, 
that occur only for quasiperiodic structures. Locally, 
phason excitations may turn out to switch S and L at 
some places, which, in the example illustrated in 
Fig. 3, ﬂ ips a sequence LLS into the sequence LSL. 
In the real quasicrystal structure, primary phason 
effects are often manifested as ﬂ uctuations or 
occupational disorders at pairs of atomic sites that are 
separated by less than a typical interatomic distance51. 
These closely spaced sites are termed phason-ﬂ ip sites, 
where, due to simple geometrical constraints, one site 
should be vacant when the other is occupied; the atom 
may be hopping51 between them. Therefore, within 
this context, the lattice dynamics of quasicrystals can 
be described by a combination of lattice vibrations 
(phonons) and atomic ﬂ uctuations or jumps 
(phasons). When these local atomic ﬂ uctuations show 
long-range correlations, phason dynamics modes 
may be characterized by long wavelengths of the 
order of ~100 nm (ref. 52) and slow relaxation times, 
several tens of seconds52,53 due to the diffusive nature 
of a phason excitation44. Here we describe only local 
behaviour. Atomic ﬂ uctuations at such local phason-
ﬂ ip sites do not destroy the long-range quasiperiodic 
order, but instead give rise to signiﬁ cant diffuse 
scattering in the same manner as thermal vibrations50.
Thermal diffuse scattering (TDS) is described 
by the mean-square thermal vibration amplitude of 
the atom (Debye–Waller factor), see equation (2) in 
Box 1. Having in mind that the high-angle annular 
detector mainly captures TDS30, annular-dark-ﬁ eld 
scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-
STEM) is able to detect any local thermal vibration 
anomaly through investigations of the image intensity 
with variations in temperature and/or detector angle 
range54. For the highly perfect decagonal Al72Ni20Co8, 
signiﬁ cant local ﬂ uctuations are in fact observed as 
an anomalously large Debye–Waller factor at speciﬁ c 
Al sites. The anomalous sites are located around 
the core of the 2 nm decagonal clusters and can be 
represented by a pentagonal quasiperiodic tiling 
with an edge length of 2 nm (Fig. 5d)54 — the same 
length scale as that of the basic cluster. These localized 
ﬂ uctuations can be reasonably interpreted as phason 
ﬂ uctuations54; that is, the observed Al sites are the 
most likely to ﬂ uctuate due to their phason degree of 
freedom, predicted by the hyperspace description55,56 
of the decagonal Al72Ni20Co8 structure. Though it is 
beyond the capability of STEM experiments, further 
investigations on correlated motion of these Al atoms 
may be an important key to understand the phason 
dynamics modes truly typical of quasiperiodic order. 
Preliminary X-ray diffraction studies on the same 
Al72Ni20Co8 have conﬁ rmed signiﬁ cant attenuation 
of Bragg intensities at high temperature, a direct sign 
of an anomalously large Debye–Waller factor that 
goes on even at a macroscopic scale57.
Apart from the phason-related ﬂ uctuations 
described above, similar localized atomic behaviour 
is also found in some crystalline metallic solids such 
as skutterudite58 or clathrate59 compounds, which are 
well known candidates as thermoelectric materials. 
Low thermal conductivities combined with reasonably 
good metallic electric conductivities are necessary 
demands to obtain better thermoelectric properties. 
In the above compounds, it is known that there 
indeed exist localized, anharmonic vibrational 
modes58, which are attributed to the ‘rattling’ 
behaviour59 of atoms that are weakly bound and 
located within the core of open-structured atomic 
cages (namely, the atomic polyhedra such as 
represented in Fig. 4). The rattling behaviour is 
believed to be responsible for the drastic reduction of 
thermal conductivity in these materials, by providing 
local scattering points that effectively suppress 
long-range phonon propagation. A similar effect 
occurs with the phasonic atomic ﬂ uctuations in the 
quasicrystalline compounds. In fact, some of the 
Al-transition metal quasicrystals and related giant 
crystals composed of the large clusters (~2 nm) show 
conducting properties that make them attractive 
as thermoelectric materials60,61, although their 
performance is still not beyond those of the 
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group
 PROGRESS ARTICLE
nature materials | VOL 3 | NOVEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/naturematerials 
765
existing materials. Within the multiple-shell clusters 
in quasicrystalline and related crystalline compounds, 
the outer atomic shells are rather robust, but the 
atomic conﬁ gurations around the core may easily 
show structural frustration: many possible sites with 
only a fraction that can be occupied causes signiﬁ cant 
ﬂ uctuation or disorder. A good example of this 
description can be found in the Cd-rare-earth giant 
cubic compounds, in which only the core atoms in 
the icosahedral clusters are arranged in a signiﬁ cantly 
disordered manner62. An important and encouraging 
implication of this cluster-based notion is that we 
may be able to tune the balance between electrical 
and thermal conductivities if we can control localized 
ﬂ uctuations, perhaps by designing new cluster 
structures in either quasiperiodic or periodic forms.
In a general sense, we expect localization 
phenomena in solids at any disordered or defected 
area. For the simple close-packed metallic solids such 
as face-centred-cubic or hexagonal-close-packed 
structures, occurrence of such structural disorder 
is basically random, even if the defect density is 
artiﬁ cially enhanced by some processing method. 
The most exciting and potentially useful aspect of 
2 nm
2 nm
b
a
c
d
Mirror symmetry
Tenfold rotation symmetry
Fivefold rotation symmetry
2 nm
Figure 5 Atomic-resolution 
ADF-STEM images of 
decagonal Al72Ni20Co8 with 
cluster models. a, A decagonal 
cluster with a diameter 
of about 2 nm (ref. 32). 
Tenfold-symmetry-breaking 
arrangements of the bright 
spots are in good accordance 
with Gummelt’s prototype 
decagon (blue). b, Superposing 
the decagon covering pattern 
over the image33. c, Structural 
models of the decagonal 
cluster for three different 
symmetries37. Red spheres 
indicate Al atoms, blue spheres 
indicate transition metal atoms. 
d, Signiﬁ cant ADF-contrast 
due to a local anomaly of the 
Debye–Waller factor emerges 
around the core of the clusters 
(red), during in situ high-
temperature observation at 
1,100 K (ref. 54). Occurrence 
of such localized ﬂ uctuations 
can be well represented by the 
pentagonal quasiperiodic tiling 
(yellow) with an edge length 
of 2 nm.
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group
PROGRESS ARTICLE
766 
nature materials | VOL 3 | NOVEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/naturematerials
complex metallic structures46, including quasicrystals 
and giant unit-cell crystals, is that localized 
ﬂ uctuations or disorder is intrinsically involved in the 
structure in many cases. These localized sites can be 
reasonably represented by the cluster substructure. 
Although there is no available example at the 
moment, the effective use of such a dense, three-
dimensional ‘ordered’ array of disordered parts in the 
structure, may in the future lead to the development 
of new functional compounds. For example, such sites 
could be used as a template to substitute additional 
atoms not originally part of the crystal or quasicrystal 
structure, and impart new electrical, thermal or 
magnetic properties.
SUMMARY
The discovery of quasicrystals has provided a 
paradigm shift in solid-state physics because it had 
long been assumed, though never strictly proven, that 
the best and most stable long-range order should be 
realized in the form of a periodic solid constructed by 
regularly repeating unit cells. Quasicrystals are now 
established as a second well-ordered form of solids, 
and in fact the best quasicrystalline materials available 
today possess a highly perfect long-range order that 
is comparable with the best available crystalline 
materials, if ‘order’ is judged by the sharpness of 
their diffraction peaks. Although quasicrystals 
cannot be deﬁ ned as packing of identical unit cells, 
their structures can be effectively viewed in terms 
of packing of clusters, and their ideal state may be 
described as a unique way of packing by overlapping 
clusters that realizes the most stable, energetically 
favoured atomic conﬁ gurations. The clusters are also 
found to deﬁ ne the length scales of the characteristic 
localized ﬂ uctuations in quasicrystals, explaining the 
origin of the substantial diffuse scattering that exists 
even for the best quasicrystalline materials, 
and providing a critical inﬂ uence on long-range 
thermal and electrical conduction properties. 
This cluster-based concept can also be invoked to 
describe crystalline intermetallic phases with giant 
unit cells, which frequently occur at compositions near 
to those where quasicrystals form. Like quasicrystals, 
these giant unit-cell crystals also show many unusual 
properties, and represent a natural extension for 
research into cluster-based compounds, whether 
periodic or quasiperiodic, with the potential for the 
discovery of new properties and new applications to 
materials. We may even see a whole new ﬁ eld emerge: 
cluster-engineered materials.
doi:10.1038/nmat1244
References
1. Shechtman, D., Blech, I., Gratias, D. & Cahn, J. W. Metalic phase with long-
range orientational order and no translational symmetry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 
1951–1953 (1984).
2. Dubost, B., Lang, J.-M., Tanaka, M., Sainfort, P. & Audier, M. Large AlCuLi 
single quasicrystals with triacontahedral solidiﬁ cation morphology. Nature 
324, 48–50 (1986).
3. Tsai, A. P., Inoue, A. & Masumoto, T. A stable quasicrystal in Al-Cu-Fe system. 
Jpn J. Appl. Phys. 26, L1505–L1507 (1987).
4. Ohashi, W. & Spaepen, F. Stable Ga-Mg-Zn quasi-periodic crystals with 
pentagonal dodecahedral solidiﬁ cation morphology. Nature 330, 555–556 
(1987).
5. Tsai, A. P. in Physical Properties of Quasicrystals (ed. Stadnik, Z. M.) 5–50 
(Springer, 1999).
6. Stephens, P. W. & Goldman, A. I. Sharp diffraction maxima from an icosahedral 
glass. Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 1168–1171 (1986); ibid 57, 2331 (1986).
7. Pauling, L. Apparent icosahedral symmetry is due to directed multiple twinning 
of cubic crystals. Nature 317, 512–514 (1986); ibid So-called icosahedral and 
decagonal quasicrystals are twins of an 820-atom cubic crystal. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
58, 365–368 (1987).
8. Levine, D. & Steinhardt, P. J. Quasicrystals: A new class of ordered structures. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 2477–2480 (1984).
9. Desiraju, G. R. In search of clarity. Nature 423, 485 (2003).
10. Bak, P. Icosahedral crystals: Where are the atoms? Phys. Rev. Lett. 56, 861–864 
(1986).
11. Janssen, T. Crystallography of quasi-crystals. Acta Crystallogr. A 42, 261–271 
(1986).
12. Yamamoto, A. Crystallography of quasiperiodic crystals. Acta Crystallogr. A 52, 
509–560 (1996).
13. Elser, V. & Henley, C. L. Crystal and quasicrystal structures in Al-Mn-Si alloys. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 2883–2886 (1985).
14. Audier, M. et al. Structural relationships in intermetallic compounds of the 
Al-Li-(Cu, Mg, Zn) system. Phil. Mag. B 60, 437–466 (1989).
15. Hiraga, K., Sugiyama, K. & Ohsuna, T. Atomic cluster arrangements in cubic 
approximant phases of icosahedral quasicrystals. Phil. Mag. A 78, 1051–1064 
(1998).
16. Janot, C. & de Boissieu, M. Quasicrystals as a hierarchy of clusters. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 72, 1674–1677 (1994).
17. Ishihara, K. N. & Yamamoto, A. Penrose patterns and related structures. I. 
Superstructure and generalized Penrose patterns. Acta Crystallogr. A 44, 
508–516 (1988).
18. Bendersky, L. Quasicrystal with one-dimensional translational symmetry and 
a tenfold rotation axis. Phys. Rev. Lett. 55, 1461–1463 (1985).
19. Hiraga, K. in Advances in Imaging and Electron Physics (ed. Hawks P. W.) 37–98 
(Academic, London, 1998).
20. Abe, E., Takakura, H. & Tsai, A. P. Ho arrangement in the Zn6Mg3Ho 
icosahedral quasicrystal studied by atomic-resolution Z-contrast STEM. 
J. Electron Microsc. 50, 187–195 (2001).
21. Beeli, C. & Horiuchi, S. The structure and its reconstruction in the decagonal 
Al70Mn17Pd13 quasicrystal. Phil. Mag. B 70, 215–240 (1994).
22. Tsuda, K. et al. Structure of Al-Ni-Co decagonal quasicrystals. Phil. Mag. A 74, 
697–708 (1996).
23. Penrose, R. The role of aesthetics in pure and applied mathematical reserach. 
Bull. Inst. Math. Applic. 10, 266–271 (1974).
24. Burkov, S. Structure model of the Al-Cu-Co decagonal quasicrystal. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 67, 614–617 (1991); ibid Modeling decagonal quasicrystals: random 
assembly of interpenetrating decagonal clusters. J. Phys. 2, 695–706 (1992).
25. Henley, C. L. in Quasicrystals: The State of the Art (eds DiVincenzo, D. & 
Steinhardt, P. J.) 429–524 (World Scientiﬁ c, Singapore, 1991).
26. Joseph, D., Ritsch, S. & Beeli, C. Distinguishing quasiperiodic from random 
order in high-resolution TEM images. Phys. Rev. B 55, 8175–8183 (1997).
27. Ritsch, S. et al. Highly perfect decagonal Al-Co-Ni quasicrystal. Phil. Mag. Lett. 
74, 99–106 (1996).
28. Abe, H. et al. Atomic short-range order in an Al72Ni20Co8 decagonal 
quasicrystal by anomalous X-ray scattering. Jpn J. Appl. Phys. 39, L1111–L1114 
(2000).
29. Pennycook, S. J. & Boatner, L. A. Chemically sensitive structure imaging with a 
scanning transmission electron microscope. Nature 336, 565–567 (1988).
30. Pennycook, S. J. & Jesson, D. E. High-resolution Z-contrast imaging of crystals. 
Ultramicroscopy 37, 14–38 (1991); ibid High-resolution incoherent imaging of 
crystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 938–941 (1990).
31. Saitoh, K. et al. Structural study of an Al72Ni20Co8 decagonal quasicrystal using 
the high-angle annular dark-ﬁ eld method. Jpn J. Appl. Phys. 36, L1400–1402 
(1997).
32. Yan, Y., Pennycook, S. J. & Tsai, A. P. Direct imaging of local chemical disorder 
and columnar vacancies in ideal decagonal Al-Ni-Co quasicrystals. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 81, 5145–5148 (1998).
33. Steinhardt, P. J. et al. Experimental veriﬁ cation of the quasi-unit-cell model 
of quasicrystal structure. Nature 396, 55–57 (1998); correction Nature 399, 
84 (1999).
34. Gummelt, P. Construction of Penrose tilings by a single aperiodic protoset. 
Geometriae Dedicata 62, 1–17 (1996).
35. Steinhardt, P. J. & Jeong, H.-C. A simpler approach to Penrose tiling with 
implications for quasicrystal formation. Nature 382, 433–435 (1996).
36. Abe, E. et al. Quasi-unit cell model for an Al-Ni-Co ideal quasicrystal based on 
clusters with broken tenfold symmetry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4609–4612 (2000).
37. Yan, Y. & Pennycook, S. J. Chemical ordering in Al72Ni20Co8 decagonal 
quasicrystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 1542–1545 (2001).
38. Mihalkovic, M. et al. Total-energy-based prediction of a quasicrystal structure. 
Phys. Rev. B 65, 104205 (2002).
39. Goedecke, T. et al. Isothermal sections of phase equilibria in the Al-AlCo-AlNi 
system. Z. Metallkd. 89, 687–698 (1998).
40. Hume-Rothery, W. Researches on the nature, properties, and conditions 
of formation of intermetallic compounds, with special reference to certain 
compounds of tin.-I.-V. J. Inst. Met. 36, 295–361 (1926).
41. Ritsch, S. et al. The existence regions of structural modiﬁ cations in decagonal 
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group
 PROGRESS ARTICLE
nature materials | VOL 3 | NOVEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/naturematerials 
767
Al-Co-Ni. Phil. Mag. Lett. 78, 67–75 (1998).
42. Hiraga, K. et al. Structural characteristics of Al-Co-Ni decagonal quasicrystals 
and crystalline approximants. Mater. Trans. 42, 2354–2367 (2001).
43. Bak, P. Phenomenological theory of icosahedral incommensurate 
(“quasiperiodic”) order in Mn-Al alloys. Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 1517–1519 (1985).
44. Levine, D. et al. Elasticity and dislocations in pentagonal and icosahedral 
quasicrystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 1520–1523 (1985).
45. Socolar, T., Lubensky, T. & Steinhardt, P. J. Phonons, phasons and dislocations 
in quasicrystals. Phys. Rev. B 34, 3345–3360 (1986).
46. Urban, K. & Feuerbacher, M. Structurally complex alloy phases. J. Non-Cryst. 
Solids 334–335, 143–150 (2004).
47. Lubensky, T. C. et al. Distortion and peak broadening in quasicrystal 
diffraction patterns. Phys. Rev. Lett. 57, 1440–1443 (1986).
48. Jaric, M. V. & Nelson, D. R. Diffuse scattering from quasicrystals. Phys. Rev. B 
37, 4458–4472 (1988).
49. Ishii, Y. Phason softening and structural transitions in icosahedral 
quasicrystals. Phys. Rev. B 45, 5228–5239 (1992).
50. de Boissieu, M. et al. Diffuse scattering and phason elasticity in the AlPdMn 
icosahedral phase. Phys. Rev. Lett. 75, 89–92 (1995).
51. Coddens, G. & Steurer, W. Time-of–ﬂ ight neutron-scattering study of phason 
hopping in decagonal Al-Co-Ni quasicrystals. Phys. Rev. B 60, 270–276 (1999).
52. Francoual, S. et al. Dynamics of phason ﬂ uctuations in the i-AlPdMn 
quasicrystal. Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 225501 (2003).
53. Edagawa, K., Suzuki, K. & Takeuchi, S. High resolution transmission electron 
microscopy observation of thermally ﬂ uctuating phasons in decagonal Al-Cu-
Co. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1674–1677 (2000).
54. Abe, E., Pennycook, S. J. & Tsai, A. P. Direct observation of a local thermal 
vibration anomaly in a quasicrystal. Nature 421, 347–350 (2003).
55. Takakura, H., Yamamoto, A. & Tsai, A. P. The structure of decagonal 
Al72Ni20Co8 quasicrystal. Acta Crystallogr. A 57, 576–585 (2001).
56. Abe, H. et al. Anomalous Debye-Waller factor associated with an order-
disorder transformation in an Al72Ni20Co8 decagonal quasicrystal. J. Phys. Soc. 
Jpn 72, 1828–1831 (2003).
57. Cervellino, A., Haibach, T. & Steurer, W. Structure solution of the basic 
decagonal Al-Co-Ni phase by the atomic surfaces modeling method. Acta 
Crystallogr. B 58, 8–33 (2002).
58. Keppens, V. et al. Localized vibrational modes in metallic solids. Nature 395, 
876–878 (1998).
59. Cohn, J. L. et al. Glasslike heat conduction in high-mobility crystalline 
semiconductors. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 779–782 (1999).
60. Mizutani, U., Takeuchi, T. & Sato, H. Atomic structure determination, 
electronic structure calculations and interpretation of electron transport 
properties of various 1/1–1/1–1/1 approximants. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 14, 
R767–R788 (2002).
61. Macia, E. May quasicrystals be good thermoelectric materials? Appl. Phys. Lett. 
77, 3045–3047 (2000).
62. Gomez, C. P. & Lindin, S. Comparative structural study of the disordered 
MCd6 quasicrystal approximants. Phys. Rev. B 68, 024203 (2003).
63. Fisher, I. R. et al. Growth of large-grain R – Mg – Zn quasicrystals from the 
ternary melt (R = Y, Er, Ho, Dy and Tb). Phil. Mag. B 77, 1601–1615 (1998).
64. Tsai, A. P., Guo, J. Q., Abe, E., Takakura, H. & Sato, T. J. A stable binary 
quasicrystal. Nature 408, 537–538 (2000).
65. Weickenmeier, A. & Kohl, H. Computation of absorptive form factors for high-
energy electron diffraction. Acta Crystallogr. A 47, 590–597 (1991).
Acknowledgement
We are grateful to A. P. Tsai, K. Saitoh, P. J. Steinhardt, H.-C. Jeong and 
H. Takakura for collaboration, on which the present article is based. We also thank 
T. J. Sato, M. Widom, C. L. Henley, M. Miharcovic, W. Steurer, M. de Boissieu, 
A. Yamamoto, N. Tanaka, K. Ishizuka and H. Inui for valuable comments and 
discussions. E.A. acknowledges support from the CREST-JST ‘Fundamental 
properties of quasicrystals’ project (1996-2001, Project leader: A. P. Tsai). Y.Y. and 
S.J.P. acknowledge support from the US department of Energy under contract 
numbers DE-AC36-99GO10337 and DE-AC05-00OR22725.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be address to E.A. or S.J.P.
Competing ﬁ nancial interests
The authors declare that they have no competing ﬁ nancial interests.
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group
