DECAGON 
~
~
~
~
J
~
F$[S n5;;;.;fy i:ogpl 
01 HAY 23 Wfl 3: 47 
FSIS Docket Clerk, Docket #00-048N 
Food Safety and Inspection Service 
U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Room 102, Cotton Annex, 
300 12th Street, S.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20250-3700. 
To Whom It May Concern: 
30-048N 
Anthony J. Fontana, Jr. Ph.D. 
30-048N- 
13 
This letter is in reference to the public comments requested on the Lmonocytogenes Relative 
Risk Draft Assessment and Action Plan. It is our understanding that the Action Plan is aimed at 
reducing the incidence of listeria1 gastroenteritis and listeriosis resulting from the contamination 
of the United States food supply with L. monocytogenes. We also note that the stated goal of the 
new USDA regulations is to reduce the incidence of illness or death due to listeriosis by 50% 
during by 2005. As manufacturers of water activity instrumentation, Decagon Devices, Inc. is 
aware of the ways in which water activity instruments can be used by food processors to reduce 
the risk of food-borne illness. We suggest that water activity be used as part of a program to 
reduce the risk of sickness or death due to L. monocytogenes contamination. 
As presently constituted, the eight-area action plan for the reduction of the presence of L. 
monocytogenes in food products focuses almost exclusively on detection of the bacteria and the 
creation of new handling procedures for ready-to-eat food products. While more stringent 
detection testing and new handling procedures will certainly help reduce the risk of a L. 
monocytogenes outbreak, even the 50% goal assumes that some contaminated food products will 
reach consumers in spite of these new efforts. A more complete food safety plan should include a 
method for evaluating whether L. rnonocytogenes-contaminated products can support 
proliferation, since the level of bacteria present invariably affects the severity of the illness in 
persons who consume contaminated products. Water activity testing can be used for this risk 
assessment. 
In the section entitled “Post-Retail Growth of Listeria”, the Draft Risk Assessment Document 
states “even when L. rnonocytogenes is initially present at a low level in a contaminated food, the 
microorganism can multiply during storage, including storage at refrigeration temperatures”. 
Concurrently, it has been shown that L. monocytogenes growth is very difficult to control though 
refrigeration alone. However, it also is proven that below a water activity of 0.92 no growth of L. 
rnonocytogenes occurs (Farber et aZ., 1992). Water activity in combination with other hurdles, 
such as pH, temperature, or modified atmosphere packaging, will limit growth even at higher 
than 0.92 water activity levels. 
It is impractical to bring the water activities of some products such as frankfurters and soft 
cheese below this level. However, using the 0.92 a, standard, it is possible to assess the risk of 
post-packaging L. monocytogenes growth in most food products. This relates directly to many of 
the products appearing on the Draft Risk Assessment Document’s Table 1, including: Smoked 
Seafood, Preserved Fish, Natural Cheese, Aged Cheese, Dry/Semi-Dry Fermented Sausages, 
PM, and Meat Spreads. Because the water activities of these products are relatively close to 
0.92, simple changes in processing or formulation that slightly lower the water activity can stop 
L. monocytogenes growth. Furthermore, continual monitoring of water activity can confirm that 
all product runs that leave a processing facility will be safe from L. monocytogenes growth. 
We recognize that water activity testing is not a complete solution to the problem of L. 
monocytogenes contamination. However, it can be an integral part of a strategy for reducing the 
incidence of illness due to this bacterium. We urge the USDA, FDA, CDC, and FSIS to use 
water activity testing to improve the efficacy of the L. monocytogenes action plan. We have 
attached a reference list of research papers related to water activity and L. monocytogenes 
growth. Should you require further reference material, or any other information on this subject, 
please contact us. 
Best Regards, 
Anthony J. Fontana Jr. Ph.D. 
Applications Engineer 
Water Activity and Listeria monocytogenes References 
Chen, N. and Shelef, L. A. (1992). Relationship between water activity, salts of lactic acid, and 
growth of Listeria monocytogenes in a meat model system. Journal of Food Protection. 
55 574-578. 
Cheroutre-Vialette, M., Lebert, I., Hebraud, M., Labadie, J. C., and Lebert, A. (1998). Effects of 
pH or aw stress on growth of Listeriu monocytogenes. International Journal of Food 
Microbiology. 42( 1 -2):7 1-77. 
Dalgaard, P. and Jorgensen, L. V. (1998). Predicted and observed growth of Listeria 
monocytogenes in seafood challenge tests and in naturally contaminated cold-smoked salmon. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology. 40: 105-1 15. 
Debevere, J. H. (199 1). Listeriu monocytogenes food-borne infection: Present-day situation and 
control. Voeding. 52:258-263. 
Debevere, J. H. (1991). Listeria monocytogenes foodborne infections: Current situation and 
control. Voeding. 52: 189-194. 
Farber, J. M., Coates, F., and Daley, E. (1992). Minimum water activity requirements for the 
growth of Listeria monocytogenes. Letters In Applied Microbiology. 15: 103-105. 
Miller, A. J. (1992). Combined water activity and solute effects on growth and survival of 
Listeria monocytogenes Scott A. Journal of Food Protection. 55414-418. 
Nolan, D. A., Chamblin, D. C., and Troller, J. A. (1992). Minimal water activity levels for 
growth and survival of Listeria monocytogenes and Listeriu innocuu. International Journal of 
Food Microbiology. 16:323-335. 
Tapia de Daza, M. S., Villegas, Y., and Martinez, A. (1991). Minimal water activity for growth 
of Listeriu monocytogenes as affected by solute and temperature. International Journal of 
Food Microbiology. 14:333-338. 
Tienungoon, S., Ratkowsky, D. A., McMeekin, T. A., and Ross, T. (2000). Growth limits of 
Listeriu monocytogenes as a function of temperature, pH, NaC1, and lactic acid. Applied and 
Environmental Microbiology. 66( 1 1):4979-4987. 
Wijtzes, T., Mcclure, P. J., Zwietering, M. H., and Roberts, T. A. (1993). Modelling bacterial 
growth of Listeria monocytogenes as a function of water activity, pH and temperature. 
International Journal of Food Microbiology. 18: 139-149. 
