USDA/FSIS Microbiology Laboratory Guidebook      3rd Edition/1998
2-1
CHAPTER 2. PHYSICAL EXAMINATION OF MEAT AND POULTRY PRODUCTS
 Charles P. Lattuada and B. P. Dey
2.1  Introduction
Microorganisms associated with meat and poultry products can be
placed in three categories, beneficial, spoilage and pathogenic. 
Each product has a characteristic microbial profile called its
"normal flora".  Frequently information on changes in the "normal
flora" can be obtained rapidly by simple observations.  These
observations can be grouped into a category called organoleptic
observations.  The term "organoleptic" refers to the use of the
senses in determining the acceptability of a product. This would
also include a direct microscopic examination.
Organoleptic 
analyses 
are 
of 
particular 
importance 
during
investigations of certain food production problems such as
detecting deleterious pre- or post-processing changes of canned
products.  Changes brought about by abusive handling and storage
also may be detected by organoleptic observation.
In order to make a valid judgment, based upon one or more
organoleptic observations, the analyst must know the physical
characteristics of a "normal" product.  This knowledge can be
gained by experience and specialized training.  Each laboratory
should have Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) describing the
organoleptic standards for the acceptance or rejection of samples.
When judging a product to be abnormal, if possible, the decision
should be based on a comparison of the suspect product with one
that is normal, if readily available.  This minimizes the
subjectivity of the decision that a product has an "off odor", "off
color", or other sensory abnormality.  Tasting products as part of
a microbiological examination is a dangerous practice and should be
avoided.  When the question to be answered is related to spoilage,
odor is of primary importance; chemical and/or bacteriological
results are corroborative and substantiating. 
2.2  Examination
The following guideline establishes a standardized inter-laboratory
procedure for characterizing samples.
a.
Appearance: Changes in color; degradation of fat;
presence of foreign materials such as metal, hair,
feathers, sand, charcoal, etc.
b.
Texture: Change in consistency; development of slime;
breakdown of structure (proteolysis), etc.
USDA/FSIS Microbiology Laboratory Guidebook      3rd Edition/1998
2-2
c.
Odor: Examples of words used to describe off-odors are:
sour (acidic), moldy, musty, fishy, rancid, fruity,
yeasty (beer-like) and putrid.  However, if the analyst
cannot decide how to classify an odor it is acceptable
and appropriate to say simply: "off-odor" or "taint". 
Notations as to whether the off-odor is strong or slight
are also in order.
2.21 Odor Examination By a Panel
In some cases results of odor examinations are equivocal and an
odor detection panel, consisting of at least three members must be
formed.  The purpose of this panel is to evaluate aroma only, and
its judgement must not be swayed by appearances.  Only people with
a good sense of smell can be assigned to it.  The coordinator, who
is not a panel member, will prepare the samples and ensure that the
following procedures are followed:
a.
The test must be conducted in a well-ventilated area
free of strong odors.
b.
At least 15 - 20% of the samples in the test group
should be normal, wholesome, product-counterparts of the
samples being examined.  The normal controls should be
as similar to the test product as possible with respect
to ingredients, processing, packaging, size, age and
handling procedures.
c.
All samples should be presented to the smell panel in
sequentially coded glass jars or polyethylene bags of
the same size and shape, similar in weight and at the
same temperature (usually 35°C).  Both the normal and
questionable products should be presented in a random
order with a rest between samples.  Do not decontaminate
cans by flaming since heating and/or burning the
contents could alter or mask any other odors that might
be present.
d.
Before beginning the examination, the panel members
should smell and discuss the characteristic aroma of a
normal product.  They should be made aware that it is
for general reference only, since normal products may
vary slightly in odor and intensity.  They then should
rest until the samples are presented to allow recovery
of the sense of smell which tires easily.
e. 
During the actual sample analysis, each panel member
should remove the jar lid or open the bag, sniff the
contents without glancing at them, replace the lid/close
the 
bag 
and 
return 
the 
container 
to 
the 
panel
coordinator.  The panelist's sensory perceptions should
USDA/FSIS Microbiology Laboratory Guidebook      3rd Edition/1998
2-3
be entered on a score pad containing a list of
appropriate terms with notations about whether the odor
was strong or weak.
 
f.
During the examination the panel members must not
comment, exclaim or use body language that conveys their
impression of the odors to other members of the panel. 
Caution:  It is not to be assumed that a smell panel composed
of laboratory personnel will have the degree of skill attained
by professional odor analysts.  The purpose of a panel of
laboratory personnel is to detect the odors of decomposition
or product contamination with an odorous compound.
2.3  Determination of pH in Meat and Poultry Products
Potentiometric measurements should be used to determine the pH of a
food product.  The accuracy of most pH meters is approximately 0.1
pH units and reproducibility should be approximately ± 0.005 pH
units.  Both the glass and reference electrode are usually housed
in a single tube, called the combination electrode.  To obtain
accurate results the same temperature should be used for
standardization with the buffers and the sample.  Measurements
should be taken within the temperature range of 20 to 30°C.
2.31 Equipment and Reagents
a.
Blender
b.
Beaker, 100 ml
c.
Separatory funnel
d.
pH meter, suitable for reading pH from 0 to 14 in 0.1
unit increments.  A rugged, designated combination
electrode should be used for pH measurement of meats and
poultry.  A flat combination electrode works well for
determining the surface pH of canned foods.
e.
Distilled water
f.
Certified buffer solutions of pH 7.00, and either pH
4.00 or 10.00.  The buffers chosen should bracket the
desired pH.
2.32 Procedure
a.
Calibrate the pH meter, according to manufacturer's
instructions, using certified buffers pH 7.00 and either
pH 4.00 or 10.00.
b. 
Most products will be solid and require blending.  A 1:5
or 1:10 dilution should be made with distilled water in
a clean blender jar.  Blend to a thin uniform
consistency and perform the pH measurement.  If fat or
oil causes fouling of the electrode, transfer a portion
USDA/FSIS Microbiology Laboratory Guidebook      3rd Edition/1998
2-4
of the homogenate to a separatory funnel and draw off a
portion of the aqueous phase.  On certain products
centrifugation may be required in order to recover a
measurable aqueous phase.
c.
Adjust the temperature control on the pH meter to that
of the sample (ideally 25°C) and immerse the pH electrode
into the liquid phase.
d.
A surface electrode may be used with certain low fat
products that present a flat, solid core surface.  If a
surface measurement is taken, ensure that the electrode
has good contact with the product surface.
e.
Record pH to the nearest 0.1 unit.
2.4 Determination of Water Activity (Aw) of Meat and Poultry
Products
     
The free moisture level in food is called water activity (aw). This
is the water available to support microbiological growth in the
food. It can be lowered by dehydration or by the addition of
binding agents such as salt or sugar.  The growth of different
types and genera of microorganisms is controlled by the water
activity level in a specific product. Much information exists on
the water activity limits of growth for microorganisms.  For
example, the limit of growth for Clostridium botulinum occurs
between an aw of 0.935 and 0.945.  Canned foods with an aw of ≤0.85
are exempt by the FDA from the canned food regulations and cured
meats without nitrates must have an aw of ≤0.92.  It is important,
therefore, that the aw in foods be measured very accurately.  A
detailed list of growth limiting aw values can be found in Chapter
8 of the Compendium of Methods for the Microbiological Examination
of Foods.
Measurement of the aw in a food sample is affected by both time and
temperature.  It is dependent upon allowing enough time for the
water vapor of the sample to reach equilibrium with the air space
in a closed container, such as a closed jar, at a constant
temperature.  When incubation is required for equilibration, it is
absolutely necessary to maintain accurate temperature control of
the food samples inside the incubator used for aw. It is equally
important to allow ample time for the humidity of the air space
above the sample to reach equilibrium with the food sample.
2.41 Decagon
USDA/FSIS Microbiology Laboratory Guidebook      3rd Edition/1998
2-5
The Decagon CX-2 will measure aw in less than 5 minutes.  The
instrument has rapid vapor equilibration, does not require
temperature equilibration and requires only a small sample
(approximately 5 grams of food).  The instrument does not have to
be calibrated, but quality control samples, consisting of deionized
water and various salt slushes, must be included in an analysis. 
When a very wet sample and a very dry one follow one another, two
interim readings should be taken of the second sample before
collecting data with the third reading.  When a reading is
completed,the instrument will "beep" continuously.  The only
reported material to interfere with a Decagon reading is propylene
glycol.  Foods containing propylene glycol should not be analyzed
by this method.
2.42 Equipment and Materials
a.
Decagon, Model CX-2 manufactured by Decagon Devices,
Inc., Pullman, WA 99163-0835.
b.
Blender and blending jars
c.
Transfer pipettes
2.43  Procedure
a.
In 
order 
to 
obtain 
a 
representative 
sample,
approximately 100-200 grams of food should be blended.
b.
Remove at least two samples, approximately 5 grams each,
for aw determination; the cup should never be filled
above the fill level line molded into the side of the
plastic cup.
c.
Follow the manufacturer's directions contained in the
Decagon Manual very carefully when performing this
analysis.
d.
Saturated salt solutions should be used for reference
controls.  The following saturated salt mixes and their
expected aw at 25oC normally are used:
NaCl ---------0.755
KBr ----------0.811
KCl ----------0.845
(NH4)H2PO4-----0.934
 
Note: 
Never leave a sample in the instrument after a
reading has been taken.
2.44 American Instrument Electronic Hydrometer
USDA/FSIS Microbiology Laboratory Guidebook      3rd Edition/1998
2-6
Another method for determining aw is the American Instrument
Electronic Hydrometer.  Reportedly, it is an accurate instrument
for measurement of the aw in food products, provided the
manufacturer's directions are followed carefully.  The instrument
measures the changes in electrical resistance of specially coated
lithium chloride sensors.  The electronic part of the instrument is
very rugged and needs no special care.  The sensors, like pH
electrodes, are very sensitive and can be affected permanently by
water condensation, desiccation, corrosive chemicals such as
mercury vapor, unstable hydrocarbons such as ketones; halogen
gases; and sulfur compounds such as hydrogen sulfide and sulfur
dioxide.  Sensors can be affected reversibly by polar vapors such
as ammonia, amines, alcohols, glycols and glycerols.  The response
of sensors will return to normal, from slightly higher readings, if
the polar vapors are removed by aeration.
2.45 Equipment and Materials
a.
American Instrument Electronic Hydrometer (Model No.
30-87 or equivalent) manufactured by Newport Scientific,
Inc., 8246E Sandy Court, Jessup, MD 20794.
b.
Sensors, Color Code-Gray, (Cat-No. 4822W) for the above
instrument, available from the same manufacturer.  The
Company makes different types of sensors for different
ranges of humidities.  This sensor is the one most
commonly used in meat and poultry product analyses. They
have an aw range of about 0.81 to 0.99.  Each sensor is
unique and comes with its own factory calibration curve.
 When purchasing gray sensors specify that the aw
readings between 0.90 - 0.94 be inside the linear
portion of the calibration curve.  Also request that the
correction factor of each sensor at 30°C (86°F) be
incorporated into each calibration curve.
c.
Sensor lids and 8-gang switch box.  These socket type
lids normally fit into the rims of standard pint size
canning jars.  The 8-gang switch box allows measurement
of eight samples at a time.  The sensor connectors
should be labeled 1 to 8 to correspond to the switch
position.
d.
A forced-air incubator should be used to hold the
samples at 30 ± 0.5°C.  If necessary, cut a 1.5" diameter
hole in the incubator to introduce the electrical leads
for the eight sensors into the incubator.  Be sure to
fill the hole with sealant.
e.
Clean and dry standard pint-size glass canning jars,
without chips or cracks on the rims, for the samples.
f.
Pipettes
g.
Preparation 
of 
a 
saturated 
ammonium 
phosphate,
monobasic, [(NH4)H2PO4] slush
USDA/FSIS Microbiology Laboratory Guidebook      3rd Edition/1998
2-7
(NH4)H2PO4, reagent grade
200 g
Merthiolate
 25 mg
Glass distilled water
Place the ammonium phosphate and merthiolate in a
new 
or 
clean 
pint-size 
jar, 
slowly 
add
glass-distilled water (approximately 2-3 ml at a
time), and stir vigorously with a spoon until
approximately 
one 
half 
of 
the 
crystals 
are
dissolved.  Care must be taken to avoid splashing
the salts onto the sides and rims of the jar. 
Incubate the salt slushes at 30°C for 2-3 days to
establish equilibrium.
h.
Preparation of saturated potassium dichromate (K2CrO4)
slush
Use the same procedure as above. Omit the merthiolate.
i. 
Store the salt slushes indefinitely in a 30°C incubator
at all times except to install or remove sensors.
j.
The aw of the salt slushes should be (measured with a
calibrated gray sensor):
(NH4)H2PO4 slush
0.929 at 30°C 
K2CrO4 slush
0.865 at 30°C
2.46 Procedure
a.
Follow the manufacturer's directions very carefully when
using this method.
b.
Test each sensor first in (NH4)H2PO4 and then in K2CrO4
salt slush and record the results on the analysis sheet.
 The sample test results will be recorded on the same
sheet.  Do not use sensors that differ from the expected
value of the salt slush by more than aw 0.01 unit.
c.
If the aw is going to be measured in other than the range
specified for the grey sensor, be sure to use the
appropriate sensor and prepare salt slushes appropriate
for the expected range.  A table of other salt slushes
can be found in Chapter 8, "Measurement of water
activity (aw) and acidity", in the Compendium of Methods
for the Microbiological Examination of Foods.
2.5  Selected References
Greenspan, L. 1977.  Humidity fixed points of binary saturated
aqueous solutions. J. Res. Nat. Bur. Stand. 81A:89-96.
USDA/FSIS Microbiology Laboratory Guidebook      3rd Edition/1998
2-8
Prior, B. A. 1979.  Measurement of water activity in foods: A
review. J. Food Prot. 42:668-674.
Troller, J. A., and V. N Scott. 1992.  Measurement of water
activity (aw) and acidity, p. 135-151.  In C. Vanderzant and
D. F. Splittstoesser (ed.), Compendium of Methods for the
Microbiological Examination of Foods. 3rd Edition. Amer. Publ.
Hlth. Assoc. Washington, D.C.
