Report as of FY2007 for 2006MT110B: "Student fellowship:
Sources of groundwater and subsurface water aquisition and
utilization by conifers invading riparian communities in western 
Montana"
Publications
Project 2006MT110B has resulted in no reported publications as of FY2007. 
Report Follows
 
 
ROOTING DISTRIBUTION OF TWO TREE SPECIES IN UPLAND AND 
RIPARIAN AREAS IN WESTERN MONTANA 
 
 
Final Report for 
Water Research Fellowship 
 
Erin Thais Riley, PhD Candidate 
Clayton Marlow, Main Advisor 
 
 
 
Project Synopsis 
This current project is an effort to provide insight into a plant-soil interaction that may be 
fundamental to the understanding of landscape scale effects of global climate change, 
disrupted fire cycles, and stream flow. While it is believed larger trees are tapping into 
deeper groundwater sources and smaller sized trees are using water in the upper 1-2 m of 
the forest floor, it is possible that small Douglas-fir are capturing shallow ground water 
before it can enter the subsurface flow path that recharges streams.  In contrast, small 
aspen may be sharing deeper water sources with conspecific larger trees (Arno 1986). 
Picture by Erin Thais Riley at Pony Canyon, January 26, 2007. 
Identifying those variables that affect lateral runoff is key to understanding the water 
budget and ultimately the affect of fire suppression and climate change on stream flow.  
This research will help management agencies to adjust their management objectives for 
vegetation management under the constantly changing pressures of climate change, fire 
suppression, and grazing.  
 
The Beaverhead-Deerlodge forest south of Boulder, MT is dominated by lodgepole pine 
and Douglas-fir in the uplands with Quaking aspen in the riparian systems. Following a 
century of aggressive wildfire suppression, local ranchers and government officials are 
seeing a decline in stream flow that wildlife and livestock use for water sources.  The 
degree of interaction between climate change and disrupted fire cycles and stream flow 
has become a focal point for forest, range, and landscape ecological research. Among the 
management agencies interested in this work is Bureau of Land Management, Lewistown 
Field Office. A fire ecologist at this field station acknowledges immediate benefits from 
this research.     
 
Vegetation management requires knowing which species and age class to manipulate to 
achieve landscape goals. The goal of this project is to determine if Douglas-fir, aspen, 
and herbaceous communities extract water from the same or different depths within the 
top 1-2 m of the soil column. To achieve this goal we will: 1) ascertain rooting zone 
within the upper soil column in Douglas-fir, Aspen and grass/forb communities; 2) 
confirm rooting depth stratification by using a DNA fingerprinting tool (AFLP’s) to 
match roots from a specific depth to their counterpart; 3) compare the impact of the forb 
and grass community on soil water decline in non-forested areas. The hypotheses of this 
study are as follows: 1) smaller sized Douglas-fir and aspen use water within the upper 
profile where as larger sized Douglas-fir use deeper water sources and 2) grasses and 
forbs have less affect on soil water status than small-size classes of trees.  
 
Douglas-fir size classes 1,2 vs. 3 are significantly different (P=0.07). Conversely, aspen 
was not showing significance among different size classes with n=15. The initial results 
are based on four sites, two were Douglas-fir and two were aspen out of the 24 total sites.  
Research Approach: 
This research project will aim to achieve the goal of determining if Douglas-fir, aspen, 
and herbaceous communities extract water from the same or different depths within the 
top 1-2 m of the soil column. Predawn water potentials (Ψpredawn) coupled with soil water 
potentials (Ψsoil) extrapolated from soil water content (θ) measured with a neutron 
moisture meter will give estimations about what depths Douglas-fir and Aspen are 
acquiring their water from.  Measuring leaf conductance with a porometer will allow us 
to see if the trees are water stressed.  AFLPs which is a DNA fingerprinting tool, will 
allow us to definitively say if those tree roots are found at that depth in the soil.  
Study Design: 
Individual trees will be sampled for three seasons within 24 pre-selected sites represented 
by four drainages. Samples will be collected during the months of April, May, June, July, 
August, September and October. Each of the 24 sites have two Neutron Moisture Meter 
tubes inserted to a 154 cm depth and soil water volume at 20 cm intervals will be 
collected Monthly during the spring and fall and weekly during the summer months. One 
of the Neutron Moisture Meter tubes is undisturbed and one has the entire vegetative 
understory removed to account for water uptake by grasses and forbs.  At each site 12 
trees will be selected, tagged, and classed into three size categories.  Class size one is 
between 0 and 120 cm, class size two is between 120 and 240 cm and class three is any 
tree above 240 cm.  Twelve trees at each site will be paired within 2 meters (Moore and 
Owens 2006) of one another and sampled using the predawn water potential and 
porometer on the sides as close to each other as possible to avoid environmental 
variability that can occur from atmospheric, edaphic, topographic, and vegetation 
variables (Wambolt 1973). To be sure roots are present at certain depths, DNA from 
aboveground plant tissue such as leaves will be isolated and digest the DNA using 
Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism technique then matched to their roots. Soil 
cores will be taken with a two inch circumference soil core to 154 cm depth or bedrock, 
extracted and fine roots will be removed, their depth recorded in the soil, and matched to 
their above ground counterpart.  Drs. Luther Talbert and Mike Giroux at Montana State 
University have offered the use of their labs to conduct this portion of the research 
project.  
Neutron Moisture Access Tubes 
24 forested sites were chosen to install two Neutron Moisture Meter access tubes. These 
sites were chosen by location within watersheds and tree community. 12 of the sites are 
dominated by aspen and 12 sites are dominated by Douglas-fir. These access tubes will 
be 15 meters apart and one will have all understory vegetation removed with roundup.  24 
of these access tubes were inserted 154 cm or bedrock, whichever came first, and the 
remaining will be inserted at the same depth this coming summer.  The access tubes were 
dug with a 5 cm hand auger and thin walled PVC pipe was installed for the access tubes.  
Rubber stoppers were inserted in the bottom of each tube to keep moisture from entering 
at the bottom of the tubes. About 31 cm were left above ground to set the Neutron 
Moisture Meter on top of.  
Soil water potential 
Soil water potential (Ψsoil) will be calculated through soil retention curves developed for 
the study site. Samples from different horizons visible within soil pits dug will be 
collected.   Soil water volume (θ) is measured at 20 cm intervals to the bottom of the 
neutron moisture access tubes.  Soil water potential will be developed by Midwest 
Industries Corp. from the soil samples collected from the different soil horizons, and soil 
water potentials (Ψsoil) will be extrapolated from soil retention curves by using soil water 
content collected with the Neutron Moisture Meter. This method of extrapolating soil 
water potentials from soil water content has shown to have a very high correlation (Fahey 
and Young 1984).  
Xylem Water Potential 
In this study, leaf petioles from Quaking aspen trees are used to get an estimate of xylem 
water potential and twigs are used to get xylem water potential for Douglas-fir. Pressure 
chamber determinations are estimates of the total water potential of the xylem sap 
(Ritchie and Hinckley 1975).  The twig or leaf is removed from the tree and cut with a 
razor blade at an angle to allow for more surface area of the xylem. The instant water is 
seen at the end of the leaf petiole or twig, the pressure gauge is read and recorded.  This 
value measured in bars is the xylem water potential for the twig and will be used to 
represent the xylem water potential for the tree.  
Leaf Conductance 
A steady state leaf porometer (Decagon Devices) is used to measure stomatal 
conductance.  This is a measures of the passage of carbon dioxide (CO2) or water vapor 
through the stomata of the leaf.  The leaf porometer calculates the resistance between the 
inside and outside of the leaf with a measurement in mmol/m2 s1 (Millimoles per meter 
squared seconds). This measure how much conductance or exchange is taking place 
between the atmosphere and the leaf of the tree. If the tree is transpiring more, it has 
access to water, but when the tree does not have access to water, it will close its stomates. 
The same twelve trees that were measured for xylem water potential will be measured for 
leaf conductance.   
Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphisms 
This DNA fingerprinting tool allows DNA polymorphisms to be determined between 
individual plants. We will use this technique to determine the identity of fine root tissue 
and match them to their aboveground counterpart at different depths. The use of  AFLP 
kit from Invitrogen Life Technologies will be used to do the isolation and amplification 
following three major steps: restriction endonuclease digestion of the DNA and ligation 
of adapters, amplification of the restriction fragments, and gel analysis of the amplified 
fragments. This technique usually creates 50 to 100 restriction fragments in each AFLP, 
making it very powerful in detecting DNA polymorphisms and a good means to identify 
individuals. High quality DNA must be used with this technique which is why small roots 
will be used in fingerprinting (Jackson 2000).  Douglas-fir plots will be sampled by 
individuals while fingerprinting aspen may be difficult since they are all one organism. 
Study area 
 
 
 
 
Hay Canyon with neutron access wells as the red points. 
 
 
 
 
State Creek with neutron access wells as the red points. 
 
 
 
 
Boulder Divide with neutron access wells as the red points. 
 
 
 
 
 Pony Reject with neutron access wells as the red points. 
This study site is in Jefferson County, Montana north of Whitehall, Montana.  It is 
located on Route 16 that goes from Whitehall, MT to Boulder, MT.  The site is located on 
the west side of the road between long 45o00’ and Lat 112o00, 46o00’ and 112o15’, 
112o00’ and 46o15’, 112o15’ and 46o15’. Land resources within the study are 
administered by the Bureau of Land Management, Butte Area Office and the 
Beaverhead-Deerlodge National Forest.   The sub-watersheds under consideration lie 
within the northern portion of the Upper Jefferson TMDL Planning Unit.  
 
The drainages empty to the east to south east and were chosen due to similarity in aspect.  
The upper portion of the larger watershed area is dominated by Lodgepole pine (Pinus 
contorta) forest which transitions into Douglas-fir (Pseudotsuga menzesii) forest and 
ends in a sagebrush/grassland type in the valley bottom.  The watershed that contains the 
target sub-watersheds drains over 11,200 ha (28,800 acres) or about 36% of the Whitetail 
Basin.   
Vegetation and soil sampling 
The vegetation changes from site to site but the dominant vegetation are: Bearberry 
(Arctosaphylos uva-ursi), Baltic Rush (Juncus balticus), Big Sagebrush,(Artemesia 
tridentata ssp. Veseyana), Bluebunch Wheatgrass (Psedorogenaria spicata), Clover 
(Trifolium repens), Common Horsetail (Equisetum arvense), Idaho Fescue (Festuca 
idahoensis), Kentucky Bluegrass (Poa pratensis), Oatgrass (Danthonia spp.), Red Top 
(Agrostis stolonifera), Smooth Brome (Bromus inermis), Snowberry (Symphoricarpos 
occidentalis), Tailcup lupine (Lupinus caudatus), Wild Geranium (Geranium 
viscosissimum), and Woods Rose (Rosa woodsii) 
 
The soils in this area are predominately sandy soils with some silt. This changes in the 
riparian systems where more clay is present.  This is not expected considering the granite 
parent material of the boulder batholith area.  
 
The parent material of the Whitehall site is intrusive igneous rock that probably 
originated 10-20 miles beneath the surface during the late Cretaceous and early Tertiary 
period.(78-69 million years ago) During the Eocene Epoch the overlaying rock was 
removed (1 mile above the surface) exposing the igneous rock below. The major 
exposure in the study site is the Boulder batholith with smaller satellite bodies connected 
to the primary extrusion but are similar in composition and texture. The dominant type of 
material is light gray coarse to medium grained quartz throughout the watershed. Large 
boulders can be found which are called tor piles, and were formed from weathering and 
erosion along joint planes. The material that is found in the stream beds in the Quaternary 
period is Alluvium composed of silt, sand and gravel in the stream valleys ( Arno 1986).    
Environmental Measurements 
Relative humidity, temperature, and precipitation will be measured in each of the sub-
watersheds by placing a probe at 2/3 rds canopy height. Vapor pressure deficit will be 
calculated using air relative humidity and temperature at a height corresponding to two 
thirds of the canopy height.   This will give us a good indication of RH measures and 
effects on transpiration.  Temperature and precipitation are recorded with digital 
recorders within one mile of the sample site. These are encased in fencing to keep 
wildlife from destroying them.  Soil volumetric water content will be taken using a 
Neutron Moisture Meter by wells throughout the sample units.  Soils will be taken back 
to the lab, weighed, dried, and weighed again to get soil mass.  Bulk density and 
volumetric water content will be calculated for the sites.   
Supporting Hydrologic Data 
This data will provide important information about vegetative effects on streamflow and 
at what depths different tree species are affecting the soil water moisture. In tangent of 
this study, fifteen monitoring wells have been placed in the riparian zone of 4 drainage.  
The wells are arranged in rows of three with the two outermost wells in the upland 
ecotone on the sides of the stream and one well adjacent to the stream channel.  Since 
2003, measurements of groundwater elevation have been taken from April to November.  
In 2004 pressure transducers were installed inside stilling wells on each stream above and 
below the prescribed burn sites to monitor surface flow. In the spring of 2006 Hay 
Canyon  was burned with a prescription of 70% small Douglas-fir to be removed.  We are 
currently looking how the groundwater wells and surface water runoff are affected by this 
burn.  
Results to date: 
Initial review of neutron and groundwater monitoring in 2006 indicated the following. 
Douglas-fir size classes 1,2 vs. 3 are significantly different (P=0.07). Conversely, aspen 
was not showing significance among different size classes with n=15. A sample adequacy 
test was used to get an idea of sample size using our initial results.  This test indicated 
that we need close to n=45 samples to get a P=0.05 for the Douglas-fir size classes 1,2 
vs.3.  The sample adequacy for the aspen when comparing size class 1 vs. 3 is with a 
P=.1we need approximately n=91 and we currently have approximately 15(Kupper and 
Hafner 1989). The initial results are based on four sites, two were Douglas-fir and two 
were aspen out of the 24 total sites.  
 
 
Percentage of Aspen compared to all trees
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
0.45
0.5
Pony
Hay
Percentage of Aspen
compared to all trees
 
 
 
Figure 3 
Hay Canyon Levels Over 2 Days
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
12:35
15:35
0:35
3:35
6:35
9:35
17:05
21:35
0:35
3:35
6:35
12:35
15:35
11:05
18:35
21:35
Time
W ater Level Change in cm
July
August
September
October
November
Pony Canyon Daily Water Levels Over 
2 Days
-5.5
-5
-4.5
-4
-3.5
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.50
1:22
8:52
16:22
23:52
20:52
4:22
13:22
Time
Water Level Change 
in cm
July
August
September
October
November
 
 
 
The two canyons sampled are Hay and Pony Canyon.  Pony Canyon has considerably 
less aspen than Hay Canyon (fig. 3) which could explain the greater amount of oscillation 
in Hay Canyon than we see in Pony Canyon. If we look at the difference of surface water 
levels between Hay (fig. 4) and Pony (fig. 5) Canyon every hour and a half over two 
days, we see there is a much greater amount of fluctuation in the Hay drainage than in the 
Pony drainage.  The more negative the number, the lower the water level. This 
relationship needs to be investigated in more detail to confirm or reject the hypothesis 
that tree encroachment can affect stream flow.   
Figure 4 
Figure 5 
Research Products: 
The expected products of this research are two journal articles, two posters presented at 
professional meetings, three departmental presentations and a paper for the Society of 
Range Management.  
 
 
 
Outreach Activities: 
As a Ph.D. student Erin Thais Riley has the opportunity to help design and implement a 
curriculum for a class given at Little Big Horn College on the Crow Reservation.  This 
class was implemented this past summer and was a five day field school. A portion of the 
class was riparian ecology and management that Ms. Riley developed a course 
curriculum for. This course will continue for the next two summers with Ms. Riley’s 
help. The Crow, as well as other Native Americans, are concerned about the affects of 
off-reservation land uses on water resources within the reservation. Riparian tree species, 
like aspen, have cultural significance to native peoples so the Crow are concerned about 
management options that involve tree removal. Consequently, the information generated 
from this study will be incorporated into the LBHC natural resource field school 
curriculum in 2007 and 2008.  The results of this research will be used by the Forest 
Service and BLM in land management prescriptions to help regenerate water in systems 
that are lacking.  
 
 
References: 
 
Arno, S.F and George E. Gruell. (May 1986) Douglas-fir Encroachment into Mountain 
Grasslands in Southwestern Montana. Journal of Range Management 39(3): 272-276. 
 
Auken, Van, O.W. (2000) Shrub invasions of North American semiarid grasslands. 
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, 31; 197-215. 
 
Davis, S.D. and H.A. Mooney (1986) Water Use Patterns of Four Co-occurring Chaparral 
Shrubs. Oecologia. v.70; 172-177.  
       
Fahey, T.J. and D.R. Young (1984) Soil and xylem water potential and soil water content 
in contrasting Pinus controta ecosystems, southeastern Wyoming, USA. Oecologia. 61: 
346-351. 
       
Goodale, C.L, Davidson, E.A. 8 August (2002) Carbon cycle: Uncertain sinks in the 
shrubs. Nature 418; 593-594. 
 
Heisler, J.L., Briggs, J.M., Knapp, A.K. (2003) Long term patterns of shrub expansion in 
a C4-dominated grassland: fire frequency and the dynamics of shrub cover and 
abundance. American Journal of Botany 90; 423-428. 
 
Hillel, Daniel (2004). Introduction to Environmental Soil Physics, Elsevier academic 
Press.  
 
Huxman, T. E., Wilcox, B. P., Breshears, D.D, Scott, R.L., Snyder, K.A., Small, E.E., 
Hultine, K. (2005) Ecohydrological Implications of Woody Plant Encroachment. 
Ecology. 86(2); 308-319.  
 
Jackson, R.B., L.A. Moore, W.A. Hoffmann, W.T.Pockman, and C.R. Linder (1999) 
Ecosystem Rooting Depth Determined with Caves and DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Vol. 
96; 11387-11392.  
 
Jackson, R. B., John S. Sperry and Todd E. Dawson. (2000). Root Water Uptake and 
Transport: using physiological processes in global predictions. Trends in Plant Science, 
Vol 5, No. 11; 482-488.  
 
Kay, Charles (2001). Long-Term Aspen Exclosures in the Yellowstone Ecosystem. 
USDA Forest Service Proceedings RMRS-p-18. 225-240 
 
Marlow, C.B., C. Wood, and R. Tucker (2006). Armells Creek Prescribed Fire 
Demonstration Project. Final Report. JFSP 01C-3-1-02. 
 
Moore G.W. and M.K. Owens (July 2006). Removing adult overstory trees stimulates 
growth and transpiration of conspecific juvenile trees. Rangeland Ecol Manage. 59:416-
421. 
  
Ritchie, G.A. and Thomas M. Hinckley (1975) The Pressure Chamber as an Instrument 
for Ecological Research. Ecological Research. V 9. 165-253.  
   
Scholander P.F. and H.T. Hammel (1965). Sap Pressure in Vascular Plants. Science v. 
148. 339-346. 
 
Wambolt, Carl (1973). Conifer Water Potential as Influenced by Stand Density and 
Environmental Factors. Canadian Journal of Botany v. 51; 2333-2337. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
