Quasi-Brillouin zones and s-p band dispersion observed
in photoemission from the 2fold surface of decagonal AlNiCo
E.Rotenberg1, W.Theis2, K.Franke2, K.Horn3, P.Gille4
1 Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley Lab, Berkeley CA 94720, USA
2 Fachbereich Physik, Freie Universität Berlin, D-14195 Berlin, Germany
3 Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft, D-14195 Berlin, Germany
4 Fachbereich Kristallographie der Leopold-Maximilians-Universität, D-80000 München, Germany
In spite of considerable progress in the understanding of the structural properties of quasi-
crystalline alloys, an explanation of their fascinating physical properties in terms of the nature of
their electronic states remains elusive1. The conventional picture of Bloch waves, so successful
in interpreting the properties of regular crystals, is obviously problematic since the basis of
Bloch wave behavior, i.e. translational symmetry, is absent in quasicrystals. Hence, cluster-like
localized states have been put forward in theoretical treatments, in analogy to the cluster concept
of the quasicrystal geometric structure. We have recently shown that signatures of band-like
states are observed in decagonal AlNiCo quasicrystals by means of photoemission from the
tenfold surface2. The observation of band-like states, which exhibit a free-electron like dispersion
with the parallel and normal component of the electron wave vector k|| and k⊥, can be understood
within a picture of quasi-Brillouin zones in which only those reciprocal lattice vectors with a
large structure factor associated act as centers for higher-order Brillouin zones3. Here we show
that this concept provides a consistent description of the electronic states along both the periodic
and quasiperiodic directions of decagonal AlNiCo. Planes of atoms are stacked periodically
along the tenfold axis, while within the planes the atoms are ordered quasiperiodically; this is
sketched schematically in the top left side of Figure 1. Normal to the tenfold axis are two
inequivalent 2-fold symmetric directions (named "P" and "E" in the inset of Figure 1), and our
photoemission experiments were performed on these two, which are represented by arrows
passing through the planes and vertices of the fictitious decagon in the Figure; they form an
angle of 18o with one another. All data were recorded on beamline 7.0.1, and were recorded by
rotating the sample in the polar and
azimuthal directions with analyzer and light
incidence fixed, with subsequent
symmetrization; the azimuthal range was
large enough to avoid artefacts from the
symmetrization process. The images were
constructed by subtraction of a polynomial
background to enhance the weak features in
the s-p band region.
The concept of quasi-Brillouin zones is
based on the relation between the diffraction
pattern and the influence of the dominant
Bragg planes on valence electron dynamics
in the quasicrystal. Quasicrystals possess
diffraction patterns characterized by
(countably infinite) sharp spots, with a
hierarchy of decreasing intensity. This
suggests that one may, to a first
approximation, take only the location of the
Figure 1: Distribution of
photoelectron intensity
from two inequivalent 2-
fold surfaces of AlNiCo at
a binding energy of 6 eV
below EF.  The horizontal
direction is the quasi-
periodic and the vertical
the periodic direction. The
inset shows a schematic
diagram of the symmetry
axes in d-AlNiCo
most intense spots in reciprocal space as centers of higher order Brillouin zones. If we consider
an s-p band with a free-electron-like dispersion, we expect spherical constant energy surfaces in
k-space. By sampling the intensity distribution at a specific binding energy below the Fermi level
EF, as a function of parallel wave vector k||
x and k||
y, (in terms of polar and azimuthal angle of
electron emission), we expect ring-like features from the cut through these spherical surfaces.
Such rings, centered at specific points in k||-space, are in fact observed (Fig. 1). They arise from
s-p-like states in the AlNiCo valence band, dispersing in a parabolic manner. The top image
(from the "E" surface) shows two rings on either side of the center (k||
x ,k||
y)=(0,0), while the
bottom (from "P") has one ring centered on (0,0) and two rings on either side. This demonstrates
that bulk states are sampled, since the rotation of the bulk direction exactly corresponds to the
displacement of the ring structures in the k-space images.
The above analogy between the diffraction and quasi-Brillouin zones can in fact be made by
directly comparing our electron diffraction image from the "P" surface and the corresponding k||-
space distribution of s-p state intensity in Figure 2. The low energy diffraction (LEED) pattern
shows a rhombic arrangement of intense spots, as shown by the white lines; a similar
arrangement connects the centers of the ring patterns in the photoemission image. The fact that
the rings in the horizontal plane are strongest, while those centered around the top and bottom
corner are weaker may be related to the photoemission transition matrix element. The image
actually contains more detailed information which goes beyond the simple interpretation in terms
of s-p states which disperse in a parabolic fashion; note, for example, that the rings seem to
overlap in the center of the k|| space image, and that there are secondary rings above and below
the strongest features. The energy which is sampled here is already close to the onset of the Co
and Ni d-band region, where a more complex dispersion is expected.
Figure 2: a.) LEED pattern of a twofold surface of d-AlNiCo at 100
eV kinetic energy. B.) Photoemission intensity map from d-AlNiCo at
a binding energy of 4.5 eV below EF, recorded at a photon energy of
99 eV. The rhombic pattern connecting the prominent LEED
diffraction spots and the centers of the rings in the photoemision
k||, quasiperiodic
k||, periodic
References
1. "Physical Properties of Quasicrystals", ed. Z.M.Stadnik, Springer Series in Solid State
Sciences 126, (1999).
2. E.Rotenberg, W.Theis, K.Horn, P.Gille, Nature 406, 602(2000)
3. K.Niizeki, T.Akamatsu, J.Phys.Cond.Mat. 2, 2759(1990)
This work was supported by the Director, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S.
Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC03-76SF00098, and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft.
Principal investigator: Eli Rotenberg, Advanced Light Source, E.O. Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. Email:
erotenberg@lbl.gov. Telephone: 510-486-5975.
