Applied Engineering in Agriculture
Vol. 17(4): 557–560 
 2001 American Society of Agricultural Engineers ISSN 0883–8542
557
REMOTE SENSING OF VINEYARD MANAGEMENT ZONES:
IMPLICATIONS FOR WINE QUALITY
L. F. Johnson, D. F. Bosch, D. C. Williams, B. M. Lobitz
ABSTRACT. High–spatial resolution multispectral imagery was acquired at mid–season 1997 by an airborne digital camera
system and used to establish management zones within a 3–ha commercial wine vineyard in California’s Napa Valley. Image
processing included off–axis brightness correction, band–to–band alignment, ground registration and conversion to a
Vegetation Index to enhance sensitivity to canopy density. The image was then stratified by Vegetation Index and color–coded
for visual discrimination. An output image was generated in TIFF–World format for input to mapping software on the grower’s
laptop computer. The imagery was used to delineate low–, moderate–, and high–vigor zones within the study block.
Supporting field measurements per zone then included canopy structure (woody biomass, canopy transmittance), vine
physiology (leaf water potential, chlorophyll content), and fruit biochemistry. Grapes from each zone were fermented
separately and the resulting wines were formally evaluated for difference and quality. The low– and high–vigor zones were
clearly distinct from one another with respect to most measurements. Block subdivision enabled the production of a reserve"
(highest) quality wine for the first time ever from this particular block.
Keywords. Remote sensing, Precision viticulture, Management zones, Vine vigor, Image processing, Geospatial technology.
inegrowers have known for centuries that
grapes harvested from different areas in the
vineyard can produce wines with different
flavors. Even when such biological factors as
variety, clone, and rootstock are identical, grape quality,
maturity, and resulting wines are influenced by subtle
differences in physical characteristics of the vineyard, to
include soil type, microclimate, slope, exposure, soil water
holding capacity, and drainage (Smart, 1985; Smart and
Robinson, 1991; Wilson, 1998).
In certain regions of France, grapes have been grown for
more than 1700 years. Vintners in these regions have had
abundant time to understand how vintage varies throughout
Article was submitted for review in February 1999; approved for
publication by the Information & Electrical Technologies Division of
ASAE in April 2001. 
Article based on a paper originally published in Proceedings, First Int’l.
Conference on Geospatial Information in Agriculture & Forestry,
2:469–476, 1–3 June 1998, Lake Buena Vista, Fla., sponsored by ERIM
International, Inc. (ISSN 1098–3155). The original article was screened by
the Conference Program Committee and specifically recommended for
submission to ASAE. Throughout, mention of manufacturer names is made
for informational purposes only and does not necessarily imply product
endorsement by the authors’ home institutions.
The authors are Lee F. Johnson, ASAE Member Engineer, Senior
Research Scientist, Institute of Earth Systems Science and Policy,
California State University Monterey Bay, and Principal Investigator, Earth
Science Division, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California,
Daniel F. Bosch, Vineyard Technical Manager, Robert Mondavi Winery,
Oakville, California, Donald C. Williams, Enologist, Robert Mondavi
Winery, Oakville, California (currently Research Manager, Ravenswood
Winery, Sonoma, California), and Bradley M. Lobitz, Remote Sensing
Research Scientist, Institute of Earth Systems Science and Policy,
California State University Monterey Bay, and, Earth Science Division,
NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, California. Corresponding
author: L. F. Johnson, MS242–4, NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett
Field, CA 94035–1000, phone: 650–604–3331; fax: 650–604–4680,
e–mail: Ljohnson@mail.arc.nasa.gov.
the vineyard, and generally, field boundaries have been
established to minimize within–field differences in growing
conditions. By contrast, the majority of vineyard
development in California’s Napa Valley has occurred since
the mid–1960’s. The valley tends to be characterized by
relatively large fields (blocks") that often encompass
heterogeneous physical conditions. Growers tend to treat the
entire block as a single minimum management unit" for
cultivation and harvest.
The goal of this study was to evaluate the use of airborne,
digital, multispectral imagery for delineation of sub–block
management zones. Imagery was used to divide a study block
into zones of differing apparent vigor, field measurements of
canopy and fruit attributes were obtained, grapes were
harvested and fermented per zone, and wine evaluations were
performed with respect to uniqueness and quality.
Our expectation was that the additional expenditure of
labor and resources required for block subdivision might be
rewarded in two ways. First, winemakers blend wines from
different lots to create a desired taste and color in the final
consumer product. Therefore, a greater number of distinct
wine lots will provide the winemaker with increased latitude
in blending options. Second, we speculated that increased
uniformity of each individual wine lot might serve to increase
quality. Either outcome would effectively increase crop
value. Image processing methods were largely based on a
previous study that applied remote sensing to monitoring of
phylloxera (Daktulosphaira vitifoliae [Fitch]) infestation in
vineyards (Johnson et al., 1996; Baldy et al., 1996; Lobitz
et al., 1997).
METHODS
STUDY SITE
An operational 3–ha block of Chardonnay was selected for
study. The block was part of Mondavi’s 200–ha Carneros
W
558
APPLIED ENGINEERING IN AGRICULTURE
vineyard, located southwest of the city of Napa, California,
at approximately 38³15’N, 122³22’W. The block was
planted in 1991 on Haire series (clay–loam) soils. A
multi–wire vertical trellis system was used. Rows were 2.4 m
apart, oriented northeast to southwest; within–row vine
spacing was 1.5 m. The block was clean cultivated, meaning
that all undergrowth vegetation was removed.
Much of the Carneros property occupies hilly terrain. The
study block was no exception, encompassing up to 45 m of
relief along–row. The quality of the clone was high.
However, the block was highly non–uniform due to
topographically induced differences in drainage and
microclimate, and as a result has historically produced fair to
poor wines.
AIRBORNE IMAGERY
Digital imagery was acquired for the vineyard on 31 July
1997 after completion of foliar expansion. An Airborne Data
Acquisition and Registration (ADAR) System Model 5500
(Positive Systems, Inc., Whitefish, Mont) was used aboard a
light aircraft. The system was comprised of four cameras,
approximately boresighted. Each camera was fitted with a
filter to record 8–bit imagery in one of the following spectral
channels: blue (450–540 nm), green (520–600 nm), red
(610–680 nm), and reflected (or near") infrared (760–1000
nm). Spatial resolution was 2 m/pixel, given the nominal
flight altitude of 4300 m above ground level. All imagery was
collected under clear skies within two hours of solar noon.
An image frame centered on the study block was selected
for processing and analysis. A correction was applied to
compensate for brightness falloff as a function of distance
from image center. This effect, which was introduced by the
camera lens, was previously characterized in an optical
calibration laboratory. Image–to–image registration was
performed order to compensate for pointing inconsistencies
among cameras and thus improve band alignment.
The atmosphere was assumed uniform above the entire
study block and no attempt was made to correct the imagery
for atmospheric effects. This assumption is reasonable when
looking for relative differences within a localized area, and
at a single point in time, as reported here. Compensation for
atmospheric effects may become more of a necessity when
comparing fields that are widely separated spatially, or in
comparing the same field at different times of the growing
season.
A normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) was
derived for each pixel (as [infrared–red]/[infrared+red]) to
emphasize differences in the amount of leaf area per unit
ground area (Tucker, 1979), commonly referred to by
growers as canopy density. Canopy density is a function of
both the horizontal (percent green cover) and vertical
distribution (layering) of leaves. Automated classification
based on the Iterative Self–Organizing Data Analysis
algorithm (Duda and Hart, 1973) was used to assign each
pixel to 1 of 12 groups based on NDVI. A previous study
found that this simple approach yielded a reasonably strong
relationship (r2 = 0.76) to vine pruning weights, a measure of
canopy density (Johnson et al., 1996). Each group was
assigned a different color on the output classified NDVI"
image to enhance visual discrimination. Latitude and
longitude coordinates were recorded along the perimeter of
the test block with a Nav–5000 (Magellan Systems, San
Dimas, Calif.) global positioning system (GPS). Readings
from a U.S. Coast Guard beacon were used to compute
positions with sub–meter accuracy. The GPS data were used
as tiepoints to register the classified NDVI image to map
coordinates. The image was then converted to TIFF format,
with a world file" for geo–referencing, and loaded onto a
laptop computer with an integrated GPS receiver.
The NDVI image was taken to the field in early August
1997 to physically navigate and subdivide the study block
into three management zones representing high, moderate–
and low–vigor. Aspen software (Trimble Navigation,
Sunnyvale, Calif.) was used to display the grower’s position
with respect to the image. Seven groups of five consecutive
(within–row) vines from throughout the field were selected
and flagged: two groups in the high– vigor zone, two groups
(moderate), and three groups (low). Subsequent revision of
zone boundaries based on in situ measurements resulted in
the following distribution of sample vine groups: two (high),
one (moderate), and four (low). Values reported herein are
with respect to this revised configuration (fig. 1).
CANOPY TRANSMITTANCE
A Sunfleck Ceptometer (Decagon Devices, Inc., Pullman,
Wash.) was used in the field to estimate the percent of
photosynthetically active solar irradiance (400–700 nm)
transmitted from top–of–canopy to mid–canopy per sample
vine. This instrument has 80 light sensors placed at 1–cm
intervals along a linear wand. The wand was exposed to direct
sunlight to record ambient insolation (AMB) and inserted
into the canopy of the sample vine to record canopy light
levels (CAN). For CAN, the wand was positioned parallel to
and midway between the first and second catch wires of the
trellis, centered between the stakes. A bubble–level was used
to maintain the wand level for all AMB and CAN readings.
All recorded AMB and CAN values were the mean of five
replicates taken within 10–15 sec. A maximum of ten
minutes elapsed between AMB and CAN. Percent canopy
transmittance (CT) was calculated for each sample vine as:
CT(%) = (CAN/AMB) Ü 100. An inverse relationship was
expected between canopy density (vigor) and CT. All
measurements were made under clear skies on 25–26 August
1997, 10:00–11:30 A.M. local time.
LEAF WATER POTENTIAL
A pressure chamber (PMS Instrument Co., Corvallis,
Ore.) was used to measure mid–day leaf water potential
(LWP), an indicator of water status, after the procedure of
100 m
L
M
H
H
High Vigor
Low Vigor
Figure 1. Study block with management zones defined by remote sensing
and field measurements. Zones are low (L), moderate (M), and high (H)
vigor.
559
Vol. 17(4): 557–560
Grimes and Williams (1990). LWP measurements were made
on the center three vines from each sample group. Three
leaves were sampled per vine. A sun–exposed leaf was de-
tached and immediately inserted into the chamber with the
petiole protruding. The chamber was pressurized with CO2;
the amount of pressure required to visibly force sap through
the end of the petiole was recorded. Higher pressures (ex-
pressed as –Mpa) indicate greater water bonding and greater
vine water stress. An inverse relationship was therefore ex-
pected between LWP (absolute values) and vigor. Measure-
ments were made under clear skies on 25–26 August 1997
within 1 h of solar noon.
LEAF CHLOROPHYLL
A SPAD–502 Chlorophyll Meter (Minolta Corp., Ramsey,
N.J.) was used for in vivo measurement of the ratio of light
transmittance through the leaf at two wavelengths: 650 nm
(red) and 940 nm (near infrared). The instrument is a
self–contained unit including illumination source and
detectors. Instrument readings have been shown to be
strongly related (r2 = 0.91) to laboratory measurement of
chlorophyll concentration in grape leaves (Baldy et al., 1996)
and in several other species (Yadava, 1986). Measurements
were made from the inter–vein portions of fully expanded
leaves at top–of–canopy. Each leaf was characterized by the
mean of six replicate measurements. Measurements were
made under cloudy skies on 20 August 1997. A manila folder
was placed in the solar path to provide further shielding from
diffuse illumination.
FRUIT BIOCHEMISTRY
Measurements of brix (sugar), titratable acidity (TA), pH,
and malic acid (MA) were made periodically by
industry–standard procedures from early August until
harvest. These measurements were made from juice samples
of 150–200 grapes collected from 30–40 vines throughout
each zone. Data reported here were collected on 5 September,
8 September, and 10 September 1997 for the moderate, low,
and high zones, respectively, one day pre–harvest in each
case.
HARVEST
Harvest occurred 6 September, 9 September, and
11 September 1997 for the moderate–, low–, and high–vigor
zones respectively. Grapes from each management zone
were allocated to separate wine lots for barrel fermentation.
BIOMASS
Pruning weights (PW) were recorded for the sample vines
in mid–December 1997, during the dormant season and after
completion of leaf drop. All shoots produced during the
growing season were counted, removed and immediately
weighed with a field–portable scale. A short length of each
shoot, containing two to three buds, was retained on the vine
to support the following season’s growth. Many growers find
that PW gives a good, albeit retrospective, approximation of
overall vine vigor.
WINE EVALUATION
In February 1998, a panel of 15 enologists performed an
industry standard blind taste test to evaluate differences
among the study block wine lots. Three samples were
involved: a known reference" wine and two blind samples
(hence the test name: duo–trio"). Under the rules of this test,
one of the blind samples was drawn from the same lot as the
reference, and the other from a different lot. The evaluators
were simply asked whether each blind sample was the same
as the reference, or different. Statistical significance was
associated with test results as a function of the number of
evaluators participating.
In addition, the wine lots were evaluated with respect to
overall quality according to the summary judgment of a
single expert, the chief winemaker. Three general
designations are used in this geographic region. Ranging
from high to low in terms of quality and value, these are
reserve," district," and varietal."
RESULTS
The vine measurements are summarized in table 1.
Pruning weights, which are relied upon extensively in the
wine industry, confirmed the vigor level zonation established
with remote sensing. That is, pruning weights were was
positively related to vigor level. A second biomass measure,
canopy transmittance, also tended to confirm the zonation.
As expected, canopy transmittance was greatest in the
low–vigor zone; the moderate– and high–vigor zones were
much lower and statistically inseparable. The number of
shoots per vine was similar among zones, indicating that
biomass differences were driven mainly by vigor of
individual shoots. Leaf water potential measurements
indicated that water stress was inversely proportional to vigor
level. No significant differences were seen in foliar
chlorophyll concentration, as inferred by measurement of
leaf optical properties in the red and near infrared, indicating
that the remotely sensed NDVI was responding primarily to
differences in foliar biomass rather than leaf color.
The immediate pre–harvest fruit measurements are
summarized in table 2. The only notable trend was in malic
acid, levels of which in the high–vigor zone were some of the
Table 1. Vine measurements by management zone.
Variable
Vigor[a] Mean (std. dev.)[b]
Sample Size
Pruning wt (kg)
L
0.65 (0.40)*
20
M
0.79 (0.21)
5
H
1.13 (0.48)*
10
Number of shoots
L
13.5 (2.5) **
20
M
14.4 (1.7)
5
H
14.3 (2.1)
10
Canopy transmittance (%)
L
39.9 (26.7)**
20
M
11.5 (13.4)
5
H
12.1 (11.3)
10
Leaf water potential (Mpa)
L
–1.2 (0.15)**
36
M
–1.0 (0.1)*
9
H
–0.9 (0.12)**
18
Chlorophyll conc. (unitless)
L
40.8 (2.8)
20
M
39.3 (4.1)
5
H
42.5 (3.8)
10
[a]  L = low; m = moderate; H = high.
[b] *mean significantly different at .05 level,
**mean significantly different at .01 level, according to a posteriori 
F–test (Sokal and Rohlf, 1973).
560
APPLIED ENGINEERING IN AGRICULTURE
Table 2. Fruit biochemistry by management zone, based on random
samples of 150–200 grapes collected from 30–40 vines per zone.
Low
Moderate
High
Brix (g/L)
24.2
24.0
23.8
TA (g/L)[a]
7.2
7.3
7.9
pH (unitless)
3.51
3.51
3.6
MA (g/L)[b]
3.94
4.60
5.51
[a] TA = titratable acidity.
[b] MA = malic acid. Note excessive level of MA in high–vigor zone.
highest the winery had ever seen. Probably this resulted from
excess canopy density and self–shading (Smart and Robin-
son, 1991). Elevated malic acid can result in immature–tast-
ing grapes and a flat tasting, lower quality wine.
Results of the wine evaluations are shown in table 3. The
duo–trio panel judged that the low and moderate wine lots
were different (p < .05) as were the low and high lots (p < .10);
the moderate and high lots were not shown to be significantly
different. In a separate evaluation for quality (table 4), the
low and moderate lots were judged to be of reserve quality
and the high–vigor lot of lower, district quality.
CONCLUSIONS
Remotely sensed vegetation index imagery was used to
establish sub–block management zones in a 3–ha
commercial 
vineyard 
of 
Chardonnay 
wine–grapes.
Subsequent ground–based measurements revealed a clear
differentiation between low– and high–vigor zones with
respect to biomass (primarily shoot vigor), vine water status,
and most importantly, fruit and wine character. The
relationship of the moderate–vigor zone with respect to the
remainder of the block was ambiguous, with some
measurements indicating greater similarity to low–vigor and
some to high–vigor. These results suggested that the
boundaries of the moderate–vigor zone either need
adjustment, or the entire zone be dissolved and incorporated
into the remaining zones. In fact, the latter is exactly what has
occurred over the 1998–2000 timeframe.
Harvesting by vigor zones allowed for the extraction of
unique wine lots from a block that was historically treated as
a single management unit. This aspect alone has value in that
the winemaker was provided with greater flexibility in the
final blending process. More significantly, however,
zonation allowed the production of reserve quality, highest
value wines from the study block for the first time ever.
These results were achieved on a clean cultivated
vineyard block. It is expected that the presence of green
understory vegetation, in the form of a cover crop or
extensive weeds, would complicate image interpretation.
Due to typical summer drought conditions and widespread
use of drip irrigation, however, understory is generally
Table 3. Duo–trio blind taste test for differences among wines 
produced from management zones, as determined by 
panel composed of 15 enologists.
Zone Comparison
Different?
Significance Level[a]
Low vs. Moderate
yes
p < .05
Low vs. High
yes
p < .10
Moderate vs. High
no
[a] Significance level gives probability, based on panel size, that wines
from different zones are the same.
Table 4. Programs to which wines produced from each management
zone were assigned, as determined by a single 
enological expert, the chief winemaker.
Zone
Program[a]
Low
Reserve
Moderate
Reserve
High
District
[a] “Reserve” is the highest quality and value designation.
senescent by mid–to–late season in Napa vineyards. Thus,
understory should not pose a problem for making relative,
sub–block determinations in Napa Valley and similar wine-
growing regions.
The winery, in concert with a commercial value–added
remote sensing vendor, has continued to use annual
late–season imagery for decision support over the 1998–2000
growing seasons. The technology is used primarily to
establish and adjust sub–block management zone boundaries
across ~500 ha of vineyard (both clean cultivated and
otherwise) at Carneros and two other Napa Valley properties.
Zone vigor is then influenced by various viticultural
practices, such as adjusting the number of buds left at
pruning, cultivating a cover crop, or adjusting the irrigation
start–date. In addition to harvest management, other Napa
Valley growers are evaluating the use of imagery to monitor
irrigation, nutrient status, disease, pest infestation, and also
to support new vineyard development (Carothers, 2000).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
LJ and BL were supported by a grant from the NASA
Ames Commercial Technology Projects Fund.
REFERENCES
Baldy, R., J. DeBenedictis, L. Johnson, E. Weber, M. Baldy, and J.
Burleigh. 1996. Relating chlorophyll and vine size to yields in a
phylloxera infested vineyard. Vitis 35(4): 201–205.
Carothers, J. 2000. Imagery technology meets vineyard
management. Practical Winery and Vineyard May/June: 54–62.
Duda R., and P. Hart. 1973. Pattern Classification and Scene
Analysis. New York: John Wiley and Sons Inc.
Grimes, D., and L. Williams. 1990. Irrigation effects on plant water
relations and productivity of Thompson Seedless grapevines.
Crop Sci. 30: 255–260.
Johnson, L., B. Lobitz, R. Armstrong, R. Baldy, E. Weber, J.
DeBenedictis, and D. Bosch. 1996. Airborne imaging aids
vineyard canopy evaluation. California Agric. 15(4): 14–18.
Lobitz, B., L. Johnson, C. Hlavka, R. Armstrong, and C. Bell. 1997.
Grapevine Remote Sensing Analysis of Phylloxera Early Stress
(GRAPES): Remote sensing analysis summary. NASA
Technical Memorandum No. 112218. Hanover, Md., NASA
Center for AeroSpace Information.
Smart, R. 1985. Principles of grapevine canopy management
microclimate manipulation with implications for yield and
quality. Amer. J. Enology and Viticulture 36(3): 230–239.
Smart, R., and M. Robinson. 1991. Sunlight into wine. Adelaide,
Australia: Winetitles.
Sokal, R., and F. Rohlf. 1973. Introduction to Biostatistics,
179–181. San Francisco, Calif.: W.H. Freeman and Co.
Tucker. C. 1979. Red and photographic infrared linear
combinations for monitoring vegetation. Remote Sensing of
Environment 8(1): 127–150.
Wilson, J. 1998. Terroir. Berkeley, Calif.: Univ. of California Press.
Yadava, U. 1986. A rapid and nondestructive method to determine
chlorophyll in intact leaves. HortScience 216(6): 1449–1450.
