 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Mexico Ecological Services Field Office 
2105 Osuna NE 
Albuquerque, New Mexico  87113 
Phone: (505) 346-2525 Fax: (505) 346-2542 
 
 
 
 
 
May 5, 2006 
 
22420-2006-F-0009 
 
Memorandum 
 
To: 
Area Manager, Albuquerque Area Office, Bureau of Reclamation, 
Albuquerque, New Mexico 
 
From: 
Field Supervisor, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, New Mexico Ecological 
Services Field Office, Albuquerque, New Mexico 
 
 
Subject: 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s Biological Opinion on the Effects of the 
Bernalillo Priority Site Project proposed by the Bureau of Reclamation 
 
This document transmits the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's (Service) biological opinion 
on the effects of the proposed Bernalillo Priority Site Project in the Albuquerque Reach 
of the Rio Grande, Bernalillo County, New Mexico.  This biological opinion concerns the 
effects of the proposed action on the endangered Rio Grande silvery minnow 
(Hybognathus amarus) (silvery minnow), the endangered southwestern willow flycatcher 
(Empidonax trailli extimus) (flycatcher), and the threatened bald eagle (Hailiaeetus 
leucocephalus) (eagle). Your request for formal consultation, in accordance with section 
7 of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) of 1973, as amended (16 U.S.C. 531 et seq.) was 
received on October 21, 2005.   
 
This biological opinion is based on information submitted in the Middle Rio Grande 
Project Bernalillo Priority Site Project Biological Assessment dated October 18, 2005; 
meetings between Reclamation and the Service; site visits; and other sources of 
information available to the Service.  A complete administrative record of this 
consultation is on file at the Service’s New Mexico Ecological Services Field Office 
(NMESFO). 
 
 
1
You have determined that the proposed project may affect, is not likely to adversely 
affect, the flycatcher and eagle. We concur with these determinations for the following 
reasons:   
 
Flycatcher 
The proposed action is not expected to adversely affect flycatchers because neither 
suitable nor potentially suitable habitat for flycatchers currently exists within the project 
area.  The closest occupied flycatcher habitat occurs on the Pueblo of Isleta and Ohkay 
Owingeh (San Juan) Pueblo, approximately 30 miles south and 70 miles north of the 
project area, respectively.   
 
Habitat conditions within the project area may be improved for flycatchers as a result of 
splitting the river channel and redirecting the secondary river channel away from the east 
levee.  The east river bank will be protected, vegetation will be allowed to re-establish, 
and the narrow band of existing vegetation will remain intact.  In addition to protecting 
existing habitat, the proposed action will create approximately 1.43 acres (0.58 hectare) 
of islands or bars resulting from the deposition of sediments along the existing portion of 
the river channel and on the island created in between the two river channels.  The islands 
and bars would initially be inundated at an annual frequency of 75 to 80 percent, thereby 
allowing only emergent vegetation to establish.  However, as the islands and bars 
stabilize and build up, young woody riparian vegetation could establish in the center and 
eventually create potentially suitable flycatcher habitat.  Along the east side of the 
existing river channel, approximately 2.36 acres (0.95 hectare) of the old channel will be 
filled and replanted.  This would add to the existing habitat along the east side of the river 
channel and help ensure bank stability.  The island resulting from the creation of the 
second channel will be replanted, further increasing the amount of potentially suitable 
habitat. 
 
Eagle  
Terrestrial habitat within the project area is composed of scattered cottonwoods with an 
understory of willow, saltcedar, Russian olive, and weed species.  In addition, several 
snags that offer suitable perching structures for bald eagles have been identified in the 
project area.  Bald eagles only breed in a few isolated locations in New Mexico, none are 
located near the project area.  Wintering bald eagles are present within the Middle Rio 
Grande Valley and have been observed flying and perching in the project area. This 
population of winter migrants will not be adversely affected by the proposed action 
because the distance from the project area to the bald eagle wintering areas is sufficient to 
avoid noise impacts. 
Eagles may roost within the project area.  Therefore, the proposal includes requirements that 
the project area be surveyed daily prior to activity.   If, as a result of those surveys, an eagle is 
observed within 0.25 mi upstream or downstream of the active project site in the morning 
before project activity starts, or following breaks in project activity, the contractor will suspend 
all activity until the bird leaves of its own volition, or a U. S. Bureau of Reclamation 
(Reclamation) biologist, in consultation with the Service, determines that the potential for 
harassment is minimal.  If an eagle arrives during construction activities or is beyond that 
 
2
distance, construction need not be interrupted. If eagles are found consistently in the immediate 
project area during the construction period, Reclamation will contact the Service to determine 
whether formal consultation is necessary.  It is expected that implementation of these actions 
will reduce effects to the eagle to an insignificant level.  
 
The remainder of this biological opinion will deal with the effects of implementation of 
the proposed action on the silvery minnow. 
 
Consultation History 
Reclamation and the Service conducted a site visit to review the proposed project on March 30, 
2005, prior to initiation of formal consultation.  A Biological Assessment was received by the 
Service on October 21, 2005.  A draft Biological Opinion was provided to Reclamation on 
May 28, 2006. 
 
 
BIOLOGICAL OPINION 
 
DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED ACTION 
 
Purpose and Objective 
The Bernalillo Priority Site Project (Project) proposed by Reclamation is necessary to 
protect the integrity of the east levee and canal system along the Albuquerque Reach of 
the Middle Rio Grande between the U.S. Highway 550 bridge and the northern boundary 
of the Pueblo of Sandia (See Figure 1). The banks of the river are close to the east levee 
and pose a potentially serious threat to project facilities and public health and safety.  The 
Project proposes to create a secondary high flow channel, realign the main river channel, 
and install bendway weirs to reduce bank erosion threatening the levee.   
 
Project 
The proposed action for protection of the east levee and canal system is to install a series 
of bendway weirs and rootwad revetments and split the existing flow into two channels 
(See Figure 2).  The eastern channel (main channel) would follow a similar pathway to 
the existing river channel, except that the existing river bend would be lengthened and 
moved away from the levee.  Existing native vegetation along the east levee would not be 
disturbed during the construction process and additional riparian/wetland habitat would 
be created as part of the proposed action (See Figure 3).    
 
The proposed action is anticipated to occur during the summer of 2006.  Features of the 
proposed action are described below, in the probable order in which they would occur.  
Construction equipment to be utilized includes bulldozers, excavators (land-track and 
amphibious), water trucks, scrapers, dump trucks, loaders, and motor graders.   
 
Removal/Disposal of Jetty Jacks and Exotic Vegetation 
Jetty jacks within the project area will be removed from the site.  This process requires 
construction access of 30 feet to the left and right of the center line of each jetty jack line.  
 
3
The removal of jetty jacks promotes more natural habitat conditions, provides better 
construction access for other project features, and eliminates a potential safety hazard. 
 
Non-native vegetation, including Russian olive (Elaeagnus angustifolia) and saltcedar 
(Tamarix spp.) will be removed from the project area.  These species are considered 
invasive and are often affiliated with highly altered hydrologic regimes (U.S. Bureau of 
Reclamation 2005b). The removal of existing cottonwood trees (Populus spp.) and other 
native plants will be minimized to the extent practical during all project phases.  
Removed vegetation will be mulched and spread out evenly (not to exceed a height of 12 
inches) on the ground surface throughout the project area. 
 
Secondary Channel Excavation 
A secondary channel will be excavated to split the river flow into two channels at the 
upstream end of the existing sharp bend. The secondary channel will be excavated while 
the river remains in its current alignment.  Earth plugs will be placed at both ends of the 
secondary channel until its excavation is complete.  Excavated earth material will be 
temporarily placed between the secondary channel and the existing main channel (See 
Figure 2).  When material is excavated from below the waterline, the excavator bucket 
will be tilted after it is clear of the water surface so that water can drain out of the bucket 
before the material is deposited on land.  Once excavation is complete, the earth plugs 
will be removed to connect the secondary channel to the river.   
 
The secondary channel will be approximately 780 feet, with a top width of 50-110 feet, 
and a depth of 4-7 feet.  The gradient of the secondary channel will be the same as that of 
the main channel.  However, over time, the main channel is expected to develop a deeper 
thalweg or pool feature on the outside of the bend, resulting in a maximum depth of 1-2 
feet deeper than the secondary channel.  During high-flow conditions, approximately 
one-third (about 5,000 cubic feet per second [cfs]) of the total flow is expected to flow 
through the secondary channel; approximately one-sixth of the total flow during low-flow 
conditions (about 500 cfs). 
 
Channel Diversion and Dewatering 
After the secondary channel is connected to the river, a temporary earthen berm will be 
built in the main channel at the upstream end of the constructed island to divert the 
flowing water into the secondary channel.  The berm will also be used as a roadway for 
hauling excavated material to the eastern bankline.  An additional earthen berm may be 
placed at the downstream end of the main channel to prevent water from backing up into 
active construction areas.  If necessary, water remaining in the main channel may be 
partially dewatered using pumps.  A minimum of 400 square feet of pool area with a 
depth of at least 3 feet will be maintained throughout the construction phase. 
 
Bendway Weir Installation 
Bendway weirs will be used in the project area to control excessive deepening and reduce 
adjacent riverbank erosion on the outer bank.  Bendway weirs will also provide additional 
bank stability and reliability during high flows to protect the eastern levee against bank 
 
4
erosion.  Scour is expected near the toe of each weir, as well as the development of a new 
thalweg approximately 25 feet away from the new bankline.  To reduce the probability 
that the new thalweg will migrate outward and undermine the weirs, weir stones will be 
placed in the old channel on the existing grade.  Weir rock placed by the excavator into 
the water will be released from the excavator bucket while submerged, rather than being 
dropped from above the water surface.  Fill will be placed between and on top of the 
weirs to create the new bankline and floodplain surface.  
  
A total of thirteen bendway weirs will be used in the project area: eight weirs at the bend 
and five additional weirs buried behind the new bankline.  The purpose of the additional 
weirs (up to four) is to prevent outflanking by future channel meandering.  The bendway 
weirs will be constructed of nominal D50 (~12-inch) riprap.  In general, the weirs will 
have a top width of 3 feet and a height of 4 feet.  The weir height will be larger (up to 10 
feet) in localized areas where the bed of the existing channel is below the elevation of the 
newly constructed channel bed.  The weirs that are not fully buried will extend 25 feet 
into the channel and have root lengths of 25-75 feet. 
 
Main Channel Realignment 
The main (eastern) channel will be realigned to lengthen the abrupt bend and move it 
away from the levee. The realignment will be achieved by partially filling and replanting 
the existing channel.  Approximately 2.4 acres of the existing channel will be filled.  The 
on-site excavated material from the secondary channel and the west side of the main 
channel will be used to create a new bankline and provide fill between and on top of the 
weir roots to create new floodplain surfaces.  Fill material will be moved into place using 
a combination of bulldozers, scrapers, excavators, and dump trucks.  Any additional earth 
material will be placed along the existing bankline upstream of the bendway weirs and 
contoured to match the existing terrace.   
 
Fill placement and the excavation of the new main channel will occur systematically to 
ensure that the area of ponded water remains as one continuous pool capable of 
sustaining fish throughout construction.  When material is excavated from below the 
waterline, the excavator bucket will be tilted after it is clear of the water surface so that 
water can drain out of the bucket.  Fill material will be released from the excavator 
bucket while submerged, rather than being dropped from above the water surface. 
  
Berm Removal 
The earthen berms will be removed when the bendway weirs have been installed and the 
main channel has been realigned.  Using an excavator, the downstream berm will be 
removed first, followed by the upstream berm.  The berm material will be excavated until 
the berm area matches the contours of the adjacent channel areas.  Excavated berm 
material will be placed on the central island or the east bank and will be contoured to 
achieve a natural appearance.  When material is excavated from below the waterline, the 
excavator bucket will be tilted after it is clear of the water surface so that water can drain 
out of the bucket before the material is deposited on land.  After the earthen berms are 
removed, the main flow of the river will return to the eastern channel, with some flow 
 
5
remaining in the secondary channel to the west.   
 
Vegetation Planting 
The Project is estimated to create an area of approximately 3.8 acres of predominately 
native bosque vegetation.  The area gained in the existing channel (approximately 2.4 
acres) will be replanted with riparian vegetation (broadcast seed, shrub, willow [Salix 
spp.], and cottonwood) to serve as a habitat enhancement feature.  Vegetation planting 
will occur during an appropriate season to maximize plant survival. 
 
Rootwads and Debris Piles 
Rootwads and debris piles will be used as added bank stabilization.  Upstream rootwads 
will protect against erosion caused by island deflection.  The rootwads downstream will 
protect against erosion caused by eddies behind the last weir, as well as protect against 
the flows that will be directed at this bankline from the eastern channel.  The rootwads 
will be placed simultaneously with the bendway weir installation.   
 
Debris piles located at the upper point of the island will be used to ensure split flow and 
protect the tip of the island from erosion.  Side bar woody debris piles will be used to 
encourage some localized scour and deposition (topographic heterogeneity) around a 
naturalized in-stream structure.  Debris piles adjacent to the secondary channel will be 
placed simultaneously with the channel’s excavation; debris piles adjacent to the main 
channel will be placed during the time the main channel is realigned.   
 
Access and Staging 
Access to the west side of the project area will occur via Arroyo Venada, from the New 
Mexico State Highway 528 crossing to the arroyo’s mouth at the Rio Grande floodway.  
An alternate access to the arroyo is via Sheriff’s Posse Road, which intersects U.S. 
Highway 550 west of the Rio Grande.  Travel along Arroyo Venada will occur on the 
tops of the levees that parallel the arroyo.  The access road proceeds northeast from the 
mouth of the arroyo through the floodplain to the west side of the project area.  Access 
will also occur via an existing dirt road that leads from the downstream end of the arroyo 
levee to an existing access ramp several hundred feet north of the arroyo mouth.  West 
side access roads may be periodically bladed to a maximum width of 18 feet. 
 
Access to the east side of the project area will occur via the top of the levee, beginning at 
the U.S. Highway 550 bridge in Bernalillo and extending south to the construction site.  
An earthen ramp will be constructed to allow access from the levee top to the project 
area.  If necessary to ensure safe and convenient access, road improvements (e.g., 
blading, gravel cap placement) may be made to the levee road and ramp. 
 
Construction materials, including riprap, coir fabric, and rootwads, may be stockpiled on 
the terrace between the east bank of the river and the levee while construction activities 
are occurring.  Additionally, riprap and other construction materials may be temporarily 
stockpiled on the terrace west of the levee at the southeast corner of the U.S. Highway 
550 bridge. 
 
6
 
At the beginning of the project, access will be primarily from the west side.  After the 
secondary channel has been excavated and the river has been diverted into it, primary 
access will be from the east side.  When the river is diverted into the secondary channel, 
most of the equipment will be between the secondary channel and the main channel.  The 
equipment will then be used to realign the main channel.  At the conclusion of the 
project, the equipment fleet will exit the site to the east.  This procedure will minimize 
the need for equipment to cross flowing water in the river, though it may still 
occasionally be necessary. 
 
Conservation Measures  
Reclamation’s construction techniques outlined above are designed to minimize direct 
contact with silvery minnows, and ensure that ponded water in the original main channel 
remains capable of sustaining silvery minnows throughout the construction process.  The 
techniques allow silvery minnows present near the work area to move freely as a means 
of avoiding contact with construction equipment or personnel.  Reclamation has also 
provided the following Environmental Commitments to minimize direct or indirect 
effects to silvery minnows: 
 
1. Construction of the river channels and placement of bendway weirs and 
rootwad revetments will be implemented during low flows to minimize the 
size of the berms and amount dewatering on the construction site.  
Additionally, temporary berms will be used to direct river flows from the 
main channel to the secondary channel during the construction process. 
2. Management of a refugial pool area within the construction area that provides 
sufficient depth and area for silvery minnows to avoid construction equipment 
and activities. Reclamation will coordinate site visits with the Service to 
evaluate the refugial pool management during construction activities. 
3. All constructions spoils and waste would be disposed of at an approved 
landfill facility. 
4. Best Management Practices will be implemented and utilized to prevent 
stormwater runoff and water pollution from entering the Rio Grande during 
construction activities. 
5. A Reclamation fishery biologist will oversee construction and breaching of 
temporary berms for redirecting and partial dewatering of the river channel.   
6. To protect aquatic habitat from spills or contamination, hydraulic lines will be 
protected from punctures.  Additionally, all fueling will take place outside the 
active floodplain and all equipment will undergo cleaning and inspection prior 
to operation.  Equipment will be parked on predetermined locations on high 
ground overnight. 
 
Action Area 
The action area is defined as the area from the Angostura Diversion Dam to the Isleta 
 
7
Diversion Dam and the entire width of the 100 year floodplain within that reach. Silvery 
minnows in the immediate vicinity of the project area are likely to be directly impacted 
by excavation equipment used during construction of the main and secondary channels, 
and the dewatering of such construction areas. Silvery minnows may be indirectly 
affected by reduced water quality resulting from sediment disturbance and the 
mobilization of contaminants.  Silvery minnow critical habitat may be affected 
temporarily, but the proposed action is expected to increase and restore potential habitat 
for the species.  
 
STATUS OF THE SPECIES  
 
Species Description 
The silvery minnow currently occupies a 170-mile (275 km) reach of the middle Rio 
Grande, New Mexico, from Cochiti Dam, Sandoval County, to the headwaters of 
Elephant Butte Reservoir, Soccorro County (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 1994).  The 
silvery minnow is a stout minnow, with moderately small eyes, a small, sub-terminal 
mouth, and a pointed snout that projects beyond the upper lip (Sublette et al. 1990).  The 
back and upper sides of the silvery minnow are silvery to olive, the broad mid-dorsal 
stripe is greenish, and the lower sides and abdomen are silver.  Maximum length attained 
is about 3.5 inches (90 millimeters [mm]).  The only readily apparent sexual dimorphism 
is the expanded body cavity of ripe females during spawning (Bestgen and Propst 1994).   
 
The silvery minnow has had an unstable taxonomic history, and in the past was included 
with other species of the genus Hybognathus due to morphological similarities.  Phenetic 
and phylogenetic analyses corroborate the hypothesis that it is a valid taxon, distinctive 
from other species of Hybognathus (Cook et al. 1992, Bestgen and Propst 1994).  It is 
now recognized as one of seven species in the genus Hybognathus in the United States 
and was formerly one of the most widespread and abundant minnow species in the Rio 
Grande basin of New Mexico, Texas, and Mexico (Pflieger 1980, Bestgen and Platania 
1991).  Currently, Hybognathus amarus is the only remaining endemic pelagic spawning 
minnow in the Middle Rio Grande.  The speckled chub (Extrarius aestivalus), Rio 
Grande shiner (Notropis jemezanus), phantom shiner (Notropis orca), and bluntnose 
shiner (Notropis simus simus) are either extinct or have been extirpated from the Middle 
Rio Grande (New Mexico Game and Fish Department 1998b, Bestgen and Platania 
1991). 
 
Legal Status 
The silvery minnow was federally listed as endangered under the ESA on July 20, 1994 
(Service 1994).  The species is also listed as an endangered species by the state of New 
Mexico.  Primary reasons for listing the silvery minnow involved a number of factors, 
described in the Reasons for Listing section (below). 
 
Critical habitat was proposed for the silvery minnow on June 6, 2002 (67 FR 39205) and 
was finalized on February 19, 2003 (68 FR 8088).  The critical habitat designation 
extends approximately 157 mi (252 km) from Cochiti Dam, Sandoval County, New 
 
8
Mexico downstream to the utility line crossing the Rio Grande, a permanent identified 
landmark in Socorro County, New Mexico.  The critical habitat designation defines the 
lateral extent (width) as those areas bounded by existing levees or, in areas without 
levees, 300 ft (91.4 meters) or riparian zone adjacent to each side of the bankfull stage of 
the Middle Rio Grande.  Some developed lands within the 300 ft lateral extent are not 
considered critical habitat because they do not contain the primary constituent elements 
of critical habitat and are not essential to the conservation of the silvery minnow.  Lands 
located within the exterior boundaries of the critical habitat designation, but not 
considered critical habitat include:  developed flood control facilities, existing paved 
roads, bridges, parking lots, dikes, levees, diversion structures, railroad tracks, railroad 
trestles, water diversion and irrigation canals outside of natural stream channels, the Low 
Flow Conveyance Channel, active gravel pits, cultivated agricultural land, and 
residential, commercial, and industrial developments.  The Pueblo lands of Santo 
Domingo, Santa Ana, Sandia, and Isleta within this area are not included in the critical 
habitat designation.  Except for these Pueblo lands, the remaining portion of the silvery 
minnow’s occupied range in the Middle Rio Grande in New Mexico is designated as 
critical habitat (68 FR 8088). 
 
Habitat 
The silvery minnow travels in schools and tolerates a wide range of habitats (Sublette et 
al. 1990); yet, generally prefers low velocity (<0.33 ft per second, 10 centimeters/second  
[cm/sec]) areas over silt or sand substrate that are associated with shallow (< 15.8 inches, 
40 cm) braided runs, backwaters or pools (Dudley and Platania 1997).  Habitat for the 
silvery minnow includes stream margins, side channels, and off-channel pools where 
water velocities are low or reduced from main-channel velocities.  Stream reaches 
dominated by straight, narrow, incised channels with rapid flows are not typically 
occupied by silvery minnow (Sublette et al. 1990, Bestgen and Platania 1991). 
 
Adult minnows are most commonly found in backwaters, pools, and habitats associated 
with debris piles; whereas, Young of Year (YOY) occupy shallow, low velocity 
backwaters with silt substrates (Dudley and Platania 1997).  A study conducted between 
1994 and 1996 characterized habitat availability and use at two sites in the Middle Rio 
Grande at Rio Rancho and Socorro.  From this study Dudley and Platania (1997) reported 
that the silvery minnow was most commonly found in habitats with depths less than 19.7 
inches (50 cm).  Over 85 percent were collected from low velocity habitats (<0.33 ft/sec, 
10 cm/sec) (Dudley and Platania 1997, Watts et al. 2002). 
 
Critical Habitat 
The Service has determined the primary constituent elements (PCEs) of silvery minnow 
critical habitat based on studies on silvery minnow habitat and population biology (68 FR 
8088).  The PCEs of critical habitat for the silvery minnow include: 
 
1. A hydrologic regime that provides sufficient flowing water with low to 
moderate currents capable of forming and maintaining a diversity of aquatic 
habitats, such as, but not limited to the following: backwaters (a body of water 
 
9
connected to the main channel, but with no appreciable flow), shallow side 
channels, pools (that portion of the river that is deep with relatively little 
velocity compared to the rest of the channel), and runs (flowing water in the 
river channel without obstructions) of varying depth and velocity – all of 
which are necessary for each of the particular silvery minnow life-history 
stages in appropriate seasons ( e.g., the silvery minnow requires habitat with 
sufficient flows from early spring (March) to early summer (June) to trigger 
spawning, flows in the summer (June) and fall (October) that do not increase 
prolonged periods of low or no flow, and relatively constant winter flow 
(November through February)); 
 
2. The presence of eddies created by debris piles, pools, or backwaters, or other 
refuge habitat within unimpounded stretches of flowing water of sufficient 
length (i.e., river miles) that provide a variation of habitats with a wide range 
of depth and velocities; 
 
3. Substrates of predominantly sand or silt; and  
 
4. Water of sufficient quality to maintain natural, daily, and seasonally variable 
water temperatures in the approximate range of greater than 1 ºC (35 ºF) and 
less than 30 ºC (85 ºF) and reduce degraded conditions (e.g., decreased 
dissolved oxygen, increased pH). 
 
These PCEs provide for the physiological, behavioral, and ecological requirements 
essential to the conservation of the silvery minnow. 
 
Life History 
The species is a pelagic spawner that produces 3,000 to 6,000 semi-buoyant, non-
adhesive eggs during a spawning event (Platania 1995, Platania and Altenbach 1999).  
Adults spawn in about a one-month period in late spring to early summer (May to June) 
in association with spring runoff.  Platania and Dudley (2000, 2001) found that the 
highest collections of silvery minnow eggs occurred in mid- to late May.  In 1997, Smith 
(1999b) collected the highest number of eggs in mid-May, with lower frequency of eggs 
being collected in late May and June.  These data suggest multiple silvery minnow 
spawning events during the spring and summer, perhaps concurrent with flow spikes.  
Artificial spikes have apparently induced silvery minnows to spawn (Platania and 
Hoagstrom 1996).  It is unknown if individual silvery minnows spawn more than once a 
year or if some spawn earlier and some later in the year.   
 
Platania (2000) found that development and hatching of eggs are correlated with water 
temperature.  Eggs of the silvery minnow raised in 30۫ C water hatched in approximately 
24 hours while eggs reared in 20-24۫ C water hatched within 50 hours.  Eggs were 0.06 
inches (1.6 mm) in size upon fertilization, but quickly swelled to 0.12 inches (3 mm).  
Recently hatched larval fish are about 0.15 inches (3.7 mm) in standard length and grow 
about 0.005 inches (0.15 mm) in size per day during the larval stages.  Eggs and larvae 
 
10
 
Platania (1995) suggested that historically the downstream transport of eggs and larvae of 
the silvery minnow over long distances was likely beneficial to the survival of their 
populations.  This behavior may have promoted recolonization of reaches impacted 
during periods of natural drought (Platania 1995).  The spawning strategy of releasing 
floating eggs allows the silvery minnow to replenish populations downstream, but the 
current presence of diversion dams (Angostura, Isleta, and San Acacia Diversion Dams) 
prevents recolonization of upstream habitats (Platania 1995).  As populations are depleted 
upstream, and diversion structures prevent upstream movements, isolated extirpations of 
the species through fragmentation may occur (Service 1999).  Adults, eggs and larvae are 
also transported downstream to Elephant Butte Reservoir.  It is believed that none of 
these fish survive because of poor habitat and predation from reservoir fishes (Service 
1999). 
 
The silvery minnow is herbivorous (feeding primarily on algae); this is indicated 
indirectly by the elongated and coiled gastrointestinal tract (Sublette et al. 1990).  
Additionally, detritus, including sand and silt, is filtered from the bottom (Sublette et al. 
1990, Service 1999).   
 
Population Dynamics 
Generally, a population of silvery minnows consists of only two age classes:  YOY and 
Age-1 (Service 1999).  The majority of spawning silvery minnows are one year old.  Two 
year old fish comprise less than 10 percent of the spawning population.  High silvery 
minnow mortality occurs during or subsequent to spawning, consequently very few adults 
are found in late summer.  By December, the majority (> 98 percent) of individuals are 
YOY (Age 0).  This population ratio does not change appreciably between January and 
June, as Age 1 fish usually constitute over 95 percent of the population just prior to 
spawning.   
 
Platania (1995) found that a single female in captivity could broadcast 3,000 eggs in eight 
hours.  Females produce 3 to 18 clutches of eggs in a 12-hour period.  The mean number 
of eggs in a clutch is approximately 270 (Platania and Altenbach 1996).  In captivity, 
silvery minnows have been induced to spawn as many as four times in a year (C. 
Altenbach, City, pers. comm. 2000).  It is not known if they spawn multiple times in the 
wild.  The high reproductive potential of this fish appears to be one of the primary 
 
11
reasons that it has not been extirpated from the Middle Rio Grande.  However, the short 
life span of the silvery minnow increases the population instability. When two below-
average flow years occur consecutively, a short-lived species such as the silvery minnow 
can be impacted, if not completely eliminated from the dry reaches of the river (U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service 1999). 
 
Distribution and Abundance 
Historically, the silvery minnow occurred in 2,465 mi (3,967 km) of rivers in New 
Mexico and Texas.  They were known to have occurred from Española upstream from 
Cochiti Lake; in the downstream portions of the Chama and Jemez Rivers; throughout the 
Middle and Lower Rio Grande to the Gulf of Mexico; and in the Pecos River from 
Sumner Reservoir downstream to the confluence with the Rio Grande (Sublette et al. 
1990, Bestgen and Platania 1991).  The current distribution of the silvery minnow is 
limited to the Rio Grande River between Cochiti Dam and Elephant Butte Reservoir, 
which amounts to approximately 5 percent of its historic range. 
 
The construction of mainstem dams, such as Cochiti Dam and irrigation diversion dams 
have contributed to the decline of the silvery minnow.  The construction of Cochiti Dam 
in particular has affected the silvery minnow by reducing the magnitude and frequency of 
flooding events that help to create and maintain habitat for the species.  In addition, the 
construction of Cochiti Dam has resulted in degradation of silvery minnow habitat within 
the Cochiti Reach.   Flow in the river at Cochiti Dam is now generally clear, cool, and 
free of sediment.  There is relatively little channel braiding, and areas with reduced 
velocity and sand or silt substrates are uncommon.  Substrate immediately downstream of 
the dam is often armored cobble (rounded rock fragments generally 8 to 30 cm (3 to 12 
inches) in diameter).  Further downstream the riverbed is gravel with some sand material.  
Ephemeral tributaries including Galisteo Creek and Tonque Arroyo introduce sediment to 
the lower sections of this reach, and some of this is transported downstream with higher 
flows (Service 2001, 1999).  The Rio Grande below Angostura Dam becomes a 
predominately sand bed river with low, sandy banks in the downstream portion of the 
reach.  The construction of Cochiti Dam also created a barrier between silvery minnow 
populations (Service 1999).  As recently as 1978, the silvery minnow was collected 
upstream of Cochiti Lake; however surveys since 1983 suggest that the fish is now 
extirpated from this area (Service 1999). 
 
Silvery minnow catch rates have declined two to three orders of magnitude between 1993 
and 2004.  Additionally, relative abundance of silvery minnows declined from 
approximately 50 percent of the total fish community in 1995 to about 5 percent in 2004. 
However, in 2004, the October density of silvery minnows was significantly higher 
(p<0.05) than in 2003 and autumnal catch rates increased by over an order of magnitude 
between those years.  Silvery minnow catch rates in 2004 were comparable to those in 
2001. Catch rates in 2005 were even higher.   
 
The silvery minnow was the most abundant taxon in October 2005 captures; it comprised 
about 72 percent of the total catch (Dudley et al. 2005).  The species was nearly twice as 
 
12
abundant as the next most-abundant taxon (western mosquitofish).  The increase in 
abundance of silvery minnow in 2005 has been comparable to previous years with above 
average precipitation (e.g., mid 1990s) (Dudley et al. 2005).  These monitoring results 
from 2005 indicate that the status of the species has improved markedly compared to fall 
of 2003.   
 
Increased discharge in the Rio Grande during 2004 contrasted with the extended low-
flow conditions observed throughout the Middle Rio Grande during 2003 and 2002. The 
timing of the 2004 runoff flow was typical of a flow increase that would normally occur 
at the onset of the spring runoff period. These flows likely resulted in more favorable 
conditions for the growth and survivorship of newly hatched silvery minnow larvae. It is 
possible that even low numbers of eggs and larvae could have resulted in greatly 
increased recruitment success because of the inundation of shoreline habitats, abandoned 
side channels, and backwaters. Low velocity and shallow areas provide the warm and 
productive habitats required by larval fishes to successfully complete their early life 
history.   
 
Spring runoff in 2005 was also above average, leading to a peak of over 6,000 cfs at 
Albuquerque and sustained high flows (> 3,000 cfs) for more than two months.  These 
flows improved conditions for both spawning and recruitment.   
 
Middle Rio Grande Distribution 
Since the early 1990’s, the density of silvery minnows generally increased from upstream 
(Angostura Reach) to downstream (San Acacia Reach). During surveys in 1999, over 98 
percent of the silvery minnows captured were downstream of San Acacia Diversion Dam 
(Dudley and Platania 2002).  This distributional pattern has been observed since 1994 
(Dudley and Platania 2002) and is attributed to downstream drift of eggs and larvae and 
the inability of adults to repopulate upstream reaches because of diversion dams.   
 
In 2004 and 2005, however, Dudley et al. (2005 and 2006) found that this pattern 
reversed.  Catch rates were highest in the Angostura Reach and approximately equal in 
the Isleta and San Acacia reaches. The Angostura Reach yielded the most silvery minnow 
(n=2,226) in 2004, followed by the Isleta Reach (n=442), and San Acacia Reach (n=371). 
The pattern was likely caused by good spawning conditions (i.e., high and sustained 
spring runoff) throughout the Middle Rio Grande during April and May followed by 
wide-scale drying in the Isleta and San Acacia reaches from June-September.  High 
spring runoff and perennial flow in the Angostura Reach appeared to result in relatively 
high survival and recruitment of larval and juvenile RGSM compared to previous drought 
years (2002-2003).  In contrast, large portions of the Rio Grande south of Isleta Diversion 
Dam were dewatered in 2004 and young RGSM in these areas were either subjected to 
poor recruitment conditions (i.e., lack of nursery habitats during low flows) or they were 
trapped in drying pools where they perished. 
 
Sampling in early 2006 indicates populations are again higher downstream.  Of the 6,143 
silvery minnows caught in March 2006, 33 were found in Angostura, 2,445 were found in 
the Isleta Reach, and 3,665 were caught in the San Acacia Reach. Silvery minnow catch 
 
13
rates were 0.19 per 100 m2 in the immediate project area. 
 
Reasons for Listing/Threats to Survival 
The silvery minnow was federally listed as endangered for the following reasons: 
 
1. Regulation of stream waters, which has led to severe flow reductions, often to 
the point of dewatering extended lengths of stream channel; 
 
2. Alteration of the natural hydrograph, which impacts the species by disrupting 
the environmental cues the fish receives for a variety of life functions, 
including spawning; 
 
3. Both the stream flow reductions and other alterations of the natural 
hydrograph throughout the year can severely impact habitat availability and 
quality, including the temporal availability of habitats; 
 
4. Actions such as channelization, bank stabilization, levee construction, and 
dredging result in both direct and indirect impacts to the silvery minnow and 
its habitat by severely disrupting natural fluvial processes throughout the 
floodplain; 
 
5. Construction of diversion dams fragment the habitat and prevent upstream 
migration; 
 
6. Introduction of nonnative fishes that directly compete with, and can totally 
replace the silvery minnow, as was the case in the Pecos River, where the 
species was totally replaced in a time frame of 10 years by its congener the 
plains minnow (Hybognathus placitus); and 
 
7. Discharge of contaminants into the stream system from industrial, municipal, 
and agricultural sources also impact the species (Service 1993b, 1994). 
 
These reasons for listing continue to threaten the species throughout its currently 
occupied range in the Middle Rio Grande.   
 
Recovery Efforts 
The final recovery plan for the silvery minnow was released in July 1999 (Service 1999) 
and is currently undergoing revision.  The primary objectives for recovery are to increase 
numbers of the silvery minnow, enhance its habitat in the Middle Rio Grande valley, and 
to reestablish the species in at least three other areas of its historic range. 
 
ENVIRONMENTAL BASELINE 
 
 
14
Drought, as an overriding condition of the last decade in the southwest, is an important 
factor in the environmental baseline.  The Rio Grande basin has received below normal 
precipitation, only adding to the long-term moisture deficits.   
 
Stream conditions in 2004 and 2005 were improved over previous years.  The United 
States Geological Survey (USGS) in Albuquerque, New Mexico reported that stream 
flow conditions for in 2005 were well above average to significantly above average 
statewide leading to a peak of over 6,000 cfs at Albuquerque and sustained high flows (> 
3,000 cfs) for more than two months.  These flows improved conditions for both 
spawning and recruitment.  Despite good runoff, reservoir levels continue to be below 
average across the state.  It would take a least another year or two of well above average 
precipitation to reach pre-drought reservoir conditions.  The spring forecast for 2006 
indicates runoff will be well below average.  Streamflow is predicted to be between 10 
and 67 percent of average (NRCS; 
http://www.nm.nrcs.usda.gov/snow/watersupply/nr0604.html) 
 
Status of the Species within the Action Area 
Past actions have eliminated and severely altered habitat conditions for the silvery 
minnow.  These actions can be broadly categorized as changes to the natural hydrology 
of the Rio Grande and changes to the morphology of the channel and floodplain.  Other 
factors that influence the environmental baseline are water quality, the release of 
captively propagated silvery minnows, silvery minnow rescue efforts, on-going research 
efforts, and past projects in the Middle Rio Grande.  Also of importance is the current 
drought, the expected weather pattern for the near future, and how it may affect flow in 
the Rio Grande. Each of these topics is discussed below. 
 
Changes in Hydrology 
There have been two primary changes in hydrology as a result of the construction of 
dams on the Rio Chama and Rio Grande that affect the silvery minnow:  Loss of water 
and changes to the magnitude and duration of peak flows. 
 
Loss of Water 
Prior to measurable human influence on the system, up to the fourteenth century, the Rio 
Grande was a perennially flowing, aggrading river with a shifting sand substrate (Biella 
and Chapman 1977).  There is now strong evidence that the Middle Rio Grande first 
began drying up periodically after the development of Colorado’s San Luis Valley in the 
mid to late 1800s (Scurlock 1998).  After humans began exerting more influence on the 
river, there are two documented occasions when the river became intermittent; during 
prolonged, severe droughts in 1752 and 1861 (Scurlock 1998).  The silvery minnow 
historically survived low-flow periods because such events were infrequent and of lesser 
magnitude than they are today.  There were also no diversion dams to block repopulation 
of upstream areas, the fish had a much greater geographical distribution, and there were 
oxbow lakes, cienegas, and sloughs that supported fish until the river became connected 
again.  
 
 
15
Water management and use has resulted in a large reduction of suitable habitat for the 
silvery minnow.  Agriculture accounts for 90 percent of surface water consumption in the 
Middle Rio Grande (Bullard and Wells 1992).  The average annual diversion of water in 
the Middle Rio Grande by the MRGCD was 535,280 af (65,839 hectare-meters) for the 
period from 1975 to 1989 (Reclamation 1993).  In 1990, total water withdrawal 
(groundwater and surface water) from the Rio Grande Basin in New Mexico was 
1,830,628 af, significantly exceeding a sustainable rate (Schmandt 1993).  Water 
withdrawals have not only reduced overall flow quantities, but also caused the river to 
become locally intermittent and/or dry for extended reaches.  Irrigation diversions and 
drains significantly reduce water volumes in the river.  However, the total water use 
(surface and groundwater) in the Middle Rio Grande by the MRGCD may range from 28 
– 37 percent (S.S. Papadopulos & Associates, Inc. 2000; U.S. Geological Survey 2002).  
In addition, a portion of the water diverted by the MRGCD returns to the river and may 
be re-diverted (in some cases more than once) (Bullard and Wells 1992; MRGCD, in litt. 
2003). 
 
River reaches particularly susceptible to drying are immediately downstream of the Isleta 
Diversion Dam (river mile 169), a 5 mile (8 km) reach near Tome (river miles 150-155), 
a 5 mile (8 km) reach near the U.S. Highway 60 Bridge (river miles 127-132), and an 
extended 36 mile (58 km) reach from near Brown’s Arroyo (downstream of Socorro) to 
Elephant Butte Reservoir.  Extensive fish kills, including tens of thousands of silvery 
minnows, have occurred in these lower reaches when the river has dried (C. Shroeder, 
Service, pers. comm. 2002).  Since 1996, an average of 32 miles of the Rio Grande has 
dried, mostly in the San Acacia Reach.  The most extensive drying has occurred in the 
last two years when 70 and 68 miles, respectively, were dewatered.  Most documented 
drying events lasted an average of two weeks, before flows returned.   
 
Predatory birds have been seen hunting and consuming fish from isolated pools during 
river intermittence (J. Smith, NMESFO, pers. comm. 2003).  Although the number of fish 
present in any pool is unknown, it must be assumed that many of the fish preyed upon in 
these pools are silvery minnows.  Thus, while some dead silvery minnows were collected 
during the shorter drying events, it is assumed that many more mortalities occurred than 
were documented.      
 
Changes to Size and Duration of Peak Flows 
Water management has also resulted in a loss of peak flows that historically initiated 
spawning.  The reproductive cycle of the silvery minnow is tied to the natural river 
hydrograph.  A reduction in peak flows and/or improper timing of flows may inhibit 
reproduction.  Since completion of Elephant Butte Dam in 1916, four additional dams 
have been constructed on the middle Rio Grande, and two have been constructed on one 
of its major tributaries, the Rio Chama (Scurlock 1998). Construction and operation of 
these dams, which are either irrigation diversion dams (Angostura, Isleta, San Acacia) or 
flood control and water storage dams (Elephant Butte, Cochiti, Abiquiu, El Vado), have 
modified the natural flow of the river. Mainstem dams store spring runoff and summer 
inflow, which would normally cause flooding, and release this water back into the river 
 
16
channel over a prolonged period of time. These releases are often made during the 
summer months, when low flows would normally occur. The releases depart significantly 
from natural conditions, and can substantially alter the natural habitat. At other times, 
artificially low flows may limit the amount of habitat available to the species and may 
also limit dispersal of the species (Service 1999). 
 
In the spring of 2002 and 2003, there was concern that silvery minnows would not spawn 
because of a lack of spring runoff due to an extended drought.  River discharge was 
artificially elevated through short duration reservoir releases during May to induce 
spawning by Rio Grande silvery minnow.  In response to the releases, significant silvery 
minnow spawning occurred and was documented in all reaches except the Cochiti Reach 
(S. Gottlieb, UNM, in litt. 2002; Dudley et al. 2004). Fall populations in 2003 and 2004 
continued to decrease despite large spawning events, indicating a lack of recruitment. 
 
Mainstem dams and the altered flows they create can affect habitat by preventing 
overbank flooding, trapping nutrients, altering sediment transport regimes, prolonging 
summer base flows, and creating reservoirs that favor non-native fish species. These 
changes may affect the silvery minnow by reducing its food supply, altering its preferred 
habitat, preventing dispersal, and providing a continual supply of non-native fish that 
may compete with or prey upon the species. Altered flow regimes may also result in 
improved conditions for other native fish species that occupy the same habitat, causing 
those populations to expand at the expense of the silvery minnow (Service 1999). 
 
In addition to providing a cue for spawning, flood flows also maintain a channel 
morphology to which the silvery minnow is adapted.  The changes in channel 
morphology that have occurred from the loss of flood flows are discussed below. 
 
Changes in Channel Morphology 
Historically, the Rio Grande was sinuous, braided, and freely migrated across the 
floodplain.  Changes in natural flow and sediment regimes, narrowing and deepening of 
the channel, and restraints to channel migration (i.e., jetty jacks) adversely affect the 
silvery minnow.  These effects result directly from constraints placed on channel capacity 
by structures built in the floodplain and a trapping of sediment behind Cochiti dam 
(Porter and Massong 2005).  These environmental changes have and continue to degrade 
and eliminate spawning, nursery, feeding, resting, and refugia areas required for species’ 
survival and recovery (Service 1993a).   
 
The active river channel through the reaches where the silvery minnow persists in the 
Angostura and San Acacia Reaches is being narrowed by the encroachment of vegetation, 
resulting from continued low flows and the lack of overbank flooding.  The lack of flood 
flows has allowed non-native riparian vegetation such as salt cedar and Russian olive to 
encroach on the river channel (Reclamation 2001).  These non-native plants are very 
resistant to erosion, resulting in narrowing of the channel.  When water is confined to a 
narrower cross-section, increases in its velocity occur.  Fine sediments such as silt and 
sand are carried away leaving coarser bed materials such as gravel and cobble.  Habitat 
 
17
studies during the winter of 1995 and 1996 (Dudley and Platania 1996), demonstrated 
that a wide, braided river channel with low velocities resulted in higher catch rates of 
silvery minnows, and narrower channels resulted in fewer fish captured.  The availability 
of wide, shallow habitats at various flows that are important to the silvery minnow is 
decreasing.  Narrow channels have few backwater habitats with low velocities that are 
important for silvery minnow fry and juveniles. 
 
Within the current range of the silvery minnow, human development and use of the 
floodplain have greatly restricted the width available to the active river channel.  A 
comparison of river area between 1935 and 1989 shows a 52 percent reduction, from 
26,598 acres (10,764 ha) to 13,901 acres (5,626 ha) (Crawford et al. 1993).  These data 
refer to the Rio Grande from Cochiti Dam downstream to the “Narrows” in Elephant 
Butte Reservoir.  Within the same stretch, 234.6 miles (378 km) of levees occur, 
including levees on both sides of the river.  Analysis of aerial photography taken by 
Reclamation in February 1992, for the same river reach, shows that of the 180 miles (290 
km) of river, only 1 mile (1.6 km), or 0.6 percent of the flood plain has remained 
undeveloped.   
 
Development in the flood plain, makes it difficult, if not impossible, to send large 
quantities of water downstream that would create low velocity side channels that the 
silvery minnow prefers.  As a result, reduced releases have decreased available habitat for 
the silvery minnow and allowed encroachment of non-native species into the floodplain. 
 
Water Quality  
Both point (pollution discharges from a pipe) and non-point (diffuse sources of pollution) 
sources affect the Middle Rio Grande.  Major point sources are waste water treatment 
plants (WWTPs) and feedlots.  Major non-point sources include agricultural activities 
(e.g., fertilizer and pesticide application, livestock grazing), storm water run off, and 
mining activities. 
 
Effluents from WWTPs contain contaminants that may affect the water quality of the 
river.  It is anticipated that WWTP effluent may be the primary source of perennial flow 
in the lower portion of the Angostura Reach during extended periods of intermittency.  
For that reason the water quality of the effluent is extremely important.  In the project 
area, the largest WWTP discharges are from Albuquerque, followed by Rio Rancho (2 
WWTP) and Bernalillo (mean annual discharge flows are 80.4, 2.5, 0.9, and 0.7 cfs, 
respectively) (Bartolino and Cole 2002).  Since 1998, total residual chlorine (chlorine) 
and ammonia, as nitrogen (ammonia), have been discharged unintentionally at 
concentrations that exceed protective levels for the silvery minnow.  
 
Albuquerque WWTP effluent discharge records show that during November 1999, the 
monthly maximum chlorine concentration in the outfall was 0.49 milligrams per liter 
(mg/L).  Additionally, on February 23, 2003, the concentration of chlorine in the outfall 
was reported to be 0.70 mg/L (C. Abeyta, Service, in litt. 2003; D.S. Dailey, City, in litt. 
2003).  Chlorine concentrations of 0.013 mg/L can be harmful to the silvery minnow.  
 
18
Records also show that the monthly maximum concentration of ammonia during July 
2001 was 14 mg/L.  At pH 8 and water temperature of 25 °C, ammonia concentrations as 
low of 3.1 mg/L can be harmful to larval fathead minnow (U. S. Environmental 
Protection Agency 1999).  The fathead minnow has been suggested as a surrogate to 
evaluate the effects of various chemicals on the silvery minnow (Buhl 2002).  
 
Although we do not have complete records for the other WWTPs, in the summer of 2000, 
the Rio Rancho WWTP released approximately one million gallons of raw sewage into 
the Rio Grande.  Chlorine treatment was maximized in an attempt to reduce the public 
health risk.  Ammonia was reported at 37 mg/L on July 13, 2000, and at 17.1 mg/L on 
July 27, 2000 (City of Rio Rancho, in litt. 2000).  Nonetheless, no violations of chlorine 
or ammonia effluent limits were recorded.  This suggests that the averaging of 
measurements and/or the frequency of water quality measurements is insufficient to 
detect water quality situations that would be toxic to silvery minnows.  The Rio Rancho 
WWTP now uses ultraviolet disinfection (Dee Fuerst, City of Rio Rancho, pers. comm. 
2003) so the release of chlorine should no longer occur.  However, high concentrations of 
ammonia could still be discharged during an upset.  The Bernalillo WWTP is still 
operating under a permit issued in 1988 that does not restrict the discharge of lethal 
concentrations of chlorine to the Rio Grande.  The extent of impact from this discharge to 
the Rio Grande is unknown.  A new permit is under review that will regulate chlorine and 
ammonia discharges, although the risk of accidental discharges would remain. 
 
In addition to chlorine and ammonia, WWTP effluents may also include cyanide, 
chloroform, organophosphate pesticides, semi-volatile compounds, volatile compounds, 
heavy metals, and pharmaceuticals and their derivatives, which can pose a health risk to 
silvery minnows when discharged in concentrations that exceed the protective water 
quality criteria (J. Lusk, Service, in litt. 2003).  Even if the concentration of a single 
element or compound is not harmful by itself, chemical mixtures may be more than 
additive in their toxicity to silvery minnows (Buhl 2002).  The long-term effects and 
overall impacts of chemicals on the silvery minnow are not known.  
 
Large precipitation events wash sediments and pollutants into the river from surrounding 
lands through storm drains and intermittent tributaries.  Contaminants of concern to the 
silvery minnow that are frequently found in storm water include the metals aluminum, 
cadmium, lead, mercury, and zinc, organics such as oils, the industrial solvents 
trichloroethene and tetracholoroethene (TCE), and the gasoline additive methyl tert-butyl 
ether (USGS 2001).   
 
Harwood (1995) studied the North Floodway Channel (Floodway) of Albuquerque, 
which drains an urban area of about 90 square miles and crosses Pueblo of Sandia lands.  
He found that storm water contributions of dissolved lead, zinc, and aluminum were 
significant and posed a threat to the water quality of the Rio Grande.  Because the 
Floodway crosses lands of the Pueblo of Sandia and enters their portion of the Rio 
Grande, the pueblo requested that the Environmental Protection Agency conduct toxicity 
tests on water in the Rio Grande collected below the Floodway.  Aquatic crustaceans 
 
19
exposed to this water were found to have significant reproductive impairment and 
mortality when compared with controls.  Additionally, larval fish also experienced 
significant mortality and/or narcosis when exposed to water and bed sediment collected 
from this same area on April 22, 2002 (http://oaspub.epa.gov/enviro/pcs det_reports. 
detail_report?npdesid=NM0022250).  This study indicates that storm water runoff can 
impact the water quality of the Rio Grande and the aquatic organisms that live in the 
river.   
 
Sediment is the sand, silt, organic matter, and clay portion of the river bed, or the same 
material suspended in the water column.  Ong et al. (1991) recorded the concentrations of 
trace elements and organochlorine pesticides in suspended sediment and bed sediment 
samples collected from the Middle Rio Grande between 1978 and 1988.  These data were 
compared to numerical sediment quality criteria (Probable Effects Criteria [PEC]) 
proposed by MacDonald et al. (2000).  According to MacDonald et al. (2000) most of the 
PECs provide an accurate basis for predicting sediment toxicity to aquatic life and a 
reliable basis for assessing sediment quality in freshwater ecosystems.  Although PECs 
were developed to assess bed (bottom) sediments, they also provide some indication of 
the potential adverse effects to organisms consuming these same sediments when 
suspended in the water column.   
 
Semi-volatile organic compounds are a large group of environmentally important organic 
compounds.  Three groups of compounds, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), 
phenols, and phthalate esters, were included in the analysis of bed sediment collected by 
the USGS (Levings et al. 1998).  These compounds were abundant in the environment, 
are toxic and often carcinogenic to organisms, and could represent a long-term source of 
contamination.  The analysis of the PAH data by Levings et al. (1998) show one or more 
PAH compounds were detected at 14 sites along the Rio Grande with the highest 
concentrations found below the Cities of Albuquerque and Santa Fe.  Polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons and other semi-volatile compounds affect the sediment quality of the Rio 
Grande and may affect silvery minnow behavior, habitat, feeding, and health. 
 
Pesticide contamination occurs from agricultural activities, as well as from the 
cumulative impact of residential and commercial landscaping activities.  The presence of 
pesticides in surface water depends on the amount applied, timing, location, and method 
of application.  Water quality standards have not been set for many pesticides, and 
existing standards do not consider cumulative effects of several pesticides in the water at 
the same time.  Roy et al. (1992) reported that DDE, a degradation product of DDT, was 
detected most frequently in whole body fish collected throughout the Rio Grande.  He 
suggested that fish in the lower Rio Grande may be accumulating DDE in concentrations 
that may be harmful to fish and their predators.   
 
In addition to the compounds discussed above, several other constituents are present and 
affect the water quality of the Rio Grande.  These include nutrients such as nitrates and 
phosphorus, total dissolved solids (salinity), and radionuclides.  Each of these also has the 
potential to affect the aquatic ecosystem and health of the silvery minnow.  As the river 
 
20
dries, pollutants will be concentrated in the isolated pools.  Even though these pollutants 
do not cause the immediate death of silvery minnows, the evidence suggests that the 
amount and variety of pollutants present in the Rio Grande, could compromise their 
health and fitness (Rand and Petrocelli 1985). 
 
Silvery Minnow Propagation and Augmentation 
In 2000, the Service identified captive propagation as an appropriate strategy to assist in 
the recovery of the silvery minnow.  Consistent with Service policy (65 FR 183), captive 
propagation is conducted in a manner that will, to the maximum extent possible, preserve 
the genetic and ecological distinctiveness of the silvery minnow and minimize risks to 
existing wild populations.  
 
Silvery minnows are currently housed at four facilities in New Mexico including: the 
Dexter Fish Hatchery; New Mexico State University Coop Unit (Las Cruces); the 
Service’s New Mexico Fishery Resources Office (NMFRO), and the City of 
Albuquerque’s propagation facilities.  These facilities are actively propagating and 
rearing silvery minnows.  Silvery minnows are also held in South Dakota at the USGS, 
Biological Resources Division (BRD) Lab, but there is no active spawning program at 
this facility.  
 
 
 
Since 2000 more than 600,000 silvery minnows have been propagated using both adult 
wild silvery minnows and wild caught eggs and then released into the wild.  Wild gravid 
adults are successfully spawned in captivity at the City of Albuquerque’s propagation 
facilities.  Eggs are raised and released as larval fish.  Marked fish have been released by 
the NMFRO since 2002 under a formal augmentation effort funded by the Collaborative 
Program.  Silvery minnows are released into the Angostura reach of the river near 
Alameda Bridge to ensure downstream repopulation.  Eggs left in the wild have a very 
low survivorship and this ensures that an adequate number of spawning adults are present 
to repopulate the river each year.  While hatcheries continue to successfully spawn 
silvery minnows, wild eggs are collected to ensure genetic diversity within the remaining 
population. 
 
Ongoing Research 
There is ongoing research by the NMFRO and University of New Mexico (UNM) to 
examine the movement of silvery minnows.  Augmented fish are marked with a visible 
fluorescent elastomer tag and released in large numbers in a few locations.  Crews sample 
upstream and downstream from the release site in an attempt to capture the marked fish.  
Preliminary results indicate that the majority of silvery minnows disperse a few miles 
downstream.  One individual was captured 15.7 miles (25.3 km) upstream from its 
release site (Platania, et al.2003).  Monitoring within 48 hours after the release of the 
41,500 silvery minnows resulted in the capture of 937 fish.  Of these, 928 were marked 
and 927 were collected downstream of the release point.   
 
In 2002, a hybridization study involving the plains minnow and silvery minnow was 
conducted to determine the genetic viability of hybrids.  Plains minnow are found in the 
 
21
Pecos river where reintroduction of silvery minnow is being considered.  The results are 
preliminary because the number of trials was low and because there is some question 
about the fitness of the females used in the experiments.  The plains minnow and silvery 
minnow did spawn with each other and the hybrid eggs hatched.  However, none of the 
larvae lived longer than 96 hours.  The control larvae (non-hybrids) for both the plains 
minnow and silvery minnow lived until the end of the study (24 days) (Caldwell 2002).   
 
Due to the increased efforts in captive propagation, recent studies by UNM have focused 
on the genetic composition of the silvery minnow.  This research indicates that the net 
effective population size (Ne) (the number of individuals that contribute to maintaining 
the genetic variation of a population) of the silvery minnow in the wild is between 60-250 
fish (T. Turner, UNM, pers. comm. 2003).  It has been suggested that a Ne of 500 fish is 
needed to retain the long-term adaptive potential of a population (Franklin 1980).  No 
significant genetic differences have been found in populations isolated in the different 
reaches of the Rio Grande (D. Alo UNM, pers. comm. 2002).  Because the number of 
wild fish in the river appears to be low, the addition of thousands of silvery minnows 
raised in captivity could impact the genetic structure of the population.  The propagation 
effort should be sufficient to maintain 100,000 to 1,000,000 fish in the wild (T. Turner, 
UNM, pers. comm. 2003).  For instance if it were determined that 50,000 silvery minnow 
were in the wild, a minimum of 50,000 adult fish should be in propagation facilities.  We 
do not know how many fish are in the wild so it is difficult at this time to determine the 
exact number needed in propagation facilities.  However, to insure against a catastrophic 
event where most wild fish are lost, it is suggested that 100,000 to 1,000,000 silvery 
minnow should be kept in propagation facilities to maintain a sufficient amount of 
genetic variability for propagation efforts (T. Turner, UNM, pers. comm. 2003). 
Approximately 300,000 silvery minnows are currently being maintained in captivity (M. 
Ulibarri, USFWS pers. comm. 2005).   
 
Permitted and/or Authorized Take 
Take is authorized by section 10, and incidental take is permitted under section 7.  These 
permits and/or authorizations are issued by the Service.  Applicants for section 10 permits 
must also acquire a permit from the State to “take” or collect silvery minnows.  Many of 
the permits issued under section 10 allow take for the purpose of collection and salvage 
of silvery minnows and eggs for captive propagation.  Eggs, larvae, and adults are also 
collected for scientific studies to further our knowledge about the species and how best to 
conserve the silvery minnow.  Since 2000, the Service has reduced the amount of take 
permitted for voucher specimens as a result of the increasingly precarious status of the 
species in the wild.   
 
Incidental take of silvery minnows is authorized through section 7 consultation associated 
with the March 2003, programmatic biological opinion on water operations and 
maintenance in the Middle Rio Grande, the City of Albuquerque Drinking Water project, 
the Isleta Island Removal Project, the Tiffany Plug Removal Project, and the Interstate 
Stream Commission’s (ISC) Habitat Restoration Project.  
 
 
22
Factors Affecting Species Environment within the Action Area 
On the Middle Rio Grande, the following past and present federal, state, private, and 
other human activities, in addition to those discussed above, have affected the silvery 
minnow and its critical habitat: 
 
1. Release of Carryover Storage from Abiquiu Reservoir to Elephant Butte 
Reservoir:  The Army Corps of Engineers (Corps) consulted with the Service 
on the release of water during the winter of 1995.  Ninety-eight thousand af 
(12,054 hectare-meters) of water was released from November 1, 1995 to 
March 31, 1996, at a rate of 325 cfs (9.8 cm).  This discharge is above the 
historic winter flow rate.  Substantial changes in the flow regime that do not 
mimic the historic hydrograph can be detrimental to the silvery minnow.   
 
2. Corrales, Albuquerque, and Belen Levees:  These levees contribute to 
floodplain constriction and habitat degradation for the silvery minnow.  
Levees at these sites result in a reduction in the amount and quality of suitable 
habitat for the silvery minnow. 
 
3. Santa Ana River Restoration Project:  In August 1999, Reclamation consulted 
with the Service on a restoration project located on Santa Ana Pueblo in an 
area where the river channel was incising and eroding into the levee system.  
This project included a Gradient Restoration Facility (GRF), channel re-
alignment, bioengineering, riverside terrace lowering, and erodible bank lines.  
The primary component of the Santa Ana Restoration Project is the GRF, 
which should control river hydraulics upstream of its location and also river 
bed control.  The GRF was designed to:  (1) store more sand sediments at a 
stable slope for the current sediment supply; (2) decrease the velocities and 
depths and increase the width in the river channel upstream; (3) be 
hydraulically submerged at higher flows while simultaneously increasing the 
frequency and duration of overbank flows upstream; (4) provide velocities and 
depths suitable for passage of the silvery minnow through the structure; and 
(5) halt or limit further channel degradation upstream of its location.  The 
channel re-alignment involved moving the river away from the levee system 
and over the grade control structure, and involves excavation of a new river 
channel and floodplain.  Another significant component of the Santa Ana 
Restoration project is riverside terrace lowering for the creation of a wider 
floodplain.  The bioengineering and deformable bank lines also assist in 
establishing the new channel bank and regenerating native species vegetation 
in the floodplain.  
 
4. Creation of a Conservation Pool for Storage of Native Water in Abiquiu and 
Jemez Canyon Reservoirs and Release of a Spike Flow:  The City of 
Albuquerque created space (100,000 af) in Abiquiu Reservoir and the Corps 
created space in Jemez Canyon Reservoir to store Rio Grande Compact credit 
water for use in 2001, 2002, and 2003 for the benefit of listed species.  The 
 
23
conservation pool was created with the understanding that the management of 
this water would be decided in later settlement meetings or during water 
operations conference calls.  In addition, a supplemental release (spike) 
occurred in May 2001 to accommodate movement of sediment as a part of 
habitat restoration and construction on the Rio Grande and Jemez River on the 
Santa Ana Pueblo. 
 
5. Programmatic Biological Opinion on the Effects of Actions Associated with 
the U. S. Bureau of Reclamation’s, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers’, and non-
federal Entities’ Discretionary Actions Related to Water Management on the 
Middle Rio Grande:  The Service completed this biological opinion on March 
17, 2003, determining the effects of water management by the applicants on 
the silvery minnow and flycatcher.  This biological opinion had one RPA with 
several elements.  These elements set forth a flow regime in the Middle Rio 
Grande and described habitat improvements necessary to alleviate jeopardy to 
both the silvery minnow and flycatcher.  
 
6. Albuquerque Drinking Water Project: The Drinking Water Project, involves 
the construction and operation of:  (1) A new surface diversion dam north of 
Paseo del Norte Bridge, (2), conveyance of raw water from the point of 
diversion to the new water treatment plant, (3) a new water treatment plant on 
Chappell Road NE, (4) transmission of treated (potable) water to residential 
and commercial customers throughout the Albuquerque metropolitan area, 
and (5) aquifer storage and recovery.  During typical operations, the project 
will divert a total of 94,000 acre-feet per year (afy) of raw water from the Rio 
Grande (47,000 afy of City San Juan-Chama water and 47,000 afy of Rio 
Grande native water) at a near constant rate of about 130 cubic-feet per 
second (cfs) (3.68 cms).  Peak diversion operations will consist of up to 
103,000 afy being diverted at a rate of up to 142 cfs (4.02 cms).  A new water 
treatment plant with a normal operating rate of 84 million gallons per day 
(mgd) (381.9 million liters per day [mld]) and a peak capacity of about 92 
mgd (418.2 mld) or 142 cfs (4.02 cms) will be constructed as part of the 
proposed action.  Consultation on this project was completed in October, 
2003.  Construction is currently underway. 
 
7. Silvery minnow salvage and relocation:  During river drying, the Service’s 
silvery minnow salvage crew captures and relocates silvery minnows.  Since 
1996, nearly 700,000 silvery minnow have been rescued and relocated to wet 
reaches, the majority of which were released in the Angostura Reach.  Over 
600,000 of the 700,000 silvery minnows salvaged were rescued in 2005. Of 
these, 96.3 percent were transported alive (Service 2006).  The effect of 
translocating silvery minnows on the population is not known.   
 
8. Habitat Restoration Projects:  Several habitat restoration projects have been 
completed in the Albuquerque reach through the Collaborative Program.  
 
24
These projects include two woody debris installation projects to encourage the 
development of pools and wintering habitat, and a river bar modification 
project south of the I-40 Bridge designed to create side and backwater 
channels on an existing bar as well as modify the top surface of the bar to 
create habitat over a range of flows.  Additionally, this winter, the ISC started 
a multi-year habitat restoration program that implements several island, bar, 
and bank line modification techniques throughout the Albuquerque Reach.  
Approximately 24 acres of habitat were restored in the Phase I 
 
Summary 
The remaining population of the silvery minnow is restricted to approximately 5 percent 
of its historic range.  Every year since 1996, there has been at least one drying event in 
the river that has further reduced the silvery minnow population.  The population is 
unable to expand its distribution because three diversion dams currently block upstream 
movement and Elephant Butte Reservoir blocks downstream movement (Service 1999).  
Augmentation of silvery minnows with captive-reared fish will continue, however, 
continued monitoring and evaluation of these fish is necessary to obtain information 
regarding the survival and movement of individuals.   
 
Water withdrawals from the river and water releases from dams severely limit the 
survival of silvery minnows.  The consumption of shallow groundwater and surface water 
for municipal, industrial, and irrigation uses continues to reduce the amount of flow in the 
Rio Grande and eliminate habitat for the silvery minnow (Reclamation 2002).  However, 
under state law, the municipal and industrial users are required to offset the effects of 
groundwater pumping on the surface water system.  The City of Albuquerque, for 
example, has been offsetting their surface water depletions with 60,000 af per year 
(Reclamation 2002).  The combined effect of water withdrawals and the drought mean 
that discharge from WWTPs and irrigation return flows will have greater importance to 
the silvery minnow and a greater impact on water quality.  Lethal levels of chlorine and 
ammonia have been released from the WWTPs in the last several years.  In addition, a 
variety of organic chemicals, heavy metals, nutrients, and pesticides have been 
documented in storm water channels feeding into the river and contribute to the overall 
degradation of water quality.   
 
Although various conservation efforts have been undertaken in the past and others are 
currently being carried out in the middle Rio Grande, and abundance in recent years is 
increasing, the threat of extinction for the silvery minnow continues because of the high 
probability of continued drought, the fragmented and isolated nature of currently 
occupied habitat, and the absence of silvery minnows in other parts of the historic range.  
The increased abundance of silvery minnow in 2004 and 2005 is a positive sign.  
Nevertheless, the threats that endanger this species have not been eliminated. 
 
EFFECTS OF THE ACTION 
Effects of the action refer to the direct and indirect effects of an action on the species or 
critical habitat, together with the effects of other activities that are interrelated and 
 
25
interdependent with that action, which will be added to the environmental baseline.  
Indirect effects are those that are caused by the proposed action and are later in time, but 
are still reasonably certain to occur. 
 
Silvery minnows are present in the Albuquerque reach (Dudley et al. 2005), and are 
expected to be present within the action area.  The primary adverse effects of the 
proposed action on the silvery minnows result from the presence of heavy equipment in 
the water during river maintenance and channel construction activities, excavation below 
the bankline, and deposition of sediment into the river.  Adverse effects may also result 
from the mobilization of contaminants in the channel and along access points. The project 
is also expected to have beneficial effects to silvery minnows as habitat conditions 
improve and additional suitable habitat is created. 
 
Direct Effects 
Adverse effects to silvery minnows are anticipated for those individuals present in the 
immediate project area.  Direct impacts to silvery minnows are likely to occur from 
equipment used during the excavation of the main and secondary river channels, and the 
dewatering of such construction areas.  The secondary river channel will be excavated 
within a presently dry portion of the existing floodway, with earthen plugs placed at the 
upstream and downstream ends of the channel.  Such construction techniques are used to 
minimize contact with silvery minnows and the potential for harm or harassment.  
However, silvery minnows may be crushed or removed from the water by the excavation 
equipment as the newly created secondary channel meets the existing floodway, both at 
the upstream and downstream ends.  Also, silvery minnows may be crushed or removed 
from the water during the berm removal process. 
 
Following the construction of the secondary channel, earthen berms will be placed on the 
upstream and downstream ends of the main channel to redirect water into the secondary 
channel.  These berms will create a pooled area, to be managed as a temporary refugia 
area for silvery minnows to avoid construction activities.  Yet, within this refugia area, 
silvery minnows may be harmed or harrassed by personnel and/or the use of equipment 
within this area.  Direct impacts to silvery minnows will be minimized in the refugia area, 
for the area allows the silvery minnows to freely move around to avoid contact with the 
equipment or personnel.  Also, personnel will operate equipment to facilitate avoidance 
and escapement of silvery minnows and other fish in the construction area.   
 
Construction activities are scheduled to occur during the summer, fall and winter months 
of 2006, when river flows are lower.  After the completion of the secondary channel, the 
main channel will be partially dewatered for construction activities.  Partial dewatering 
may harm silvery minnows that become stranded in small disconnected pools.  To 
minimize impacts to the species, Reclamation will coordinate with the Service on the 
need for silvery minnows to be transported away from the project area. 
 
Indirect Effects  
Reduced water quality through the presence of equipment in the river and disturbance of 
 
26
sediment may have an indirect effect on silvery minnows.  During access to the project 
area, equipment may cross flowing water in the river, creating the potential for disturbed 
sediment and associated contaminants to disperse downstream and affect water quality.  
When in shallow water, equipment may disturb the water-sediment interface 
(Reclamation 2005a).  Sediment disturbance may also occur in areas where new low-flow 
habitat is being created (e.g., bendway weirs).  Additionally, the possibility of spills or 
contaminants associated with heavy equipment and fuel use, has the potential to 
adversely affect water quality for the silvery minnow.  To reduce indirect effects to 
silvery minnows from reduced water quality, Reclamation has designed their access to 
the project area in such a way as to reduce the need for equipment to enter the river 
channel.  Conservation measures (page 7) will minimize the likelihood of contaminants 
related to spills.  The increase in bottom substrate disturbance and reduction in water 
quality are expected to have minimal effects to silvery minnows. 
 
Beneficial Effects 
The proposed action will benefit the silvery minnow through the restoration of their 
habitat.  Splitting the river flow into two channels increases the width-to-depth ratio of 
the river.  The resulting decrease in depth and velocity benefits juvenile and adult silvery 
minnows by increasing the total amount of preferred habitat conditions (<40 cm deep and 
<10 cm/s water velocity) (Reclamation 2005b).   The decrease in water velocity also 
allows sediment deposition to occur in the shallower channel, improving habitat 
conditions.  In addition, areas of low velocities and sediment deposition provide 
favorable conditions for all life stages of silvery minnows.  The proposed action is 
anticipated to create 70,200 square feet (1.6 acres) of suitable habitat for the species 
(Reclamation 2005b).   
 
The placement of bendway weirs benefits the silvery minnow by creating shallow river 
habitat with low-velocity flow and sand or silt substrate, which the species prefers.  
Bendway weirs direct the high-velocity flow away from the outside bend and provide a 
series of eddies and low-flow habitats that allow settling of smaller sediments in the 
space between the weirs.  With each bendway weir extending approximately 25 feet into 
the channel and a total length of affected river being approximately 1,115 feet, the 
maximum possible area of improved silvery minnow habitat will be approximately 
27,900 square feet (0.64 acre) (Reclamation 2005b). 
 
Rootwad revetments may provide natural instream shelter to silvery minnows.   Such 
features provide natural habitat for juvenile and adult silvery minnow by slowing current 
velocities in microhabitats surrounding these features and providing cover.   
 
In the short term, the proposed action may adversely affect individual silvery minnows; 
yet, in the long term, the quality and quantity of suitable habitat in this reach of the river 
will increase, leading to improvements in the status of silvery minnows far into the 
future.  Over a longer period, channel realignment at this location will have a beneficial 
effect on silvery minnow habitat (Service 2001). 
 
 
27
Critical Habitat 
This biological opinion does not rely on the regulatory definition of “destruction or 
adverse modification” of critical habitat at 50 CFR 402.02.  Instead, we have relied upon 
the statutory provisions of the Act to complete the following analysis with respect to 
critical habitat. 
 
The entire action area of the proposed restoration project encompasses designated critical 
habitat for the silvery minnow from the Angostura Diversion Dam to the Isleta Diversion 
Dam, excluding Santa Ana and Sandia Pueblo lands.  Silvery minnow critical habitat may 
be affected temporarily, but the proposed action is expected to increase and restore 
potential habitat for the species.  Direct and indirect effects of the proposed action are 
likely to have a positive impact on three of the four PCEs of critical habitat for the silvery 
minnow.  Channel splitting, creation of low-flow habitats, sediment deposition, and 
instream cover provide habitat types included as PCEs of silvery minnow critical habitat.  
Such habitat types include, but are not limited to the following: backwaters, shallow side 
channels, pools, and runs of varying depth and velocity; substrates of predominantly sand 
or silt; and the presence of eddies created by debris piles, pools, or backwaters, or other 
refuge habitat within unimpounded stretches of flowing water of sufficient length (i.e., 
river miles) that provide a variation of habitats with a wide range of depth and velocities.  
These PCEs of critical habitat for the silvery minnow provide for the diversity of aquatic 
habitats essential to the conservation of the species.  As such, designated critical habitat 
for the silvery minnow will remain functional to serve its intended conservation role for 
the species.   
 
Cumulative Effects 
Cumulative effects include the effects of future state, tribal, local or private actions that 
are reasonably certain to occur in the action area considered in this biological opinion.  
Future federal actions that are unrelated to the proposed action are not considered in this 
section because they require separate consultation pursuant to section 7 of the Act. 
Cumulative effects include: 
 
• Increases in development and urbanization in the historic floodplain that result 
in reduced peak flows because of the flooding threat.  Development in the 
floodplain makes it more difficult, if not impossible, to transport large 
quantities of water that would overbank and create low velocity habitats that 
silvery minnow prefer.  Development also reduces overbank flooding 
favorable for the silvery minnow. 
 
• Increased urban use of water, including municipal and private uses.  Further 
use of surface water from the Rio Grande will reduce river flow and decrease 
available habitat for the silvery minnow. 
 
• Contamination of the water (i.e., sewage treatment plants, runoff from small 
feed lots and dairies, and residential, industrial, and commercial 
development).  A decrease in water quality and gradual changes in floodplain 
 
28
vegetation from native riparian species to non-native species (i.e., saltcedar) 
could adversely affect the silvery minnow and its habitat. Silvery minnow 
larvae require shallow, low velocity habitats for development.  Therefore, 
encroachment of non-native species results in less habitat available for the 
silvery minnow.   
 
• Human activities that may adversely impact the silvery minnow by decreasing 
the amount and suitability of habitat include dewatering the river for 
irrigation; increased water pollution from non-point sources; habitat 
disturbance from recreational use, suburban development, and removal of 
large woody debris. 
 
 
 
The Service anticipates that these types of activities will continue to threaten the survival 
and recovery of the silvery minnow by reducing the quantity and quality of habitat 
through continuation and expansion of habitat degrading actions. 
 
CONCLUSION 
After reviewing the current status of the silvery minnow, the environmental baseline for 
the action area, the effects of the proposed action, and cumulative effects, it is the 
Service’s biological opinion that the Bernalillo Site Priority Project, as proposed in the 
October 18, 2005 biological assessment, is not likely to jeopardize the continued 
existence of the silvery minnow.  Recent sampling data have shown significant increases 
in numbers of silvery minnow.  The Bernalillo Site Priority Project is likely to have a 
short-term adverse effect on individual silvery minnows, which may be present in the 
action area, but impacts will be minimal.  Direct impacts to silvery minnows are likely to 
occur from equipment used during the excavation of the main and secondary river 
channels, the dewatering of such construction areas, and the deposition of sediment into 
the river for habitat improvement.  However, Reclamation has designed their project and 
construction techniques to minimize contact with silvery minnows and the potential to 
harm or harass the species.  In addition, berms will be used to create a pooled area, which 
will be managed as a temporary refugia for silvery minnows to avoid construction 
activities.  Reclamation has also committed to coordinating with the Service on the need 
for silvery minnows to be transported away from the project area if silvery minnows 
become stranded in small disconnected pools as a result of dewatering. 
 
The proposed action is anticipated to have a long-term positive impact on designated 
critical habitat for the silvery minnow through improvements and availability of suitable 
habitat.  The splitting of the river channel and creation of low-flow aquatic habitat will 
restore habitat consistent with the PCEs of silvery minnow critical habitat.  The short-
term impacts to critical habitat do not affect the ability of the primary constituent 
elements to serve the intended function and conservation role of silvery minnow critical 
habitat.  Therefore, the Service concludes that the proposed action is not likely to destroy 
or adversely modify designated critical habitat for the silvery minnow. 
 
INCIDENTAL TAKE STATEMENT 
 
29
 
Section 9 of the Act and federal regulation pursuant to section 4(d) of the Act prohibit the 
take of endangered and threatened species, respectively, without special exemption. Take 
is defined as to harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture or collect, or 
to attempt to engage in any such conduct. Harm is further defined by the Service to 
include significant habitat modification or degradation that results in death or injury to 
listed species by significantly impairing essential behavioral patterns, including breeding, 
feeding, or sheltering. Harass is defined by the Service as intentional or negligent actions 
that create the likelihood of injury to listed species to such an extent as to significantly 
disrupt normal behavior patterns which include, but are not limited to, breeding, feeding 
or sheltering.  Incidental take is defined as take that is incidental to, and not the purpose 
of, the carrying out of an otherwise lawful activity.  Under the terms of section 7(b)(4) 
and section 7(o)(2), taking that is incidental to and not intended as part of the agency 
action is not considered to be prohibited taking under the Act provided that such taking is 
in compliance with the terms and conditions of this incidental take statement. 
 
The measures described below are non-discretionary, and must be undertaken by 
Reclamation so that they become binding conditions of any grant or permit issued, as 
appropriate, for the exemption in section 7(o)(2) to apply.  The action agency has a 
continuing duty to regulate the activity covered by this incidental take statement.  If 
Reclamation (1) fails to assume and implement the terms and conditions or (2) fails to 
require adherence to the terms and conditions of the incidental take statement through 
enforceable terms that are added to the permit or grant document, the protective coverage 
of section 7(o)(2) may lapse.  In order to monitor the impact of incidental take, 
Reclamation must report the progress of the action and its impact on the species to the 
Service as specified in the incidental take statement. [50 CFR §402.14(i)(3)] 
 
Amount or Extent of Take Anticipated 
The Service has developed the following incidental take statement based on the premise 
that the Bernalillo Site Priority Project will be implemented as proposed.  Take is 
expected in the form of harm and harass as: 1) silvery minnows are crushed or removed 
from the water by excavation equipment when the newly created secondary channel 
meets the existing floodway, both at the upstream and downstream ends; 2) silvery 
minnows are crushed or removed from the water during the berm removal process; 3)  
silvery minnows are stranded in disconnected pools during the partial dewatering of the 
main channel; 4) silvery minnows affected by personnel and/or the use of equipment in 
the water; 5) deposition of sediment into the river; and 5) disturbed sediment and 
associated contaminants disperse downstream and along access points, reducing water 
quality. 
 
The Service anticipates that up to 42 silvery minnows may be taken during channel 
modification, berm removal, dewatering, and sediment deposition in the river.  Recent 
monitoring indicates that 0.19 silvery minnows per 100 square meters (Dudley 2006 pers. 
comm.) are currently present in the action area.  Approximately 5.5 acres of open water 
habitat may be affected by the proposed action.   Therefore, up to 4,229 silvery minnows 
 
30
may come into contact with equipment, personnel, or fill material.  We assume that 1 out 
of every 100 silvery minnows encountered may be harmed or harassed by activity 
associated with the proposed action.  Therefore, if more than 42 silvery minnows are 
found dead, the level of anticipated take will have been exceeded.   
 
The Service notes that this number is only a best estimate of the amount of take that is 
likely under the proposed action.  Thus, estimated incidental take may be modified from 
the above estimated number should other silvery minnow monitoring information, data 
from silvery minnow rescue operations, or other research indicate substantial deviations 
from estimated values.  In this case, further consultation, may be necessary. 
 
Effect of the Take 
The Service has determined that this level of anticipated take is not likely to result in 
jeopardy to the silvery minnow. Monitoring data from 2005 have shown significant 
increases in the abundance of silvery minnow.  The Bernalillo Site Priority Project is 
likely to have minimal short-term adverse effects on individual silvery minnows, and 
beneficial effects to silvery minnow critical habitat. 
 
Reasonable and Prudent Measures  
The Service believes the following RPMs are necessary and appropriate to minimize 
impacts of incidental take of the silvery minnow from the Bernalillo Site Priority Project.  
 
1. Minimize take of silvery minnows due to construction activities, partial 
dewatering of the main channel, and habitat improvement activities 
(deposition of sediment into the river). 
2. Manage for the protection of water quality from activities associated with the 
access and use of construction equipment. 
3. Continue to work collaboratively with the Service on the Middle Rio Grande 
Endangered Species Act Collaborative Program.   
  
Terms and Conditions 
In order to be exempt from the prohibitions of section 9 of the ESA, the action agency 
must comply with the following terms and conditions, which implement the reasonable 
and prudent measures described above and outline required reporting/monitoring 
requirements.  These terms and conditions are non-discretionary.   
 
 
 
 
To implement RPM 1, Reclamation shall: 
 
1. Monitor presence/absence of silvery minnows at construction sites, and use 
adaptive management to modify construction activities, partial dewatering, 
and habitat improvement activities, as appropriate. 
2. Report findings of injured or dead silvery minnows to the Service. 
 
To implement RPM 2, Reclamation shall: 
 
 
31
1. Schedule, to the extent possible, all crossings during dry soil conditions.   
2. Report to the Service, water quality measurements taken before, during, and 
after construction activity.  
3. Report significant spills of fuels, hydraulic fluids, and other hazardous 
materials to the Service. 
 
To implement RPM 3, Reclamation shall: 
 
1. Work to further conduct habitat/ecosystem restoration projects in the Middle 
Rio Grande to benefit the silvery minnow. 
 
The reasonable and prudent measures, with their implementing terms and conditions, are 
designed to minimize the impact of incidental take that might otherwise result from the 
proposed action.  If, during the course of the action, this level of incidental take is 
exceeded, such incidental take represents new information requiring reinitiation of 
consultation and review of the reasonable and prudent measures provided.  The Federal 
agency must immediately provide an explanation of the causes of the taking and review 
with the Service the need for possible modification of the reasonable and prudent 
measures. 
 
CONSERVATION RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
Section 7(a)(1) of the ESA directs federal agencies to utilize their authorities to further 
the purposes of the ESA by carrying out conservation programs for the benefit of 
endangered and threatened species.  Conservation recommendations are discretionary 
agency activities to minimize or avoid adverse effects of a proposed action on listed 
species or critical habitat, to help implement recovery plans, or to develop information.  
The Service recommends the following conservation activities: 
 
1)  Encourage adaptive management of flows and conservation of water to benefit the 
silvery minnow. 
 
RE-INITIATION NOTICE 
 
This concludes formal consultation on the action(s) described in the October 21, 2005 
biological assessment.  As provided in 50 CFR § 402.16, re-initiation of formal 
consultation is required where discretionary federal agency involvement or control over 
the action has been retained (or is authorized by law) and if:  (1) The amount or extent of 
incidental take is exceeded; (2) new information reveals effects of the agency action that 
may affect listed species or critical habitat in a manner or to an extent not considered in 
this biological opinion; (3) the agency action is subsequently modified in a manner that 
causes an effect to the listed species or critical habitat not considered in this biological 
opinion; or (4) a new species is listed or critical habitat designated that may be affected 
by the action.  In instances where the amount or extent of incidental take is exceeded, any 
operations causing such take must cease pending re-initiation. 
 
32
 
In future correspondence on this project, please refer to consultation number 22420-2006-
F-0009.  If you have any questions or would like to discuss any part of this biological 
opinion, please contact Jennifer Parody of my staff at (505) 761-4710. 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Russ Holder 
Acting Field Supervisor  
 
 
cc: 
Assistant Regional Director, Region 2 (ES) 
 
Regional Section 7 Coordinator, Region 2 (ES) 
 
 
LITERATURE CITED 
 
Bartolino, J.R. and J.C. Cole, 2002.  Ground-Water Resources of the Middle Rio Grande 
Basin, New Mexico.  U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1222.  132 pp. 
 
Bestgen, K. and S.P. Platania.  1991.  Status and Conservation of the Rio Grande Silvery 
Minnow, Hybognathus amarus.  Southwestern Naturalist 26(2):225–232. 
 
Bestgen, K. and D.R. Propst.  1994.  Redescription, Geographic Variation, and Taxonomic 
Status of the Rio Grande Silvery Minnow, Hybognathus amarus (Girard, 1856).  
Contribution 69.  Larval Fish Laboratory, Colorado State University.  
 
Biella, J., and R. Chapman (eds.).  1977.  Archeological Investigations in Cochiti Reservoir, 
New Mexico.  Vol. 1:  A Survey of Regional Variability.  Report submitted to the National 
Park Service, Santa Fe, for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
 
Buhl, K. J.  2002.  The Relative Toxicity of Waterborne Inorganic Contaminants to the Rio 
Grande Silvery Minnow (Hybognathus amarus) and Fathead Minnow (Pimephales 
promelas) in a Water Quality Simulating that in the Rio Range, New Mexico.  Final Report 
to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Study No. 2F33 9620003.  U.S. Geological Survey, 
Columbia Environmental Research Center, Yankton Field Research Station, Yankton SD.   
 
Bullard, T.F., and S.G. Wells .  1992.  Hydrology of the Middle Rio Grande from Velarde to 
Elephant Butte Reservoir, New Mexico. U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service Research Publication 179. 
 
 
33
Caldwell, C.  2002.  Hybridization Potential and Spawning Behavior of Rio Grande silvery 
Minnow (Hybognathus amarus) and Plains Minnow (Hybognathus palcitus).  Interim 
report submitted to U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Ecological Services Field Office, 
September 2002. 18 pp. 
 
Cook, J.A., K.R. Bestgen, D.L. Propst, and T.L. Yates.  1992.  Allozymic Divergence and 
Systematics of the Rio Grande Silvery Minnow, Hybognathus amarus (Teleostei: 
Cyprinidae). Copeia 1992(1):  36–44. 
 
Crawford, C., A. Cully, R. Leutheuser, M. Sifuentes, L. White, and J. Wilber.  1993.  Middle 
Rio Grande Ecosystem; Bosque Biological Management Plan.  Middle Rio Grande  
 
Dudley, R.K., S.P. Platania, and S. J. Gottlieb. 2004.  Rio Grande Silvery Minnow 
Population Monitoring Program Results from 2003.  Report to Middle Rio Grande 
Endangered Species Collaborative Program. 176pp 
 
Dudley, R.K., and S.P. Platania.  1996.  Rio Grande Silvery Minnow Winter Population 
Habitat Use Monitoring Project, April 1996.  Summary of four trips (December 1995–
March 1996). Report to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Albuquerque.  12 pp. 
 
Dudley, R.K., and S.P. Platania.  1997.  Habitat Use of the Rio Grande Silvery Minnow Report 
to U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Albuquerque, New Mexico.  88 pp. 
 
Dudley, R.K., and S.P. Platania.  2002.  Summary of Population Monitoring of Rio Grande 
Silvery Minnow (1994–2002).  Report to New Mexico Ecological Services Field Office, 
September 10, 2002, Albuquerque, New Mexico.  14pp. 
 
Dudley, R.K., S.P. Platania, and S.J. Gottlieb.  2005.  Summary of the Rio Grande Silvery  
 
Minnow Population Monitoring Program Results from December 2005.  American 
 
Southwest Ichthyological Research Foundation, Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
 
Franklin, I. R.  1980.  Evolutionary Change in Small Populations.  Pages 135 – 148 in M. E. 
Soulé and B. A. Wilcox (editors) Conservation Biology: an evolutionary-ecological 
perspective.  Sinauer Associates, Inc. Sunderland, Massachusetts.   
 
Harwood, A.K.  1995.  The Urban Stormwater Contribution of Dissolved Trace Metal 
from the North Floodway Channel, Albuquerque, NM, to the Rio Grande.  University 
of New Mexico, Water Resources Program, Professional Project Report. 
 
Levings, G.W., D.F. Healy, S.F. Richey, and L.F. Carter.  1998.  Water Quality in the Rio 
Grande Valley, Colorado, New Mexico, and Texas, 1992-95.  U.S. Geological Survey 
Circular 1162.  Http://water.usgs.gov/pubs/circ1162 (viewed on May 18, 1998) . 
 
MacDonald, D.D., C.G. Ingersoll, and T.A. Berger.  2000.  Development and Evaluation of 
Consensus-based Sediment Quality Guidelines for Freshwater Ecosystems.  Archives of 
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry 39:20–31. 
 
34
 
National Weather Service.  2002.  West Gulf River Forecast Center, 2002 water supply 
forecast. Issued as of April1, 2002. 
Http://www.srh.noaa.gov/wgrfc/watersupply/wgrfc_APR_espfwr_2002.txt (viewed on 
April 9, 2002). 
 
New Mexico Department of Game and Fish.  1998. Rio Grande Silvery Minnow Monitoring in 
1997.  Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
 
Ong, K., T.F. O'Brien, and M.D. Rucker.  1991.  Reconnaissance Investigation of Water 
Quality, Bottom Sediment, and Biota Associated with Irrigation Drainage in the Middle 
Rio Grande and Bosque del Apache National Wildlife Refuge in New Mexico 1988–89: 
U.S. Geological Survey Water-Resources Investigations Report 91-4036, Albuquerque, 
New Mexico.  
 
 
Pflieger, W.  1980.  Hybognathus nuchalis Agassiz.  In D. lee, C. Gilbert, C. Hucutt, R. 
Jenkins, McCallister, and J. Stauffer, eds., Atlas of North American Freshwater Fishes.  
North Carolina State Museum of Natural History, Raleigh, North Carolina.  177 pp. 
 
Platania, S.P.  1995.  Reproductive Biology and Early Life-history of Rio Grande Silvery 
Minnow, Hybognathus amarus.  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Albuquerque, New 
Mexico. 23 pp.   
 
Platania, S. P.  2000.  Effects of Four Water Temperatures Treatments On Survival, Growth, 
and Developmental Rates of Rio Grande Silvery Minnows, Hybognathus amarus, Eggs and 
Larvae.  Report to U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
 
Platania, S.P., and C. Altenbach.  1998.  Reproductive Strategies and Egg Types of Seven Rio 
Grande Basin Cyprinids.  Copeia 1998(3): 559–569. 
 
Platania, S.P., and R. Dudley.  2000.  Spatial Spawning Periodicity of Rio Grande Silvery 
Minnow during 1999, http://www.uc.usbr.gov/progact/rg/rgsm2002/egg_salvage/ 
wrg/aop/rgo/progact/rg/rgsm2002/progact/rg/rgsm2002/index.html. 
 
Platania, S.P., and R. Dudley.  2001.  Summary of Population Monitoring of Rio Grande 
Silvery Minnow (21–27 February 2001). Report to the Bureau of Reclamation and Corps of 
Engineers.  Albuquerque.  7pp. 
 
Platania, S.P., and R. Dudley.  2005.  2004 Summary of Population Monitoring of Rio Grande 
Silvery Minnow. Report to the Bureau of Reclamation and Corps of Engineers.  
Albuquerque.  193pp. 
 
Platania, S.P., and C.W. Hoagstrom.  1996.  Response of Rio Grande Fish Community to and 
Artificial Flow Spike: Monitoring Report Rio Grande Silvery Minnow Spawning Peak 
Flow. New Mexico Ecological Services State Office, Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
 
35
 
Platania, S.P., Michael A. Farrington, W. Howard Brandenburg, Sara J. Gottlieb, and 
Robert K. Dudley 2003. Movement Patterns Of Rio Grande Silvery Minnow 
Hybognathus amarus, in the San Acacia Reach of the Rio Grande During 2002 Final 
Report. 38 pp. 
 
Porter, M.D. and T.M. Massong 2004b. Analyzing changing river channel morphology 
using GIS for Rio Grande Silvery Minnow habitat assessment. In Proceedings of the 
Second International Symposium on GIS/Spatial Analysis in Fishery and Aquatic 
Sciences, 3-6 September, 2002, University of Sussex, Brighton, U.K. Nishida, T., 
Kailola, P.J., Hollingworth, C.E. (Editors): 433-448. 
Rand, G.M., and Petrocelli, S.R.  1985.  Fundamentals of Aquatic Toxicology B Methods 
and Applications.  Hemisphere Publishing Corporation, New York.  666 pp. 
 
Roy, Richard, T.F. O’Brien, and M. Rusk-Maghini.  1992.  Organochlorine and Trace Element 
Contaminant Investigation of the Rio Grande, New Mexico.  U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service, New Mexico Ecological Services Office, Albuquerque, NM.  39 pp.  
 
S.S. Papadopulos & Associates, Inc.  2000.  Middle Rio Grande Water Supply Study.  Boulder, 
CO:  August 4, 2000. 
 
Schmandt, J. 1993. Water and Development in the Rio Grande/Río Bravo Basin. 
University of Texas Press, Austin, Texas. 
 
Scurlock, D.  1998.  From the Rio to the Serria: An Environmental History of the Middle Rio 
Grande Basin.  USDA Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fort Collins, Colorado, 80526. 
 
Smith, J.R.  1999b.  Summary of Easy Egg Catching in the LFCC in the 9 Mile Study Reach 
during Spring 1998 Operation.  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Report Submitted to the 
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, Albuquerque, New Mexico on April 28, 1999. 
 
Sublette, J., M. Hatch, and M. Sublette.  1990.  The Fishes of New Mexico.  Univ. New 
Mexico Press, Albuquerque, New Mexico.  393 pp. 
 
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation.  1993. Final Supplement to the Final Environmental Impact 
Statement-River Maintenance program for the Rio Grande-Velarde to Caballo Dam-Rio 
Grande and Middle Rio Grande projects, New Mexico.  140 pp. 
 
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation.  2001.  U.S. Bureau of Reclamation’s Discretionary Actions 
Related to Water Management, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Water Operations Rules, 
and Non-Federal Actions Related to Ordinary Operations on the Middle Rio Grande, New 
Mexico: June 30, 2001, through December 31, 2003.  June 8, 2001.    
 
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation.  2002.  Draft Environmental Impact Statement for the City of 
Albuquerque Drinking Water Project.  
 
36
 
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation.  2005a.  Middle Rio Grande Riverine Habitat Restoration Project 
 
Biological Assessment.   
 
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation.  2005b.  Middle Rio Grande Project Bernalillo Priority Site 
Project 
 
Biological Assessment. 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.  1999.  Update of Ambient Water Quality Criteria for 
Ammonia.  Washington, D.C.  153pp.  
 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.  1993a.  Proposal Rule to List the Rio Grande Silvery Minnow 
as Endangered, with Critical Habitat.  58 Federal Register 11821-11828. 
 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.  1993b.  Notice of 12-month Petition Finding/Proposal to List 
Empidonax traillii extimus as an Endangered Species, and to Designate Critical Habitat. 
Federal Register 58:39495–39522.. 
 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.  1994.  Endangered and Threatened Wildlife and Plants; Final 
Rule to list the Rio Grande Silvery Minnow as an Endangered Species.  Federal Register  
59:36988–37001. 
 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.  1999.  Rio Grande Silvery Minnow (Hybognathus amarus) 
Recovery Plan.  Region 2, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Albuquerque, New Mexico.  138 
pp. 
 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.  2001.  Programmatic Biological Opinion on the Effects of 
Actions Associated with the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation’s, U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers’, and non-Federal Entities’ Discretionary Actions Related to Water Management 
on the Middle Rio Grande, New Mexico, June 29, 2001. 
 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.  2006.  Rio Grande Silvery Minnow Rescue and Salvage – 
2005.  Report to Middle Rio Grande Endangered Species Collaborative Program.  43 pp. 
 
 
U.S. Geologic Survey.  2002. Ground-water resources of the Middle Rio Grande basin, New 
Mexico.  Circular 1222. 
 
U.S. Geologic Survey.  2001.  Selected Findings and Current Perspectives on Urban and 
Agricultural Water Quality by the National Water-Quality Assessment Program, FS-047-
http://water.usgs.gov/pubs/FS/fs-047-01//pdf/fs047-01.pdf 
 
Watts, H.E., C.W. Hoagstrom, and J.R. Smith.  2002.  Observations on Habitat Associated with 
Rio Grande Silvery Minnow, Hybognathus amarus (Girard).  Submitted to U.S. Army 
 
37
Corps of Engineers, Albuquerque District and City of Albuquerque Water Resources 
Division, June 28, 2002. 
 
 
 
 
 
38
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Bernalillo Priority Site (location area) location map. 
 
39
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Construction Drawing Showing Pre-Project Conditions and Proposed Action. 
 
40
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Construction Drawing Showing Proposed Action Revegetation Plan. 
 
 
 
41
