R E L E A S E  V E R S I O N  
Risk Prioritization Tool for Dams 
 
Users Manual  
 
 
 
 
 
Prepared for 
 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Mitigation Division 
500 C Street SW 
Washington, DC 20472 
 
March 3, 2008 
 
URS Group, Inc. 
200 Orchard Ridge Drive, Suite 101 
Gaithersburg, MD 20878 
15702278 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
i 
Section 1 ONE 
Introduction.....................................................................................................................1-1 
1.1. 
Background.............................................................................................. 1-1 
1.1.1. Regulations and Dam Hazard Classification ............................... 1-2 
1.2. 
Overview of New Process........................................................................ 1-2 
1.2.1. Goals and Objectives ................................................................... 1-2 
1.2.2. Dam Safety Risk Prioritization Tool Development Process........ 1-3 
1.2.3. Process Outline ............................................................................ 1-4 
1.3. 
Definitions................................................................................................ 1-5 
1.4. 
Limitations ............................................................................................... 1-6 
Section 2 TWO 
Hardware, Software and System Requirements..........................................................2-1 
2.1. 
Hardware and System Requirements ....................................................... 2-1 
2.2. 
Software Installation and Setup ............................................................... 2-1 
2.2.1. Installation of the Risk Portfolio Application.............................. 2-1 
2.2.2. Directory Structure of the Application......................................... 2-2 
2.2.3. The Riskportfolio.Xls Workbook ................................................ 2-3 
2.3. 
Transferring and Moving Data................................................................. 2-7 
2.4. 
Printing Output......................................................................................... 2-7 
Section 3 THREE 
Comprehensive User......................................................................................................3-1 
3.1. 
Start-Up.................................................................................................... 3-1 
3.1.1. Document Review........................................................................ 3-1 
3.1.2. Initial Data Input .......................................................................... 3-1 
3.2. 
Building a Dam through Dam Elements.................................................. 3-2 
3.3. 
Failure Mode Evaluation.......................................................................... 3-3 
3.3.1. Piping........................................................................................... 3-4 
3.3.2. Flood ............................................................................................ 3-5 
3.3.3. Earthquake ................................................................................... 3-5 
3.3.4. Stability........................................................................................ 3-6 
3.3.5. General Considerations................................................................ 3-6 
3.4. 
Consequence Assessment ........................................................................ 3-6 
3.4.1. Estimating the Peak Dam Breach Discharge ............................... 3-9 
3.4.2. Estimating the 10-Year Frequency Peak Discharge..................... 3-9 
3.4.3. Estimating the Population at Risk (PAR) .................................. 3-10 
3.4.4. Estimate of the Fatality Rate...................................................... 3-11 
3.5. 
Risk Categorization................................................................................ 3-12 
3.6. 
Risk Prioritization.................................................................................. 3-15 
Section 4 FOUR 
Beta Testing and Trials..................................................................................................4-1 
4.1. 
General..................................................................................................... 4-1 
4.2. 
Trials Performed ...................................................................................... 4-1 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
ii 
Appendices 
Appendix A 
“Risk Assessment – Estimating the Probability of Failure of Embankment Dams 
by Piping” 
 
Appendix B 
“Risk-Based Dam Safety Prioritization – A Method for Easily Estimating the Loss 
of Life from Dam Failure - Draft” 
 
 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONONE 
Introduction 
 
1-1 
1. 
Section 1 ONE 
Introduction 
1.1. 
BACKGROUND 
Non-federal dams in the United States are regulated by Dam Safety Offices in forty nine of the 
fifty states. These state government agencies generally fall within departments tasked with broad 
responsibilities such as environmental protection, natural resources or public safety, and as such 
usually do not enjoy abundant resources of funding or personnel. 
For a time, Texas had a relatively inactive dam safety program once the senior engineer retired, 
even though they had over 7,500 dams under their jurisdiction. Since then their program has been 
re-invigorated with new staff and funding. Other states like New Jersey have maintained a strong 
team of over 10 engineers working on dam safety, while states like Wisconsin have a single dam 
safety engineer. 
The State Dam Safety offices are also limited in their effectiveness by the strength of legislation 
and political mandate. Regulators do have review authority for new dams and major upgrades, 
but what about those thousands of dams whose ownership is uncertain, that may not have been 
inspected in decades, and may now have a higher downstream hazard than when they were 
designed and built? 
An uncomfortable status quo is maintained until an unexpected dam failure disaster strikes, and 
the State Regulator must answer hard questions from the same politicians who cut their funding 
just a few months before. Why did you let this happen? Weren’t you doing your job? Didn’t you 
know this dam would fail in the next flood? 
If lucky, the besieged State Regulator can produce a paper trail of letters sent every year pointing 
out the deficiencies, requesting action from the owner, which is typically met with silence or the 
challenge of: “who’s going to pay for this?” Some states have developed innovative funding 
programs including loans and outright grants, but the money is never enough for the problem 
dams they know about.  
Various states have approached this problem in different ways. States like Washington with a 
mature dam safety program, reliable funding and capable engineering staff have established 
semi-quantitative scoring systems to rank their dam safety risks. Doug Johnson of Washington 
Department of Ecology, Dam Safety Office, maintains an evolving “top ten” list where the 
highest scoring dams are tackled first, removed from the list when upgrades have been 
completed, and then others take their place.  
The Washington system and similar tools used by the Natural Resource and Conservation 
Service (NRCS) and Colorado are patterned after the United States Bureau of Reclamation 
(2001) Dam Safety Risk Based Profile System1. These systems follow prescriptive scoring sheets 
that provide a helpful, but not overly illuminating indication of potential dam safety deficiencies. 
These profiling tools are consistent and rapidly implemented but may rank a dam with two minor 
deficiencies the same as a dam with one major deficiency. 
Unfortunately, most states have no dam safety profiling system at all. Regulators are aware of the 
major dams and their problems, but what about the problems they don’t know about?   
                                                 
1 US Bureau of Reclamation (2001) Dam Safety Risk Based Profile System 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONONE 
Introduction 
 
1-2 
The States need a simple tool that allows them to identify and prioritize their dam safety risks so 
that the limited resources available to them can be used most diligently and effectively.   
1.1.1. Regulations and Dam Hazard Classification 
Dam safety regulations vary dramatically from state to state. Some states have the authority to 
restrict operation of any dam or reservoir if they have dam safety concerns. However, most states 
do not have true enforcement power. They can write letters but without the ability to fund and 
with the ever changing political priorities, there is only so much they can do to influence the 
majority of unsophisticated dam owners to take action.  
Dam safety regulations are grounded in state law and are fully deterministic and prescriptive. 
Risk-based thinking is a new concept to most state regulators2. Dam safety requirements are tied 
to dam hazard classifications. 
Dam hazard classifications vary between states but generally include three classes based on 
estimated loss of life and downstream damage from a dam failure: 
• 
High Hazard – Probable loss of life; 
• 
Significant Hazard – Possible loss of life, major damage; and 
• 
Low Hazard – No loss of life, minor damage. 
High hazard dams attract the most stringent design requirements such as being able to safely pass 
the probable maximum flood (PMF), must meet modern stability and filter requirements, have 
limitations on conduit design, and must be able to sustain maximum credible earthquake (MCE) 
loading, among other requirements. Significant hazard dams have less specific and less difficult 
requirements such as the typical requirements to safely pass 50% of the PMF, and lesser 
requirements on zoning and stability. Low hazard dams may only be required to safely pass the 
100 year storm and may not require specific geotechnical investigations and analysis, so long as 
designs with precedent are cited. 
 
So this deterministic regulatory environment has produced a huge inventory of dams, which do 
not satisfy design criteria for their hazard class. What is the regulator to do? 
1.2. 
OVERVIEW OF NEW PROCESS 
1.2.1. Goals and Objectives 
URS Group was under contract with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to 
develop a new tool for Risk-Based Dam Safety Prioritization to be used by State Dam Safety 
Regulators. 
The objectives for development of a “Risk Tool” are outlined below: 
                                                 
2 The NSW Dam Safety Committee in Australia (State Regulator) recently enacted risk-based dam safety legislation 
and procedures.  The FEMA Risk Tool process is fully consistent with these regulations.   
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONONE 
Introduction 
 
1-3 
• Essentially a decision-making tool to identify those dams within a large inventory that most 
urgently need attention and then allocate resources accordingly 
• Provide enhanced understanding of key contributors to risk at each dam 
• Systematic and reasoned framework for prioritizing and committing resources among many 
dam safety issues 
• Provide a quantifiable measure of risk from which the urgency of actions can be judged 
• Means to effectively communicate dam safety risk situation to decision makers and 
politicians to impact funding priorities 
• Provide a consistent methodology throughout the country for regulators to evaluate dam 
safety.   
• Consistent with standards-based regulatory programs in each state. 
To achieve these objectives, consideration must be given to the variety of State agencies, 
policies, regulations and available resources. The dam risk categorization process and Risk Tool 
must: 
• Be simple, quick and easy to implement 
• Be applicable to any type or number of dams 
• Acknowledge the limited resources available 
• Be flexible to accommodate the broad differences between owners and information known 
about each dam 
• Avoid subjectivity and unnecessary bias 
• Be transparent, defensible and reproducible 
What the dam risk prioritization tool is not is a means to judge dam safety tolerability. Once 
priorities are judged, then risk acceptance or tolerability is a matter of policy that will vary from 
state to state. As a minimum, each dam would need to be evaluated individually using 
compliance with deterministic standards or a detailed risk assessment. 
1.2.2. Dam Safety Risk Prioritization Tool Development Process 
The work described in this report is part of a four year development and implementation process 
comprised of the following: 
• FY 2004 - 2005 – Development of tool; 
• FY 2005 - 2006 – State trials and guidance manual preparation; and 
• FY 2007 – Roll out to ASDSO member states.  
The guidelines and procedures for the Risk Categorization System were developed utilizing the 
NDSRB Steering Committee for direction, oversight, and review. 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONONE 
Introduction 
 
1-4 
The first step was to review a previous ASDSO Committee report and then develop ideas with 
the new Steering Committee through meetings held in Washington DC, Las Vegas and 
Annapolis. The original Steering Committee struggled to reach consensus on any issue, but 
produced a useful framework for the following work. 
A Consequence Categorization System was established for partitioning an inventory of dams into 
groupings with similar consequences resulting from dam failure. Dam failure consequence was 
tied to state dam hazard classification and then expanded to recognize society’s aversion to 
incidents that cause large loss of life. To aid in the prioritization process, Wayne Graham of the 
United States Bureau of Reclamation (USBR) was commissioned to develop a new simplified 
loss of life consequence assessment methodology based on the more limited dam failure 
hydrologic information typically available to state regulators. This process was found to be easy 
to use and was verified against a number of case histories with dam break / inundation modeling. 
Instead of using a generalized, qualitative Risk Matrix of “High, Medium and Low” in the Risk 
Categorization System, an entirely different system was developed. The revised process builds on 
the successful elements of various ranking systems currently in use, simplifies potential failure 
modes analysis and dam risk assessment processes, is based on international guidelines from 
ANCOLD, International Committee on Large Dams (ICOLD) and others, and is more flexible, 
quantitative and generally further advanced than the system envisioned in the 2003 ASDSO 
report. The team relied heavily on the positive experience from Australia and the USBR. 
1.2.3. Process Outline 
The new process covers the most important failure modes for a wide variety of dam types and 
dam features, and it explicitly quantifies risks posed by different failure modes.  This allows each 
failure mode likelihood and its consequences to be computed and graphed, and then the failure 
mode risk and overall dam risk is quantified and compared against risk tolerability criteria. 
The Risk Categorization of each dam is then established by the quantitative risk level and its 
position relative to risk criteria.  Each dam can be ranked by total risk and by failure mode risk. 
Risk Categories parallel those used by the USBR, and reflect different levels of urgency and 
priority. 
 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONONE 
Introduction 
 
1-5 
 
The above figure summarizes the three step dam safety risk categorization process. Consequence 
categorization starts with the existing hazard classification and the National Inventory of Dams 
(NID) database information. The Failure Mode Evaluation is greatly simplified using a bin 
process in the worksheet for each type of dam and failure mode to guide the evaluator to failure 
probabilities based on whatever information is available. The lives consequences are computed 
in a separate Life Loss Potential (LLP) worksheet. Risk is then quantified by multiplying failure 
probability by LLP. Risk can then be prioritized based on total dam risk or by failure mode risk. 
1.3. 
DEFINITIONS 
Abutment Outflanking – During a flood, flows pass over the reservoir perimeter beyond the limits 
of the dam structure, probably over the abutments. 
As Low As Reasonably Practical (ALARP) –The risk has been reduced as low as reasonably 
practicable. This reasonableness test reflects society’s aversion to incidents that can potentially 
cause large loss of life but recognizes that there is a point of diminished returns. ALARP is 
defined as the point where additional risk reduction is not possible without a disproportionate 
investment for the benefit gained. 
Concrete Core Wall – Early 20th century dam building design when a concrete wall serves as the 
core with surrounding shells of embankment soils.   
Dam Element – a feature of the subject dam which could potentially fail for one of the reasons 
indicated by the element’s failure modes (i.e. earth dam, unlined spillway, outlet works, etc). 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONONE 
Introduction 
 
1-6 
Dam Risk Profile – an individual dam’s collection of Elements and LLP worksheets. The Dam 
Risk Profile is an Excel workbook. 
Failure Mode – a method (i.e. piping for an earth dam, earthquake for a concrete dam, etc.) by 
which a Dam Element could fail resulting in an uncontrolled release of the reservoir. 
Failure Probability (F) – a User judged value representing the probability that a particular failure 
mode will cause failure of the Dam Element. The F value is illustrated as 1 in 100, 1 x 10-2 or 
0.01, for example. 
Life Loss Potential (LLP) – the number of lives potentially lost given failure of a Dam Element. 
The LLP value is equal to the estimated population at risk multiplied by a depending upon 
distance from the dam.  Sometimes referred to as “Loss of Life Potential.” 
Maximum Design Earthquake (MDE) – An extreme design earthquake for which the dam could 
sustain damage but not catastrophic release of the reservoir.  The return period may range from 1 
in 5,000 to 1 in 100,000, or may be taken as the deterministic maximum credible earthquake 
(MCE).   
Operating Basis Earthquake (OBE) – An unusual design earthquake expected during the life of 
the structure with a return period of about 1 in 500 years that does not disrupt the operation of the 
reservoir.   
Population at Risk (PAR) – the estimated number of people within the inundation zone from a 
dam failure. The value is based on assumed people within dwellings, cars, factories, camping 
areas, etc that are inside the inundation zone that will get their feet wet. 
Risk Portfolio – a collection of User created Dam Risk Profiles. The Risk Portfolio is a Microsoft 
Excel Workbook which manages the Dam Risk Profile workbooks. 
Risk Tool – The combination of Excel spreadsheets (riskportfolio.xls and template.xls) that 
together comprise the dam risk prioritization program. 
Threshold Failure Flood (TFF) – The flood where there is just enough overtopping of the dam to 
cause breach failure by erosion overturning, sliding, or collapse. 
Workbook – A workbook is an excel file that contains one or more worksheets, user forms and 
macro code. The Risk Portfolio application is an Excel workbook as is each Dam Risk Profile. 
Worksheet – A worksheet is a single page within a workbook that contains data arranged in rows 
and columns.  
1.4. 
LIMITATIONS 
The work on this project has been carried out in accordance with reasonable and accepted 
engineering practices. No warranty or guarantee, either written or implied, is applicable to this 
work.  Additional failure modes and dam elements will likely be added to the tool in future 
revisions, such as fuse plug spillways, penstocks and slab and buttress concrete dams.   
 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTWO 
Hardware, Software and System Requirements 
 
2-1 
2. 
Section 2 TW O 
Hardware, Software and System Requirements 
2.1. 
HARDWARE AND SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 
This application has been developed with Microsoft Excel and will run on any computer that is 
currently running Microsoft Excel 2002 or newer. Some features of the application will not work 
with Excel 2000. Screen resolution should be 1024 x 768 or higher. The application requires very 
little disk space – less than 3 Mb for the application plus 1 Mb for each Dam Profile.  
2.2. 
SOFTWARE INSTALLATION AND SETUP 
2.2.1. Installation of the Risk Portfolio Application 
The Risk Portfolio application consists of two Microsoft Excel workbooks which must be placed 
within the same directory on the user’s computer. 
Copy the two files, RiskPortfolio.xls and Template.xls to the same directory. These file names 
CAN NOT be changed by the User.  To create a shortcut to the Risk Tool application on your 
desktop right-click on the RiskProfile.xls workbook and select the menu item for “Send To”, 
then select “Desktop (Create Shortcut)”. It is not necessary to create a shortcut to the 
Template.xls file as this is a library file only used by the program. 
Prior to starting the Risk Tool, the User is required to make modifications to the basic setup of 
Excel. First, macros must be enabled from the security menu. Furthermore it is necessary to trust 
the Visual Basic Project. Set these options from the Security dialog box which is available when 
you click the Tools menu, then select Macros, then Security. On the Security Level tab set the 
macro level to Medium (or Low). On the Trusted Publishers tab select the checkbox to Trust 
Access to Visual Basic Project. 
 
Security Dialog Box Showing Security Level 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTWO 
Hardware, Software and System Requirements 
 
2-2 
 
 
Security Dialog Box Showing Trusted Publishers Tab 
2.2.2. Directory Structure of the Application 
In the screenshot below, note that the RiskPortfolio.xls and Template.xls workbooks are in the 
same directory. As individual dam risk profiles are created they are placed in the data folder by 
State and Region. It is not necessary to access the workbooks from the directories because the 
Risk Portfolio workbook contains a list of all the dam profiles on the Risk Portfolio Main Page 
(shown below). Please DO NOT move the workbooks to different directories or the charts that 
track the risk will not be able to include them in the totals. 
 
Directory Showing Data Directory 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTWO 
Hardware, Software and System Requirements 
 
2-3 
2.2.3. The RiskPortfolio.xls Workbook 
From this workbook you can create Dam Risk Profiles, view a listing of the profiles organized by 
state and region, or view a chart of existing Dam Risk Profiles.  
 
 
RiskPortfolio.xls Main Page 
How to Create a Dam Risk Profile 
From the RiskPortfolio.xls workbook, click on the link called “Create New Profile” (shown in 
the above screenshot). This will bring up a window (shown below) into which you must enter the 
Dam Name, State, and Region. Once you click the Create Profile button the new Dam Risk 
Profile is created, then opened and the total risk is added to the main page of the 
RiskPortfolio.xls workbook. 
 
Create New Profile Window 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTWO 
Hardware, Software and System Requirements 
 
2-4 
How to view or edit a Dam Risk Profile 
Click on the link for the Dam Risk Profile’s name from the RiskPortfolio.xls main page (shown 
above). This will open the respective dam’s risk profile and from there you can fill in data about 
the dam and add or remove dam elements. You can browse the dam elements by clicking on their 
worksheet tabs. 
 
 
Worksheet Tabs Showing Dam Elements 
How to Delete a Dam Risk Profile 
Simply remove the Dam Risk Profile from the data directory. You can do this by clicking on the 
link called “Browse Data Directory”. This will open the windows file Explorer from which you 
can select and delete the appropriate workbooks and directories. Changes made to the directory 
will be reflected when you click the “Refresh Dam List” link or reopen the Risk Portfolio 
application. 
 
 
Links for Managing Dam Risk Profiles 
 
How to add or remove Dam Elements from a Dam Risk Profile 
While in the Dam Risk Profile you can click the button to Add or Remove Elements. This will 
open a form listing all possible elements. Existing elements will be checked. You can check or 
uncheck the elements as required for the particular dam. 
 
 
 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTWO 
Hardware, Software and System Requirements 
 
2-5 
 
Form Used to Include or Exclude Dam Elements 
Editing Failure Probabilities (F) for Dam Elements 
Each Dam Element contains three or four failure modes that are tailored to the Dam Element. In 
the screenshot below the failure modes are Earthquake, Flood and Normal Stability. The values 
for these failure modes should be entered in the blue boxes in rows 11 and 12. Selection of the 
appropriate F values depends upon review of available design and construction data as well as 
visual observations. Guidance is provided in Section 3.3. 
 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTWO 
Hardware, Software and System Requirements 
 
2-6 
 
Failure Modes Exist For Each Element 
As you enter the data for the failure modes, Excel will try to create the appropriate points on the 
chart. Until all the data is entered you will see a warning from Excel indicating that the chart data 
is not completely valid. This does not indicate that there is an error with your data, it occurs 
because Excel is trying to calculate points with incomplete data. You may safely ignore this 
message. 
 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTWO 
Hardware, Software and System Requirements 
 
2-7 
 
Excel Warning That Data Is Not Yet Complete  
**YOU MAY SAFELY IGNORE THIS MESSAGE** 
Charts  
The RiskPortfolio.xls workbook’s Entire Dam Portfolio tab displays a chart of the total risk for 
each dam in the portfolio. You can access this 
tab by clicking on it or selecting the “View 
Dam Portfolio Risk Profile” link on the Main 
page of the Risk Portfolio. 
Each Dam Risk Profile contains a tab which 
displays a chart of the risk of each failure mode 
of each element. 
 
2.3. 
TRANSFERRING AND MOVING DATA 
Each Dam Risk Profile is contained within an individual Microsoft Excel workbook. You can 
move these workbooks to another computer provided you also move the State and Region 
directories and store them in the directory called Data. The Data directory is automatically 
created the first time you open the RiskPortfolio.xls application. This directory structure, 
illustrated in Section 2.2.2, is used by the RiskPortfolio.xls application to create the list of Dams 
on the Main page and to calculate the risk of the Entire Dam Portfolio. If the Dam Profiles are 
moved outside this directory structure then they will not be included in the application. Use the 
Windows Explorer to copy and move Dam Profiles between computers. 
2.4. 
PRINTING OUTPUT 
You may wish to print the Dam Elements to take on site with you. As the application has been 
developed within Microsoft Excel, printing can be done through Excel as well. Each Dam 
Element is one worksheet. To activate the worksheet click its tab. 
To print one copy of the active worksheet to the default printer, click the Printer icon found on 
the Standard toolbar. To print multiple copies or select a different printer, click on the File menu 
and select Print to open the print dialog box from which you can change the number of copies or 
set other printer options. 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTWO 
Hardware, Software and System Requirements 
 
2-8 
 
Click the printer icon to print a single copy of the active worksheet. 
 
 
The print dialog box allows you to select multiple copies or change printers. 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-1 
3. 
Section 3 THREE 
Comprehensive User 
3.1. 
START-UP 
3.1.1. Document Review 
After installation, you are ready to proceed building a dam inventory. The engineering 
assessment of each dam is conducted by first collecting whatever information was available in 
the files. In some cases this includes periodic inspection reports, design and construction 
documentation, U.S. Corps of Engineers Phase I dam safety reports completed in the late 1970’s 
and early 1980’s, and perhaps instrumentation data. For other dams, there may be no information 
except a site inspection report 20 years ago. Fortunately, in most states the dams included in the 
NID have a Phase I report which includes dam section details, flood hydrology, geology and 
perhaps a geotechnical study.  The Risk Tool is designed for use given any amount of available 
information. In general, with less information comes a more conservative risk profile.  
Referenced documents should be identified and noted within the risk profile file. These notations 
can be included at the user’s discretion in the comment block provided as shown below. 
Dam Element illustrating Comments Section of Worksheet 
3.1.2. Initial Data Input 
The initial data input screen prompts the user for basic information regarding the dam and the 
evaluator. The dam information consists mostly of data available from the NID as shown below.  
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-2 
 
This table also prompts the user to establish the 
probability of the dam impounding water in any 
one year. For most dams, the probability is 
100%. This field is intended to accommodate 
flood control facilities that are usually dry or 
normally impound a small percentage of the 
total flood capacity. Without a storage pool, the 
probability of these flood control dams failing 
through piping or stability is reduced, although 
the risk of desiccation cracking maybe higher 
leading to increased piping risk once the 
reservoir fills.  Therefore, if a significant 
storage pool is likely once every 10 years, then 
the probability of the dam impounding water in 
any one year is 10%. The reduced probability is 
then factored into the failure modes requiring a 
storage pool.  
Use of this factor can be subjective for dams 
with small normal storage capacities but very 
large flood capacities. Therefore, unless the impoundment is dry, the User should input a value of 
100%. 
3.2. 
BUILDING A DAM THROUGH DAM ELEMENTS 
The front end visual basic routine has been developed to allow the user to select a suite of 
worksheets (dam elements) which best describe the primary features of the dam being evaluated. 
For example, a dam may include an earthfill section, concrete ungated spillway and outlet tower, 
so those three features are selected. Similarly, a dam may be best characterized by an earthfill 
section and two ungated spillways.  
Selection of the most appropriate dam elements is based on review of the available information. 
If too few or too many dam elements were initially selected, the Risk Tool allows the user to add 
or delete dam elements at any time.  
Dam elements were prepared for the following 
types of dam features 
• Concrete Gravity Dam 
• Concrete Arch Dam 
• Masonry Dam (being updated) 
• Earthfill Dam 
• Earth – Rockfill Dam 
• Concrete Face Rockfill Dam 
• Timber Crib Dam 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-3 
• Tailings Dam 
• Lined Impoundment 
• Outlet Tower and Conduit 
• Concrete Gated Spillway (being updated) 
• Ungated Spillway (multiple selections permitted) 
Additional dam elements (e.g. fuse plug spillways, slab and buttress concrete dam, penstock) are 
planned for future development for inclusion in later versions of the Risk Tool.  
3.3. 
FAILURE MODE EVALUATION 
Each dam element contains a series of three or four likely failure modes. These failure modes 
represent physical mechanisms that could result in failure of the dam and an uncontrolled release 
of the impounded reservoir. The Failure Modes Table is typically comprised of four vertical 
columns of failure mode bins such as Earthquake, Flood, Piping and Normal Stability. In each 
column are bins of descriptors which aid in selecting the order of magnitude of failure probability 
F ranging from 1 to 1 x 10-6. In addition there is a column of specific observations which provide 
clues about which bin might be appropriate. General descriptions in making subjective 
judgements of failure probability are provided below. 
 
Guidelines to Evaluate the Reasonableness of Subjective Probabilities, Barneich et Al. (1996)3 
Description of Condition or Event 
Order of Magnitude of 
Probability Assigned 
Occurrences of the condition or event are observed in the 
available database.   
10-1 
The occurrence of the condition or event is not observed, or is 
observed in one isolated instance, in the available database; 
however, several potential failure scenarios can be identified.   
10-2 
The occurrence of the condition or event is not observed in the 
available database.  It is difficult to think about any plausible failure 
scenario; however, a single scenario could be identified after 
considerable effort.   
10-3 
The condition or event has not been observed, and no plausible 
scenario could be identified, even after considerable effort.   
10-4 
 
Probability estimates should be input in scientific notation such as “1 E –3” for 1 in 1,000 years.  
Other notations such as 5% in 100 years should be converted to “2 E-3.” 
                                                 
3 Barneich et Al. (1996) “The Reliability Analysis of a Major Dam Project” Uncertainty in Geologic Environment 
From Theory to Practice, Geotechnical Special Publication No. 58., Volume 2. 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-4 
Failure Mode Descriptors and Guidance 
The following failure modes were included in the dam element worksheets where appropriate for 
each dam type: Normal Stability, Piping, Normal Flood, Extreme Flood, Earthquake, Gates, 
Valves, and Outlet Tower Stability. 
Each failure mode is characterized by a column of physical observations, geometric details, 
analysis results and other pertinent information. The columns are made up of bins with ranges of 
failure probability corresponding to the noted information about the dam in each bin. If possible, 
average dam conditions and failure probabilities are described to provide a means to benchmark 
the user’s frame of reference. This allows the evaluation to judge whether this dam is better or 
worse than the defined average. Since each bin covers 1 to 2 orders of magnitude, estimation 
precision is not critical. More important is relative consistency between dams and failure modes. 
3.3.1. Piping 
Piping is perhaps the most difficult failure mode, so the Historical Performance Method 
developed by Dr. Mark Foster while he was at the University of New South Wales (UNSW) has 
Design, construction or 
maintenance information 
Failure modes 
Visual observations 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-5 
been used to guide the binning process. The Foster et al (1998)4 paper has been appended to 
assist the User in selecting the appropriate order of magnitude. The UNSW method provides 
guidance on the adjustments to the failure probabilities based on whether various conditions are 
better or worse then the average. A new piping toolbox is currently being developed for the 
Corps of Engineers and Bureau of Reclamation that will update these guidelines. 
The column bins provide descriptors which are based on the average historical precedent for each 
set of conditions. The first bin covers the range of annual failure probability of 1x10-2 to 1. 
Obviously, if there is active piping going on with turbid seepage, no filter, erodible soils and an 
unprotected seepage exit, this represents the most dangerous situation for an earthfill dam to 
experience piping failure. The probability of failure may be as high 0.5, or 1 if failure is 
imminent.  
According to Foster et al (1998)4, an average homogeneous earthfill dam with no filters has an 
annualized probability of piping failure of 2 x 10-4. However, if there are known defects, the 
presence of dispersive clay, observed piping, etc. then the risk levels should be higher. On the 
other hand with well compacted clay and a filter toe drain, then the risk would be lower. 
Suggested adjustment factors are provided in the paper. Piping through the embankment, 
foundation and from the embankment into the foundation should also be considered. 
3.3.2. Flood 
It would seem that the flood probabilities would be the easiest to estimate.  However, flood 
estimation in the United States is still rooted in deterministic hydrology, and estimation of flood 
recurrence interval is not straightforward when all that is available is the percentage of the PMF 
passed through the spillway. Perhaps one day a more progressive probabilistic approach to flood 
hydrology, similar to that used in Australia, will address this problem as more states view dam 
safety from a risk perspective. The flood recurrence probability for extreme events is always a 
matter of some debate and should be handled consistently for each climatological area of the 
State.  For example, in arid areas where the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) is controlled 
by freak storms, the PMF may be projected to occur only once in a million years (1 x 10-6). 
Whereas in more temperate climates subject to frequent tropical storms, the PMF might have a 
return period of 1 in 10,000 or 1 x 10-4. Each State should provide guidelines for PMF 
estimation. 
3.3.3. Earthquake 
For Earthquake, some judgment of whether liquefaction might be a problem and the recurrence 
interval of the threshold earthquake for liquefaction and flow failure is required. So clues such as 
loose sands in the foundation, or hydraulic fill construction would be important to identify. 
However, if the region is quiet seismically, this failure mode can be skipped. Critical information 
or assumptions should be noted directly in the yellow Comments column so there is no doubt 
about what was assumed by the Evaluator. 
                                                 
4 Foster, M, R Fell, M Spannagle (1998) “Risk Assessment – Estimating the Probability of Failure of Embankment 
Dams By Piping,” ANCOLD Annual Conference, Sydney, November 
 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-6 
3.3.4. Stability 
With stability, slope angles, or telltale signs of cracking, slumps or deformation may be helpful 
indicators if stability analyses are not available. However, if factors of safety have been 
computed in design or dam safety reports, than these figures should be used to select the 
appropriate order of magnitude of failure probability.  
3.3.5. General considerations 
The age of the dam has an important impact in its historic performance. Dams can have a one to 
two order of magnitude higher probability of failure during initial filling and their first five years 
of operation then after five years. Dams with design flaws that have performed well for fifty 
years may also provide an indication of lower risk, although after this period like humans they 
start to show their age and should have a thorough checkup. Several dams in Australia started to 
show interesting problems with deformation and cracking at 45-60 years of age, whereas some 
century old puddle clay core dams have never shown any indications of problems. Furthermore, 
there were major changes in dam design technology after some significant failures such as the St 
Francis concrete gravity dam in California (post 1930) and the Teton zoned earthfill dam in 
Idaho (post 1975). Each state may have similar eras of dam building where technological changes 
were introduced to advance the state of practice. An example is the shift away from seepage 
collars in 1990’s after several failures of NRCS dams with these details. 
Without proper documentation of design and construction, the User should consider a 
conservative approach to selecting failure probabilities. In essence, the User is identifying a lack 
of supporting data for a given failure mode.  If there is a lack of a recent inspection, the tables 
suggest that the probabilities of failure should be increased by 10. 
3.4. 
CONSEQUENCE ASSESSMENT 
The main focus of state dam safety regulators is protecting public safety. Therefore, the type of 
consequence of primary interest in the prioritization tool is human lives. However, the method 
typically used for life loss estimation from dam failure (Graham, 1999)5 requires extensive dam 
break modeling, which is typically not available to the regulator.  
To overcome this limitation, Wayne Graham developed a simplified procedure dated June 18, 
2004 entitled “A Method for Easily Estimating the Loss of Life from Dam Failures”, appended 
to this report. A spreadsheet was developed to assist in determining the potential for loss of life 
based on the methodology outlined by Graham using primarily information from the NID 
database.  
The simplified approach requires several estimates of hydrologic and geographic parameters: 
• Estimation of the peak dam breach discharge; 
• Estimation of the peak 10-year frequency discharge; 
• Estimation of the Population at Risk (PAR) in a given reach; and 
                                                 
5 Graham, Wayne J., 1999. A Procedure for Estimating Loss of Life Caused by Dam Failure. September; and USBR, 
1999. Policy and Procedures for Dam Safety Modification Decision Making. April 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-7 
• Estimation of the fatality rate in a given reach. 
An illustration of the worksheet used to estimate the life loss potential is provided below. The 
practical application of assessing the major inputs to the worksheet is discussed below. 
Life Loss Potential Worksheet 
 
The resulting LLP values for the Flood and Sunny Day conditions are then applied to each failure 
mode for every Dam Element. The User must manually input the values into each failure mode at 
the locations shown below.  
 
 
 
 
 
Entering LLP Estimate 
NID data from 
Main worksheet 
Peak discharge for flood and sunny day 
conditions and 10-yr discharge data 
Estimate for 
population at risk 
LLP values for Flood (top) and 
Sunny Day (bottom) 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-8 
 
Selection of the appropriate LLP for each failure mode should thoughtfully consider the 
operation of the particular dam and spillway. For instance, it is possible that failure of a valve on 
an outlet works facility would not result in an uncontrolled release of the reservoir. However, the 
resulting discharge may or may not be a hazard. Guidance for application of the LLP value is 
provided in the following table. 
Failure Mode 
LLP Consideration 
Earthquake 
Sunny Day 
Flood 
Flood 
Normal Stability 
Sunny Day 
Piping 
Sunny Day 
Seepage 
Sunny Day 
Training Walls 
Flood – can failure of training walls lead to 
catastrophic breach and release of reservoir? 
Abutment Outflanking 
Flood 
Lined Chute and Dissipator Flood – can spillway channel erosion lead to 
catastrophic breach and release of the reservoir? 
Unlined Channel 
Flood – can spillway channel erosion lead to 
catastrophic breach and release of the reservoir? 
Conduits 
Sunny Day 
Gates  
Flood – can gate failure lead to catastrophic breach 
and release of the reservoir? 
Valves 
Sunny Day – can valve failure lead to catastrophic 
breach and release of the reservoir? 
If failure of a gate, valve or spillway chute does not cause a catastrophic breach of the dam, then 
a much smaller PAR and LLP should be utilized for these failure modes.   
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-9 
 
3.4.1. Estimating the Peak Dam Breach Discharge  
Key to the practical application of the methodology is in the estimate of the peak dam breach 
discharge. Ideally, the user will have access to dam break analyses that include discharge values 
for a sunny day failure as well as failure during the inflow design flood. If no detailed dam 
breach analyses are available, the most simplistic approach to estimating the peak dam breach 
discharge is to utilize the Froelich equation. 
Qp = 40.1V.295H1.24 
where:  
Qp = the peak outflow in cubic feet per second from the breached 
embankment dam 
V = the reservoir storage volume in acre-feet at the time of failure 
H = the height of the embankment in feet from the bottom of the final 
breach to the top of embankment 
The parameters utilized in this equation are readily ascertained from the NID database.  With the 
information provided in the Main worksheet (shown below), the Risk Tool automatically 
computes peak discharge using the Froelich equation. The calculated value can easily be 
overwritten by the user if alternate data is available, such as computed breach flows from 
dambreak analyses.   
 
NID Data Input to Risk Tool 
3.4.2. Estimating the 10-year Frequency Peak Discharge  
The 10-year flood flow or flood with an annual exceedance probability of 1 x 10-1 represents in 
simplistic terms the bank full condition where no loss of life would be expected. Estimates for 
the 10-year frequency flood event may or may not be available and could be difficult to 
simplistically estimate.  There are several methods for estimating the 10-year frequency peak 
discharge and these include: 
• Statistical analysis of stream gauge data 
• Regional regression equations 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-10 
• Rainfall-runoff modeling 
Of the methods outlined above and assuming no detailed estimates of the 10-year discharge are 
readily available, the regional regression equations offer the most simplistic method for 
estimating the 10-year discharge.  The USGS has published nationwide summaries for estimating 
flood discharges for ungaged sites in the publication entitled Nationwide Summary of U.S. 
Geological Survey Regional Regression Equations for Estimating Magnitude and Frequency of 
Floods for Ungaged Sites, 1993, Water-Resources Investigations report 94-4002.  The USGS 
link:  http://onlinepubs.er.usgs.gov/djvu/WRI/wrir_94_4002.djvu 
Regression equations have been developed for all 50 states based on properties of the watersheds 
within specific definable regions.  These parameters (among others) typically include: 
• Drainage area, 
• Basin or stream slope, 
• Basin mean elevation, and 
• Mean annual precipitation. 
The drainage area is typically published in the NID database and the other parameters can 
generally be obtained from available USGS or other available topographic mapping. 
It is important to note that the USGS regional regression equations are based on data from 
gauged sites in the region, and as more data becomes available, these equations are continually 
being adjusted and updated. 
In addition, the USGS has also developed a software package for estimating floods at ungauged 
sites.  The program is termed The National Flood Frequency (NFF) program and offers a 
simplistic tool for determining the 10-year frequency discharge lacking any detailed or other 
estimates.  
3.4.3. Estimating the Population at Risk (PAR)  
Ideally, flood and sunny day dam break inundation maps are available from dam safety reports or 
the Emergency Action Plan (EAP), from which the count of dwellings, roads, bridges, schools, 
parks and industrial facilities can be made. However, if this information is unavailable, then the 
flood rise could be assumed at say 20% of the dam height in the first 3 mile reach, 10% of the 
dam height from 3 to 7 miles downstream, and 5 % of the dam height from 7 to 15 miles 
downstream. Typically, the potential for loss of life diminishes significantly beyond a distance of 
15 miles due to increased warning time for these areas. However, the ultimate decision to include 
potential loss of life beyond 15 miles is the User’s. If desired, in order to work within the context 
of the Risk Tool, the user should include potential loss of life beyond 15 miles in the 7 to 15 
miles category on the LLP worksheet.  
Three people are assumed as PAR for each dwelling within the inundation footprint. Cars on 
bridges and roads are assumed to have 2 occupants, and trailer parks, schools, recreation facilities 
including fishing areas, and commercial properties are characterized based on their size and 
temporal (seasonal) use.  If the User has specific information then other occupancy rates can be 
used.   
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-11 
Lacking any other data, the approach offers a sound basis for approximating the dam inundation 
extents. Unsteady flow dam breach models are the best way to estimate the inundation extents 
and the PAR.  However, these models are very time consuming and require detailed data.  New 
GIS tools are available that can greatly assist with the plotting of dam breach inundation extents 
and estimation of the PAR.  The simplistic methods of estimating the peak breach discharges and 
ratios of peak dam breach discharge to 10-year discharge (and hence the potential hazard) do not 
account for any attenuation of the dam breach flood wave or the effect of large contributing 
drainage areas below the dam. 
3.4.4. Estimate of the Fatality Rate  
The simplistic approach presented in Graham (2004) and provided in the table below does not 
account for attenuation of the dam breach flood wave or the effect of large contributing drainage 
areas below the dam.  As such, the estimates of the fatality rates that are based on distance 
downstream from the dam and the ratio of the peak dam breach discharge to the 10-year peak 
discharge could be skewed. At any rate, lacking any detailed dam breach and inundation analysis, 
the approach and fatality rate estimates are reasonable and based on data from real dam breach 
events. 
 
Fatality Rates in Dam Failures, Graham (2004)6 
Fatality Rate based on distance from dam
Qb/Q10
0 to 3 miles
3 to 7 miles
7 to 15 miles
> 100
0.75
0.5
0.37
50 to 100
0.5
0.33
0.25
30 to 50
0.25
0.2
0.13
20 to 30
0.2
0.15
0.1
10 to 20
0.1
0.08
0.05
5 to 10
0.02
0.015
0.01
3 to 5
0.01
0.007
0.005
1 to 3
0.005
0.003
0.002
< 1
0.001
0.0001
0
 
In the LLP worksheet, “Flood” numbers are appropriate for the full or percentages of the 
Probable Maximum Flood (PMF) and Threshold Failure Flood (TFF) scenarios where some 
warning of the impending flood is likely. The Threshold Failure Flood is defined as the flood 
where there is just enough overtopping of the dam to cause failure by erosion or collapse. This 
may range from 6 inches to 3 feet above the dam crest flood depending on the crest details and 
downstream slope conditions. “Sunny Day” conditions refer to a piping or earthquake failure 
where there is no warning. The inundation footprint may be larger for the flood case because the 
flood is being passed as well, but the warning time may significantly reduce the population at 
risk. Recent work by Wayne Graham reveals that even with warning, some portion of the PAR 
does not evacuate. 
                                                 
6 Graham, Wayne (2004) “Risk-Base Dam Safety Prioritization” Draft. 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-12 
The simplified method was checked for several dams with detailed dam breach modeling results. 
Both Graham (1999, 2004) methods provided consistent results within 10 % which is quite good 
for such a simplified process.  
If the estimated LLP for either the “Flood” or “Sunny Day” condition is greater than 1,000, the 
User must override the estimate to 1,000. Currently, the workbook only supports an LLP of up to 
1,000. 
3.5. 
RISK CATEGORIZATION 
Once each failure mode probability F has been entered, then the appropriate LLP should be 
transferred from the LLP worksheet. With these two values, the loss of life risk is computed by 
multiplying the failure probability by the consequences. In many of the arid western states, dams 
may fill only rarely. This factor is multiplied times the non-flood failure probability, based on the 
probability of filling in any year (see Section 3.1.2). 
The computed failure probability F – LLP pairs are plotted automatically on the Risk Plot (shown 
below). 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-13 
 
Risk Plot from any Dam Element worksheet 
The diagonal lines on this plot are lines of equal risk. Guidance on risk priority is provided from 
the Bureau of Reclamation7 and ANCOLD8 which have led to three regions of risk priority and 
urgency: 
Priority A – Urgent Action Recommended 
                                                 
7 US Bureau of Reclamation (2003) “Guidelines For Achieving Public Protection in Dam Safety Decisionmaking,” 
June 15  
8 Australian National Committee on Large Dams (2003) “Guidelines in Risk Assessment,” ISBN 0 731 027 620 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-14 
Priority B – Risk Should be Reduced in Accordance with Priorities 
Priority C – Diminished Need to Reduce Risk Subject to ALARP Principle.  
Urgent Action means that the dam safety risk as it is currently understood by the State Engineer 
is very high and that urgent action is required by the dam owner. These actions might range from 
contacting the owner expressing concern to requesting additional investigations of the failure 
mode in question to requiring reservoir restriction in extreme cases. Further investigations may 
be all that are necessary to clarify the situation and reveal that the assumptions made in this first 
assessment are excessively conservative. The lower limit of risk urgency corresponds to an 
annualized lives risk of 1 in 100 or 1 x 10-2. 
Risk Should be Reduced in Accordance with Priorities indicates that risk level still falls 
above the level of  1 in 1000 or 1 x 10-3, but that the risk can be addressed in an appropriate and 
deliberate sequence of dams or failure modes based on their relative risk. This category 
recognizes that funds and resources available to address these dam risk issues are finite and that 
it takes time to resolve these issues. Other factors such as social and political issues may also be 
considered. However, the risk is still considered by international guidelines to require some 
action to lower risk. 
Diminished Need to Reduce Risk Subject to the ALARP Principle covers the region where 
the dam safety risk falls below the 1 x 10-3 limit. Satisfying the ALARP test means that the risk 
has been reduced as low as reasonably practicable. This reasonableness test reflects society’s 
aversion to incidents that can potentially cause large loss of life but recognizes that there is a 
point of diminished returns. ALARP is defined as the point where additional risk reduction is not 
possible without a disproportionate investment for the benefit gained. 
Each State may wish to adjust these dam safety risk thresholds and definitions to best suit their 
specific circumstances. These are suggested limits based on established Bureau of Reclamation 
and international practice. The results from this risk tool should not be used to judge risk 
tolerability since these imprecise quantities are meant only to establish priorities. 
 
 
 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-15 
Oglala Dam
Risk Profile
1E-05
1E-04
1E-03
1E-02
1E-01
1E+00
Concrete Ungated
Spillway - Extreme
Loading Instability
Concrete Ungated
Spillway - Failure
Flood2
Concrete Ungated
Spillway - Operating
Flood
Earthfill Dam -
Earthquake
Earthfill Dam -
Flood1
Earthfill Dam -
Piping
Earthfill Dam -
Normal Stability
Outlet Works -
Tower Stability (EQ)
Outlet Works -
Conduit 
Outlet Works -
Gates
Outlet Works -
Valves
Total Risk
Risk Value
Risk Value
Priority A
Priority B
Priority C
3.6. 
RISK PRIORITIZATION 
The final step in the 
process is the 
ranking of the 
failure modes and 
dams in each 
grouping by dam 
safety risk. Each 
failure mode is 
ranked by risk in the 
bar chart histogram 
navigated to by 
clicking the Risk 
Profile tab at the 
base of the 
worksheet. This 
illustrates the relative 
risk level for each 
failure mode for each 
dam separately. If the User then wants to see what failure mode is predominating the risk for a 
particular dam, then they can look back at the Risk Profile. If this does not seem right, then the 
specific failure mode worksheet selections can be reviewed for reasonableness and adjustment.  
To view other dams in the portfolio, click on the RiskProfile.xls tab, which will bring up the 
state dam profiles by region or other preset grouping. To view the entire dam portfolio risk 
profile by total risk, then click on the View Dam Portfolio Risk Profile box. This provides a 
clear graphical presentation of the relative dam safety risk of each dam in the grouping. 
Risk Ranking By Failure Modes for a Given Dam (within each Dam 
Element) 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONTHREE 
Comprehensive User 
 
3-16 
Dam Portfolio Risk
1.00E-05
1.00E-04
1.00E-03
1.00E-02
1.00E-01
1.00E+00
Oglala
Prarie No.1
Tohajiilee
FEMA
Coolidge
Dam
Risk_Rev2
San
Francisco
Dam
Charlie Day
Agency
FEMA Dam
Risk_Rev2
Dam
Total R isk
Loss of Life Potential
Priority A
Priority B
Priority C
 
Risk Portfolio 
 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONFOUR 
Beta Testing and Trials 
 
4-1 
4. 
Section 4 FOUR 
Beta Testing and Trials 
4.1. 
GENERAL 
Because risk methods are relatively new to state regulators, two mini-trials were conducted to 
confirm the viability and acceptability of the process. The trials were implemented in August and 
September 2004 with a three day session with the New Jersey DEP and a one day workshop with 
ten Bureau of Reclamation risk specialists examining Bureau of Indian Affairs dams. These 
sessions were immensely valuable in demonstrating that the process provided a quick, efficient 
and reasonable quantification of risk for a wide variety of dams, some with almost no 
information. Based on these trials a number of enhancements were implemented to improve the 
process. 
The next step was an extended beta trial with the State of Texas. This process included training 
of new dam safety staff and several multi-day workshops. This trial demonstrated the need for a 
more user-friendly front end setup routine, as well as guidelines for selecting average dam 
benchmark failure probabilities. These enhancements were developed and trialed. Texas’ unique 
situation with over 7,500 dams also stimulated the need for a more rapid consequence analysis 
process to identify which groups of dams should be tackled in what priority. 
The second beta trial was conducted in the State of Washington which has implemented one of 
the most advanced risk-based dam safety priority systems. This short trial confirmed the direction 
being followed in development and that the process was equally viable for more advanced states 
as for states with less developed dam safety programs 
4.2. 
TRIALS PERFORMED 
Each of the trials provided the development team valuable guidance and insight about how the 
prioritization tools would be utilized. 
New Jersey DEP, August 2004. The first trial was conducted with the New Jersey DEP. The 
three person DEP team included a mid and two junior level staff. The team collected files for 7 
dams and after a half day training exercise were able to complete 7 dams in 1.5 days. The team 
struggled with flood recurrence and preferred their normal percentage of PMF. However, the 
LLP calculation was completed easily with a useful CD-based state topographic map. The Corps 
Phase I inspection reports were very useful. However, we found that some of the risks were 
probably over-predicted. The team was able to calibrate ourselves on a series of cascade flood 
failures that had occurred several weeks before, so there was a timely impetus for the risk 
prioritization work. 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONFOUR 
Beta Testing and Trials 
 
4-2 
 
Failure of Upper Aetna Dam in NJ 
Bureau of Indian Affairs Dam Trial, September 2004. A Workshop was conducted at the 
Bureau of Reclamation with ten experienced dam safety specialists. After working the first dam 
together soliciting feedback on the process, the group split up into two-person teams, completing 
six more dams in less then 2 hours. The dams had a wide range of information including one case 
not in the NID database. The group suggested revised failure mode definitions to match 
experience. Much discussion ensued about the addition of warning time to LLP computation. We 
found that it was important to use a facilitator in each state.  
Texas Beta Trial, 2005 – 2006. The first beta trial of the full development package was 
conducted with Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) dam safety team. The first 
step was a three day training exercise at the TCEQ office in Austin in October 2005. The team 
worked through a number of dams and recognized some unique situations in Texas: 
• Since the dam safety program had been inactive there was a huge effort required to bring 
the team up to speed with the 7,500 dam inventory. In fact a prescreening tool was 
needed;. 
 Training of new staff with limited dam safety experience; 
 Useful calibration of Livingston Dam near failure; 
 Focus on flood control dams; and 
• Focus on dams with little or no information. 
SECTION
SECTION
SECTION
SECTIONFOUR 
Beta Testing and Trials 
 
4-3 
 
Livingston Dam during Hurricane Rita 
TCEQ was then provided with a trial period between October 2005 – March 2006. In the midst 
of this a Flood Estimation Training was provided in December 2005. Furthermore, TCEQ 
developed new Draft Statewide Flood Guidelines in March 2006. There was a follow-up 
workshop in April 2006 in which a new Visual Basic front end routine was introduced to 
simplify assembly of dam features. To address the problem of subjectivity in some assessments, 
the tool provides guidance on “average dam” conditions from the UNSW dam failure database. 
The team focused on aging NRCS dams, many with corrugated metal pipe (CMP) outlets. The 
trial revealed that many of the NID hazard classifications were inaccurate because of the 
significant development in the last 20 years. Another issue was infrequent inspections, so the 
team increased the risk by a factor of 10. 
Washington Beta Trial, April 2006. Washington State was selected as the second beta test site 
because of their advanced dam safety prioritization program in place for five years. The 
Washington team was cautious at first, but after working several dams realized that the process 
helps to correct hazard classifications and checks a broader range of failure modes. They became 
very supportive and liked “average dam” risk guidelines. Washington plans to use the tool as part 
of the yearly cycle of dam inspections. 
Other mini-trials have been conducted with US Fish and Wildlife Service, US Park Service, and 
other state regulators who have shown interest. This has demonstrated time and again the value 
of providing a tool that is transparent and easily adaptable to the unique situations in any state. A 
prescriptive “black box” would just not work with such a diverse and independent group of state 
regulators. Hence the prioritization process is truly still evolving. 
 
 
Appendix A 
 
 
Appendix B
 
 
Risk-Based Dam Safety Prioritization 
A Project Sponsored by ASDSO and FEMA 
A Method for Easily Estimating the Loss of Life from Dam Failure 
Draft, by Wayne Graham, June 18, 2004 
 
Introduction 
 
There is a hazard potential classification system used in the United States to describe the adverse 
consequences that would result from dam failure.  There are a variety of hazard classification 
systems in use, and most assign a dam either a low, significant or high hazard classification.   
 
The Federal Guidelines for Dam Safety: Hazard Potential Classification Systems for Dams, 
FEMA 333, was issued in 1998 in an attempt to provide hazard classification definitions that 
could be used uniformly by all federal and state dam safety agencies.  FEMA 333 defines the 
three hazard potential classifications as follows: 
 
Low Hazard Potential – Dam failure results in no probable life loss and low economic and/or 
environmental losses. 
 
Significant Hazard Potential – Dam failure results in no probable life loss but can cause 
economic loss, environmental damage, disruption of lifeline facilities, or can impact other 
concerns. 
 
High Hazard Potential – Dam failure results in probable life loss. 
 
Purpose and Need 
 
Most dam safety management organizations apply more stringent inspection, design and 
maintenance criteria to high hazard dams than to significant, and especially, low hazard dams.  
There is a need to develop a procedure for further dividing high hazard dams into categories 
based on the adverse consequences that would result from dam failure.  The failure of some high 
hazard dams might cause loss of life whereas the failure of other high hazard would likely cause 
the death of perhaps hundreds of people.  The failure of some high hazard dams can easily cause 
much more destruction and damage than a high hazard dam that just marginally fit into that 
category.  A simple to use loss of life estimating procedure is needed for dam safety risk based 
prioritization to help assure that the limited time and financial resources allocated to dam safety 
are wisely invested. 
 
 
 
Historical Dam Failure Data 
 
Many dam failures do not cause any loss of life.  During the 9-year period from late 1985 to late 
1994, there were more than 400 dam failures in the United States.  In more than 98 percent of 
these dam failures, there were no fatalities.  Many of these dams were small and/or were located 
in sparsely populated areas. 
 
While many dams have failed with no resultant life loss, some of the worst U.S. floods 
(measured in terms of life loss) have resulted from dam failure.  Dam failure can be sudden, 
causing rapid onset of flooding followed by rapidly rising flood levels.  During the last 25 years 
(1979 to 2003), there have been no U.S. dam failures that have caused more than about 4 
fatalities.  Prior to this period, however, the U.S. has had the South Fork (Johnstown) Dam 
failure in 1889 which resulted in 2,209 deaths, and the St. Francis Dam failure in 1928 which 
resulted in about 420 deaths (the exact number of deaths is subject to some uncertainty). 
 
One of the defining characteristics of dam failures, is that the highest fatality rates and most of 
the loss of life occur in close proximity to the dam.  Data from several dam failures will be 
presented to demonstrate this characteristic.   
 
There have been 6 or 7 U.S. dam failures that have caused more than 50 fatalities.  Table 1 
summarizes data from these failures.  Note that in several of these cases most of the fatalities 
occurred in the first few miles downstream from the dam.  
 
 
 
Table 1 
Dam Failure Data 
U.S. Dams that Caused More Than 50 Fatalities 
Percentage of Total Loss of Life in Listed 
Distance Downstream from Dam 
Dam, State and Date 
of Failure 
Height 
(ft) 
Volume 
Released 
(acre-feet) 
Total Loss 
of Life 
First 3 miles 
First 7 miles 
First 15 miles 
Williamsburg Dam,  
(Mill River Dam) MA 
May 16, 1874 
43 
307 
138 
41 
100 
100 
South Fork Dam 
(Johnstown Dam) PA 
May 31, 1889 
72 
11,500 
2,209 
Unknown 
Unknown 
About 100 
Walnut Grove Dam 
AZ 
February 22, 1890 
110 
60,000 
70 to 100 
Precise location of people is not available.  
Many of those that died were at a 
construction camp, 15 miles from the dam. 
Austin Dam PA 
September 30, 1911 
43 to 
50 
550 to 850 
78 
100 (all in 
first 2 miles) 
100 
100 
St. Francis Dam CA 
March 12-13, 1928 
188 
38,000 
420 
Fatalities occurred throughout the 54 mile 
reach from the dam to the Pacific Ocean 
Buffalo Creek Coal 
Waste Dam WV  
February 26, 1972 
46 
404 
125 
28 
85 
100 
Canyon Lake Dam SD 
June 9, 1972 
37 
700 
(10,100 from 
entire flood) 
33 from dam 
failure (165 
total) 
Unknown 
Unknown 
100 
 
More accurate data is available for the failure of dams that have occurred in recent years.  Table 2 
summarizes information for U.S. dam failures that occurred from 1960 to 1998 and released up 
to 2,000 acre-feet during their failure. 
 
 
 
 
Table 2 
Dam Failure Data 
Dams that released up to 2,000 acre-feet of water during their failure 
U.S. data for failures that caused fatalities 
Arranged in ascending order of volume released from reservoir, excluding flood inflow 
1960 to 1998 
 
Dam 
Height (ft) 
Volume 
Released 
 (acre-ft) 
Loss of Life 
Percentage 
of total LOL  
in first 3 mi. 
Percentage 
of total LOL  
in first 7 mi. 
Percentage 
of total LOL 
in first 15 mi 
Bear Wallow 
36 
40 
4 
100 
100 
100 
Lake “O” 
Hills 
15 
48 
1 
Unknown 
Unknown 
 
Unknown 
Evans, then 
Lockwood 
18 and 14 
72 and 32 
2 
100 
100 
100 
Mohegan 
Park 
20 
138 
6 
100 
100 
100 
Bergeron 
Pond 
36 
193 
1 
100 
100 
100 
Lee Lake 
25 
300 
2 
0 
100 
100 
Buffalo 
Creek Coal 
Waste 
46 
404 
125 
28 
85 
100 
Laurel Run 
42 
450 
40 
100 
100 
100 
Kelly Barnes 
40 
630 
39 
100 
100 
100 
Kendall Lake 
18 
690 
4 
100 
100 
100 
Lawn Lake, 
then Cascade 
Lake 
26 and 17 
674 and 25 
3 
0 
100 
100 
Baldwin Hills 
66 
700 
5 
100 
100 
100 
Canyon Lake 
37 
700 
(10,100 from 
entire flood) 
33 from dam 
failure 
(165 total)  
Unknown 
Unknown 
100 
Nix Lake 
23 
837 
1 
100 
100 
100 
Little Deer 
Creek 
86 
1150 
1 
0 
100 
100 
Timber Lake 
33 
1449 
2 
100 
100 
100 
 
 
 
 Procedure for Estimating Losses 
 
From the information provided above, it is clear that study efforts should focus on evaluating the 
flooding that would occur in the first 5 to 15 miles downstream from a dam.  It is in these areas 
where the warning may be deficient, the flooding most severe. 
 
The steps involved in estimating consequences are as follows: 
 
Step 1: Determine dam failure scenario to evaluate 
 
Assume that the dam fails with the reservoir water surface at the crest of the dam.  While dams 
may fail from piping or other causes with the water below the dam crest, this simplifying 
assumption is reasonable to use for nearly all dams. 
 
Step 2: Determine area flooded from dam failure 
 
In cases where dam failure inundation maps are not available, it will be necessary to develop 
some approximation of the flooding that would result from dam failure.  This necessitates 
estimating the peak dam failure outflow at the dam and in downstream areas and then 
determining the extent of flooding that would result from these discharges.  Dam failure 
modeling can be used for this or some simplified procedures, described below, can be used.   
 
The peak dam failure discharge for embankment dams can be estimated using an equation 
contained in the paper, “Peak Outflow from Breached Embankment Dam,” by David C. Froelich.  
The equation, in English units, is Qp = 40.1V.295H1.24, where Qp is the peak outflow in cubic feet 
per second from the breached embankment dam, V is the reservoir storage volume in acre-feet at 
the time of failure, and H is the height of the embankment in feet from the bottom of the final 
breach to the top of embankment. 
 
The peak discharge from a dam failure decreases, sometimes rapidly, as the flood travels 
downstream from the dam.  Plots of peak discharge (as a percentage of the discharge 
immediately downstream from the dam) versus distance downstream from the dam are available 
for estimating flows in downstream areas.  One such plot appears in “Dam Safety Guidelines, 
Technical Note 1: Dam Break Inundation Analysis and Downstream Hazard Classification,” 
issued by the State of Washington in July 1992.  Flood depths at various locations along the river 
can then be determined using Manning’s equation using cross section geometry obtained from 
the best available topographic maps.  Flood boundaries can then be approximated on available 
mapping.  The maps should not extend more than 15 miles downstream from the dam because 
 
 
historical dam failure data indicates that people in these areas have not been seriously threatened 
by dam failure (in most cases). 
 
Step 3 – Estimate the number of people at risk from dam failure 
 
Using the results from step 2, the number of people at risk can be estimated for various locations 
downstream from the dam.  It is suggested that the number of people at risk be estimated for 
three different reaches: the dam to mile 3, mile 3 to mile 7, and mile 7 to mile 15.  The number of 
people at risk can be estimated using the population of communities and the percentage of the 
community that is flooded or by obtaining the number of houses off of maps or a site visit and 
multiplying the number of houses or residences by 3.  Seasonally occupied locations or sites that 
have significant differences in population between weekday and weekend, such as campgrounds, 
may need special consideration. 
Step 4 – Determine the Loss of Life From Dam Failure 
 
People have located residences and other facilities on the floodplain for hundreds or thousands of 
years.  Many years ago, people had little knowledge of the flooding that could occur from natural 
(as opposed to dam failure) flooding and would sometimes locate in areas that could be flooded 
every few years.  With the implementation of  flood plain zoning regulations as part of the 
National Flood Insurance Program, there is less new development in the most frequently flooded 
portions of the floodplain although the existing developments remain and new developments do 
occur in areas that would be impacted by dam failure.  A dam failure can potentially cause large 
loss of life when the discharge from dam failure is much greater than typical and usual flows on 
the river that the flood wave passes through.  Comparing the discharge from dam failure to 
commonly occurring flows can provide some measure of the potential danger caused by the dam 
failure flood.  The 10-year flood, i.e., the flood that has a 10% chance of occurring in any given 
year can be used as a base to compare dam failure discharges to.  The 10-year flood is used 
because it can generally be accurately estimated for a site.  Three dam failures from the 1970’s 
show how a comparison of the dam failure discharge to the 10-year flood can help explain why 
some dam failures are extremely lethal. 
 
Buffalo Creek Coal Waste Dam failed on February 26, 1972.  There were 125 fatalities with 
about 82% of these occurring in the first 6 miles downstream from the dam.  The drainage area at 
the dam was only 1.1 square miles.  The peak discharge resulting from dam failure is available 
for three locations.  Less than 1 mile downstream from the dam, at Buffalo Creek below 
Saunders, the peak discharge resulting from dam failure was 50,000 ft3/s and the 10-year flood at 
this site is 805 ft3/s resulting in a ratio of dam failure discharge to 10-year discharge of about 62.  
About 7 miles downstream from the dam, at Buffalo Creek below Stowe, the peak discharge 
from dam failure was 13,000 ft3/s and the 10-year flood at this site is 2,100 ft3/s resulting in a 
ratio of dam failure discharge to 10-year discharge of about 6.  About 12 miles downstream from 
the dam, at Buffalo Creek above Accoville, the peak discharge from dam failure was 8,800 ft3/s 
 
 
and the 10-year flood at this site is 2,820 ft3/s resulting in a ration of dam failure discharge to 10-
year discharge of about 3.  
 
Laurel Run Dam failed on July 20, 1977.  There were 40 fatalities, with all of these occurring in 
the first 2.5 miles downstream from the dam.  The drainage area at the dam was 7.9 square miles.  
The peak dam failure discharge was 37,000 ft3/s.  The 10-year flood at this location is 920 ft3/s.  
The ratio of the dam failure peak discharge to the 10-year flood peak discharge is about 40.   
 
Kelly Barnes Dam failed on November 6, 1977.  There were 39 fatalities, with all of these 
occurring in the first 1.5 miles downstream from the dam.  The drainage area at Toccoa Falls 
College, 0.8 miles downstream from the dam is 6.2 square miles.  The peak discharge at this 
location resulting from dam failure was 24,000 ft3/s.  The 10-year flood at this location is 1,260 
ft3/s.  The ratio of the dam failure peak to the 10-year flood peak discharge is about 19.  At a 
location 4.5 miles downstream from the dam, the drainage area is 12.8 square miles.  The peak 
discharge resulting from dam failure was 6,380 ft3/s at this location and the 10-year flood is 
1,960 ft3/s, resulting in a ratio of dam failure discharge to 10-year flood peak discharge of about 
3.3   
 
The loss of life from dam failure can be estimated using a fatality rate that is appropriate for each 
area impacted by dam failure.  Table 3 supplies fatality rates that can be used to estimate the loss 
of life caused by dam failure.  The table separates the area downstream from a dam into three 
reaches (measured by distance from the dam) and provides fatality rates based on the ratio of the 
peak dam failure discharge divided by the 10-year flood for each of the three reaches.  Except for 
very unusual cases (such as very high dams), the contribution of loss of life from areas more than 
15 miles downstream from a dam should be minimal and generally would be much less than the 
losses estimated for the first 15 miles downstream from the dam. 
 
Table 3 
Fatality Rates for Estimating Life Loss from Dam Failure 
Derived from an Analysis of U.S. Dam Failures 
(June 18, 2004 Note: This is draft information, subject to considerable revision.  Do not use or quote) 
Fatality Rate (Percentage of people [prior to any evacuation] within the 
dam failure floodplain who would likely die as a result of dam failure) 
The ratio of the peak 
discharge resulting from dam 
failure divided by the 10-year 
flood discharge  (measured at 
upstream end of reach) 
From the dam (mile 
0.0) to mile 3.0 
From mile 3.0 to mile 
7.0 
From mile 7.0 to 
mile 15.0 
More than 100 
0.75 
0.50 
0.37 
50 to 100 
0.50 
0.33 
0.25 
30 to 50 
0.25 
0.20 
0.13 
20 to 30 
0.20 
0.15 
0.10 
 
 
10 to 20 
0.10 
0.08 
0.05 
5 to 10 
0.02 
0.015 
0.01 
3 to 5 
0.01 
0.007 
0.005 
1 to 3 
0.005 
0.003 
0.002 
Less than 1 
0.001 
0.0001 
0.0000 
 
Table 4 is an example showing how this data would be used for a hypothetical dam. 
 
Table 4 
Example Dam 
Loss of Life Resulting from Dam Failure 
Reach (Distance 
from Example 
Dam) in miles 
Number of people 
located within the 
dam failure flood 
boundary 
Ratio of Peak 
Discharge from 
Dam Failure to 10-
Year Flood Peak 
Discharge 
 
Fatality Rate 
 
Loss of Life 
0.0 to 3.0 
60 
35 
0.250 
15 
3.0 to 7.0 
400 
6 
0.015 
6 
7.0 to 15.0 
500 
2 
0.002 
1 
Total (mile 0.0 to 
15.0) 
960 
Not applicable 
Not applicable 
22 
 
 
 
 
 
References (in addition to those listed in the text) 
 
Graham, Wayne J., “A Procedure for Estimating Loss of Life Caused by Dam Failure,” DSO-99-
06, Bureau of Reclamation, Denver, Colorado, September 1999. 
 
Jonkman, S.N., van Gelder and Vrijling, “Loss of life models for sea and river floods,” Flood 
Defence ’2002, Wu et al. (eds) Science Presss, New York Ltd., ISBN 1-880132-54-0. 
 
Ramsbottom, David, et. al, “Flood Risks to People,” Phase 1, R&D Technical Report FD2317, 
Defra/Environment Agency, Wallingford, Oxon, United Kingdom, July 2003. 
 
Sources for Buffalo Creek Coal Waste Dam: USGS Hydrologic Atlas HA-547, “Flood on 
Buffalo Creek from Saunders to Man, West Virginia,” and USGS Water-Resources 
Investigations Report 94-4002, “Nationwide Summary of U.S. Geological Survey Regional 
Regression Equations for Estimating Magnitude and Frequency of Floods for Ungaged Sites, 
1993.” 
 
Sources for Laurel Run Dam: USGS Open File Report 78-963, “Floods of July 19-20, 1977 in 
the Johnstown Area, Western Pennsylvania and USGS Water-Resources Investigations Report 
94-4002, “Nationwide Summary of U.S. Geological Survey Regional Regression Equations for 
Estimating Magnitude and Frequency of Floods for Ungaged Sites, 1993.” 
 
Sources for Kelly Barnes Dam: USGS Hydrologic Atlas HA-613, “Kelly Barnes Dam Flood of 
November 6, 1977, near Toccoa, Georgia,” and The USGS National Flood Frequency Program, 
http://water.usgs.gov/osw/programs/nffp.html).   
 
 
