P. LOBBYING ISSUES
by
Judith E. Kindell and John Francis Reilly
1.
Introduction
The last two years have witnessed a flurry of legislative activity regarding the lobbying
activities of tax-exempt organizations. Concerns have been raised regarding the extent of their
lobbying and whether additional limitations should be imposed. Last year, in response to some
of these concerns, the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 was enacted, to become effective January
1, 1996. 2 U.S.C. 1601 et seq. In addition to requiring organizations that engage in lobbying
to register and report on their activities, the Act provides that IRC 501(c)(4) organizations that
engage in lobbying are not eligible to receive Federal funds as an award, grant, or loan.1 Debate
concerning further, non-tax legislation continues.
Nevertheless, as Miriam Galston has noted in
Lobbying and the Public Interest:
Rethinking the Internal Revenue Code’s Treatment of Legislative Activities,” 71 Tex. L. Rev.
1269 (1993), the primary vehicle for regulating organizations’ legislative activities is the Internal
Revenue Code. In her article, Professor Galston observes that the Code creates four separate and
very different regulatory regimes” regarding lobbying. Id. at 1275-81.
The first regime, which applies to IRC 501(c)(3) public charities, permits these
organizations to lobby so long as they do not devote a substantial part” of their activities to
attempting to influence legislation. This system has two subsets, which employ different tests
of substantiality.
The older, enacted in 1934, applies facts and circumstances criteria to
determine
substantial part.”
The newer was introduced in 1976, by the enactment of
IRC 501(h) and IRC 4911.
IRC 501(h) provides that certain public charities may make an
election and have their lobbying activities governed by expenditure tests in lieu of being subject
to the IRC 501(c)(3) substantial part” test. If the expenditure limits are exceeded, a tax under
IRC 4911 will be imposed or, if the limits are exceeded by 150 percent over a defined period,
exempt status will be lost. The tests are discussed in Parts 2 and 3.
The second regime applies to IRC 501(c)(3) private foundations. Under this regime, any
expenditures incurred for lobbying activities are treated as taxable expenditures under
IRC 4945(d)(1) and subject to the tax imposed by IRC 4945(a). Part 4 discusses this topic.
The third regime involves other federally tax-exempt organizations.
Outside of
IRC 501(c)(3), there is no specific provision of IRC 501(c) that restricts lobbying activities.
Consequently, the only limit imposed on the lobbying activities of non-IRC 501(c)(3)
organizations is that the lobbying activities must be germane to the accomplishment of the
organization’s exempt purpose.
As a result, the organization’s sole activity in support of its
exempt purpose may be lobbying without jeopardizing its tax exemption. This topic is discussed
in Part 5.
1 See Robert A. Boisture, What Charities Need to Know to Comply with the Lobbying Disclosure Act of
1995,” 13 EOTR 35 (Jan. 1996) and Miriam Galston, Simpson’s Lobbying Provision: More Bark than Bite,” 13
EOTR 45 (Jan. 1996) for descriptions of the provisions and effects of the Lobbying Disclosure Act.
1997 EO CPE Text
Lobbying Issues
The fourth regime concerns the lobbying expenditures of businesses. These rules are set
forth in IRC 162.
Until recently, this was not a subject that particular concerned exempt
organizations. Now, however, because of the lobbying disallowance provisions of the Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (OBRA 1993), exempt organizations also must consider the
provisions that disallow deductions for lobbying by businesses. Part 6 discusses this topic.
2.
Lobbying Activities of IRC 501(c)(3) Nonelecting Public Charities
A.
Legislative and Regulatory History
(1)
The Pre-Statutory Era
Prior to 1934, there was no specific statutory restriction on the lobbying activities of
charities.
Early regulations, however, provided that organizations
formed to disseminate
controversial or partisan propaganda” were not educational” within the meaning of the statute.
Treas. Reg. 45, art 517 (1919 ed.); T.D. 2831, 21 Treas. Dec. Int. Rev. 285 (1919). The import
of the regulation became the subject of litigation concerning the deductibility of a contribution
or bequest to an organization. The deduction was disallowed in some cases. See Herbert E.
Fales, 9 B.T.A. 828 (1927) (contributions to various temperance organizations); Joseph M. Price,
12 B.T.A. 1186 (1928) (contribution to the Civic Fund of the City Club of New York); Slee v.
Commissioner, 42 F.2d 184 (1930), aff’g 15 B.T.A. 710 (1929) (contribution to the American
Birth Control League); Henriette T. Noyes, 31 B.T.A. 121 (1934) (contribution to a women
voters’ league); Vanderbilt v. Commissioner, 48 F.2d 360 (1st Cir. 1937) (bequest to the National
Women’s Party). In other cases, the deduction was allowed. See Weyl v. Commissioner, 48
F.2d 811 (2nd Cir. 1931), rev’g 18 B.T.A. 1092 (1930) (contribution to the League for Industrial
Democracy); Cochran v. Commissioner, 78 F.2d 176 (4th Cir. 1935), rev’g 30 B.T.A. 1115
(1934) (contribution to the World League Against Alcoholism). In one case, a contribution to
an organization was allowed, while another, to a cognate organization, was disallowed.
Leubuscher v. Commissioner, 54 F.2d 998 (2d Cir. 1932), modifying 30 B.T.A 1022 (1930)
(bequest to two organizations to teach the ideas of Henry George relative to the single tax on
land).2
2
Commentators differ on the overall import of these decisions.
Dean E. Sharp,
Reflections on the
Disallowance of Income Tax Deductions for Lobbying Expenditures,” 39 B.U. L. Rev. 365, 387 (1959), simply notes
that these cases, as well as cases decided after 1934, are in conflict.” Others have deduced a trend. William H.
Lehrfeld, The Taxation of Ideology,” 19 Cath. U. L. Rev. 52, 59 (1969), emphasizes the controversial nature of
the organization’s agenda; he concludes that [o]nly the meek inherited the tax exemption.” Tommy F. Thompson,
The Availability of the Federal Educational Tax Exemption for Propaganda Organizations,” 18 U.C. Davis L. Rev.
487, 498-501 (1985), contends that the determining factor in these cases was whether the organization attempted to
influence legislation.
(Thompson also states, at 498 n. 29, that no evidence suggests that the Service actively
discriminated against organizations that advocated extreme viewpoints, or in favor of organizations that advocated
mainstream viewpoints.
The evidence suggests that the Service did in fact apply the standard strictly and
evenhandedly.”) Laura B. Chisholm, Exempt Organization Advocacy: Matching the Rules to the Rationales,” 63
Ind. L.J. 201, 216 n. 78, after noting Mr. Lehrfeld’s and Professor Thompson’s analyses, concludes:
With a few
exceptions, the cases seem to support the [legislative activity] contention at least as convincingly as they support the
proposition that advocacy per se or controversiality was the basis for denial of exemption or deductibility.”
262
Lobbying Issues
Of all these cases, Slee is paramount. In Slee, the organization at issue, the American
Birth Control League, gave free medical services to married women, collected and distributed
information about birth control, and sought to enlist the support and cooperation of legislators
in repealing and amending statutes preventing birth control. Judge Learned Hand, writing for a
unanimous court, dismissed the controversial nature of the League’s program as irrelevant:
We
cannot discriminate unless we doubt the good faith of the enterprise.” Slee, at 185. Instead, he
focused on the League’s legislative activity:
Political agitation as such is outside the statute, however innocent
the aim, though it adds nothing to dub it
propaganda,” a
polemical word used to decry the publicity of the other side.
Controversies of that sort must be conducted without public
subvention; the Treasury stands aside from them. Id.3
Immediately after this statement, however, Judge Hand made a distinction:
Nevertheless, there are many charitable, literary and scientific
ventures that as an incident to their success require changes in the
law. A charity may need a special charter allowing it to receive
larger gifts than the general laws allow. . . . A society to prevent
cruelty to children, or animals, needs the positive support of law
to accomplish its ends. . . . We should not think that a society of
booklovers or scientists was less
literary” or
scientific,” if it
took part in agitation to relax the taboos upon works of dubious
propriety, or to put scientific instruments on the free lists. All such
activities are mediate to the primary purpose, and would not, we
should think, unclass the promoters. The agitation is ancillary to
the end in chief, which remains the exclusive purpose of the
association. Trinidad v. Sagrada Orden, 263 U.S. 578, 44 S. Ct.
204, 68 L. Ed. 458 [1924]. Id. (Emphasis added.)4
The League, however, did not come within this exception because there was no evidence
that its legislative activity was
confined solely to relieving its hospital work from legal
3 This holding was reflective of the common law regarding lobbying in England and in Massachusetts, but not
in any other jurisdiction. See Girard Trust Co. v. Commissioner, 122 F.2d 108, 113-114 (Clark, J., dissenting); Elias
Clark, The Limitation on Political on Political Activities: A Discordant Note in the Law of Charities,” 46 Va. L.
Rev. 439, 447-448 (1960). Professor Clark, who is critical of the decision because it assumes the validity of the
restriction without attempting to justify it by argument or authority,” nevertheless notes:
Later courts have accepted
the principle as settled.” Id. at 446-447.
4 The citation of Trinidad is an obvious reference to the Court’s observation in that case that the exemption
statute says nothing about the source of the income, but makes the destination the ultimate test of exemption.”
Trinidad, at 581. The practical result of the Court’s statement was that an organization could qualify for tax exempt
status so long as the income was used for exempt purposes; its source was irrelevant. This became known as the
destination of income” test, and was the pervading standard for congruence with charitable exemption until the
passage of the unrelated business income tax and the feeder organization rules in the Revenue Act of 1950.
263
Lobbying Issues
obstacles.” Id. Therefore, contributions to the League were not deductible. This disallowance,
accordingly, was based not upon the controversial nature of the League’s activities, nor upon its
attempts to influence legislation per se; instead, it was based upon the assumption (actually, the
lack of evidence to refute the assumption) that its legislative activities went beyond its charitable
purposes.5
What Slee proclaims is an analog to Trinidad’s
destination of income” test -- a
destination of lobbying” test. As will be discussed in the next section, this did not become the
precise formulation of the statutory restriction on lobbying; nevertheless, Slee served as the basis
of what was to follow.
(2)
The Lobbying Restriction
In 1934, the limitation on the lobbying activities of IRC 501(c)(3) organizations, requiring
that
no substantial part of an organization’s activities constitute carrying on propaganda or
otherwise attempting to influence legislation,” became part of the statute. Revenue Act of 1934.
The legislative history is sparse.
What we do know is that the Senate Finance Committee staff drafted the provision and
that it was added to the Revenue Act of 1934 as a floor amendment.6
We also know that
Senator David Reed, the ranking minority member of the Committee and the provision’s apparent
sponsor, was dissatisfied with its formulation:
There is no reason in the world why a contribution made to the
National Economy League should be deductible as if it were a
charitable contribution if it is a selfish one made to advance the
personal interests of the giver of the money.
That is what the
committee was trying to reach; but we found great difficulty in
phrasing the amendment. I do not reproach the draftsmen. I think
we gave them an impossible task; but this amendment goes much
further than the committee intended to go. 78 Cong. Rec. 5,861
(1934).
It is not clear, however, to what extent Senator Reed was speaking for the entire
Committee. If the Committee were so dissatisfied with the provision, they could have tabled it
-- contributions to most charities are unselfishly motivated. Likewise, if the Congress or the
Administration felt that the critical issue was that more prevention of cruelty societies and
crippled children’s organizations would be affected by its enactment than selfish” organizations,
5 Judge Hand’s decision made no mention of the Treasury regulation. The Board of Tax Appeals decision, in
contrast, discussed it. Slee, 15 B.T.A. at 715.
6 The provision also contained a restriction on participation in partisan politics.” The provision, however, was
dropped in conference, so that only the lobbying restriction remained. H.R. Conf. Rep. No. 73-1385, 73d Cong.,
2d Sess. 3-4 (1934). In explaining its deletion, one of the House managers, Representative Samuel B. Hill stated,
We were afraid this provision was too broad.” 73 Cong. Rec. 7,831 (1934).
264
Lobbying Issues
it would not have become law. One suspects that the provision was enacted simply because there
was a general sentiment that lobbying by charities should be restricted.7 This is not to doubt that
the selfish/unselfish” formula was what Senator Reed wanted drafted, nor that, as he stated, the
Committee staff tried to draft it but found it impossible.8 However, the reference to the National
Economy League seems to indicate that the Senator had embarked on a personal crusade that
may not have been taken too seriously by his colleagues, who seized the opportunity to enact a
broader restriction.9
7 The Committee considered, and rejected, application of the provision to restrict contributions to war veterans’
associations. Id. at 5,861 (remarks of Senator Pat Harrison, chairman of the Committee).
8
The National Economy League is discussed in note 9.
Senator Reed’s view of the League as selfishly
motivated was not universally shared.
For example, in an editorial, the New York Times praised the League
chairman’s (and, by implication, the League’s) patriotism, disinterestedness, and loyalty.”
Useful Service,” April
27, 1933, at 16. The impossibility of starting with the National Economy League and drafting a selfish/unselfish”
standard is apparent.
9 Senator Reed had been one of the leaders of the considerable number of Old Guard” Republicans during the
Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover administrations. After the 1932 election, however, their numbers had been drastically
reduced, as had Reed’s influence. A 1933 Newsweek portrait of the Senator, Reed: Hamiltonian, Mellon Attorney,
and Penn. Senator, May 6, 1933, at 18-19, presents him as a beleaguered figure, having virtually no influence and
being subjected to the abuse of the acid-tongued Senator Harrison. By the time he was denouncing his own bill on
the Senate floor, his situation had worsened. He was locked in a nasty primary battle for renomination; the election
occurred less than two months after his floor speech; the outcome was in doubt. His opponent was his ideological
opposite, the Governor of Pennsylvania, Gifford Pinchot, a leader of the Progressive wing of the Republican Party.
(In addition to their ideological differences, they detested each other: Harold Ickes observed that they had always
fought like two tomcats sitting on a fence.” Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr., The Coming of the New Deal, 346 (1959).)
Pinchot was not Reed’s only problem; he was also opposed by an organization that would appear to have been his
natural ally, the National Economy League.
The National Economy League was one of the short-lived phenomena of the 1930’s. Organized in 1932,
apparently in reaction to the Bonus March, after two years of prominence, it vanished. A revolt of the haves,”
dedicated to a radical reduction in government expenditures, its leadership was anything but obscure, however. Its
chief spokesman was Admiral Richard Byrd (who served as chairman until he decided to travel to the Antarctic);
Nicholas Murray Butler was its honorary chairman; its original six member advisory board consisted of a former
President (Calvin Coolidge), a defeated candidate for the Presidency (Alfred E. Smith), two former Secretaries of
State (Elihu Root and Newton D. Baker), General of the Armies John W. Pershing, and Admiral Williams Sowden
Sims.
Byrd Quits as Head of Economy Group,” N.Y. Times, April 26, 1933, at 5. Mr. Lehrfeld, supra, at 63,
states that it had been accorded charitable status, and the right to receive tax-deductible contributions, in a ruling
letter dated November 3, 1933.
Soon thereafter, it submitted its own economic program to the President and
Congress. The New York Times gave front page treatment to the event and printed the text of the entire program.
Roosevelt Warned Our Debt Will Rise 4 Billion in Year,” Dec. 18, 1933, at 1.
The extent of benefits to war veterans was the League’s foremost concern. It repeatedly urged that benefits
be limited only to those wounded in war. (Appropriations to the Veterans Administration was no small budgetary
matter. In praising the League’s stand, the New York Times noted that the appropriations had reached a point
where they accounted for one-third of the entire cost of the Federal government, aside from service on the national
debt.”
Useful Service,” April 26, 1933, at 16.)
However, this position brought the League into conflict with
Senator Reed, who also made the veterans’ benefits his chief concern. Lurching unexpectedly leftward, outflanking
Pinchot and even Roosevelt, in January 1934, Reed sponsored legislation to restore benefits cut the year before.
Reed Leads Fight on Veterans’ Cuts,” N. Y. Times, Jan. 9, 1934, at 5. The League responded by presenting its
own plan and excoriating Reed’s.
Plan to Simplify Veteran Aid Urged,” N. Y. Times, Feb. 19, 1934, at 4. Reed’s
265
Lobbying Issues
It is widely accepted that the 1934 legislation represents a codification of the Slee position
and a rejection of the strict Treasury point of view, as embodied in the 1919 regulation.10 As
a general statement, this is true.
However, there is a significant difference between the two
approaches, and it is not simply that the Congress did not share Judge Hand’s distaste for the
word
propaganda.”
Rather, the tests used by the two approaches are different.
Slee’s
destination of lobbying” approach is a purpose test; the legislation’s
no substantial part”
language signifies an activities test. Different results may be reached from this distinction --
under the no substantial part” test, contributions to the American Birth Control League would
remain deductible, regardless of the purpose of its legislative endeavors, if such lobbying were
not substantial;” conversely, if the prevention of cruelty societies’ legislative activities were
substantial,” deductibility would be lost regardless of the lobbying purpose.11
Regulations
stratagem was successful both as legislation and as the substantive centerpiece of his primary campaign. As Arthur
Krock noted in his post-primary analysis of Reed’s victory over Pinchot:
Before stripping for the fray, Mr. Reed
took the precaution of getting into the money distributing class himself by leading a successful battle against the
administration for added benefits and restored government pay. . . . This equipped him with at least half of Santa
Claus’s whiskers.”
Republicans See Renewed Party in Victory of Reed,” N. Y. Times, May 18, 1934, at 24.
The remainder of 1934 was not kind to either the League or the Senator. On July 23, less than three months
after the effective date of the lobbying restriction, the ruling letter to the League was cancelled. Lehrfeld, supra, n.
2, at 64. On November 6, Senator Reed was defeated by Joseph F. Guffey, who became the first Democratic Senator
elected from Pennsylvania in 60 years.
10 See, e.g., Hearings on H. Res. 217 Before Special Committee to Investigate Tax-Exempt Foundations and
Comparable Organizations, House of Representatives, 83d Cong., 2d Sess. part 1, 433 (1954) (statement of Assistant
Commissioner (Technical) Norman A. Sugarman) and G.C.M. 34289 (May 8, 1970).
11 Slee’s purpose formulation still resonates in IRC 501(c)(3). Rev. Rul. 80-278, 1980-2 C.B. 175, holds that
an organization that institutes and maintains environmental litigation as a party plaintiff operates exclusively for
charitable purposes within the meaning of IRC 501(c)(3). In reaching this conclusion, Rev. Rul. 80-278 states:
In determining whether an organization meets the operational test, the issue is
whether the particular activity undertaken by the organization is appropriately
in furtherance of the organization’s exempt purpose, not whether that particular
activity in and of itself would be considered charitable.
* * *
Therefore, in making the determination of whether an organization’s activities
are consistent with exemption under section 501(c)(3) of the Code, the Service
will rely on a three-part test. The organization’s activities will be considered
permissible under section 501(c)(3) if:
(1)
The purpose of the organization is charitable;
(2)
the activities are not illegal, contrary to a clearly
defined and established public policy, or in conflict
with express statutory restrictions; and
(3)
the activities are in furtherance of the organization’s
exempt purpose and are reasonably related to the
accomplishment of that purpose.
266
Lobbying Issues
written after the enactment of the lobbying restriction did not elaborate upon the statute.
Reg. 86.101(6)-1 (as amended in 1935).
The current
action” organization regulations were
proposed early in 1959 (24 FR 1420 (Feb. 26, 1959)), and adopted later that year by T.D. 6391
(24 FR 5217 (June 26, 1959)).
(3)
Subsequent Statutory Developments
As part of the Tax Reform Act of 1976, Congress enacted IRC 501(h) and IRC 4911 to
provide a second test for determining the amount of allowable lobbying. These provisions are
discussed in Part 3 of this article. In addition, Congress enacted IRC 504 to provide, with certain
exceptions, that IRC 501(c)(3) organizations that lose exempt status due to excessive lobbying
may not at any time thereafter be treated as IRC 501(c)(4) organizations. IRC 504 is discussed
in Part 5.
In 1987, House Ways and Means Oversight Subcommittee Chairman J.J. Pickle
announced that he was initiating an investigation into the lobbying and electioneering activities
of IRC 501(c) organizations. The particular focus of concern was the National Endowment for
the Preservation of Liberty (NEPL), an IRC 501(c)(3) organization. The organization reportedly
received funds from the Iran-Contra arms sales and used the proceeds both to finance
conservative Congressional candidates in the 1986 campaign and to run negative advertisements
about Congressional incumbents who opposed aid to the Nicaraguan Contras.
NEPL also
engaged in a considerable amount of grass roots lobbying to garner support for Contra aid.12
The hearings resulted in the enactment of several statutes.
One of these, IRC 4912,
concerns the lobbying activities of nonelecting public charities.
For years beginning after
December 22, 1987, certain organizations whose IRC 501(c)(3) status is revoked because of
substantial lobbying activities are subject to a five percent excise tax imposed by IRC 4912 on
their lobbying expenditures,” for the year of loss of the exemption. Lobbying expenditure” is
defined in IRC 4912(d)(1) as any amount paid or incurred by a charitable organization in
carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting to influence legislation.13
What distinguishes lobbying activity from litigation activity, therefore, is lobbying activity, regardless of
its purpose, is expressly restricted by statute, whereas litigation activity is tested on the basis of whether the particular
purpose of the activity is in furtherance of the particular organization’s IRC 501(c)(3) purposes.
12 For a history of the 1987 legislation, see Chisholm, supra, n. 2, at 203-204.
13 H.R. Rep. No. 100-391, 100th Cong., 1st Sess. 1631 (1987) explains the reason for the provision:
The committee concluded that revocation of exempt status may be ineffective in the case of certain
charitable organizations as a penalty or as a deterrent to engaging in more than insubstantial
lobbying activities, particularly if the organization ceases operations after it has diverted all its
tax-deductible contributions and exempt income to improper purposes but before it has been
audited and any income tax liability has been assessed. Accordingly, the committee believes that
in such cases the sanction of revocation of tax-exempt status should be supplemented by an excise
tax, just as under present law excise taxes apply where a public charity electing under section
267
Lobbying Issues
IRC 4912 also imposes a similar tax at the same rate on any manager of the organization
who willfully and without reasonable cause consented to making the lobbying expenditures
knowing the expenditures would likely result in the organization’s no longer qualifying under
IRC 501(c)(3). There is no limit on the amount of this tax that may be imposed against either
the organization or its managers.
IRC 4912(c)(2)(C) excepts private foundations from the IRC 4912 taxes because their
lobbying expenditures are already subject to the tax imposed by IRC 4945.
In addition, the
IRC 4912 taxes are not imposed on any organization that has elected to be subject to the
lobbying limitations of IRC 501(h) (IRC 4912(c)(2)(A)) or on churches and church-related
organizations that are not eligible to make the IRC 501(h) election (IRC 4912(c)(2)(B)).
(4)
The Constitutional Issue
In Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington, 461 U.S. 540 (1983), the Court
addressed the question of whether the IRC 501(c)(3) restriction on lobbying violates
constitutional guarantees.
Regan v. Taxation with Representation of Washington was foreshadowed by Christian
Echoes National Ministry, Inc. v. United States, 470 F.2d 849 (10th Cir. 1972); cert. denied, 414
U.S. 864 (1973), where the Tenth Circuit dismissed a claim that the IRC 501(c)(3) prohibition
on lobbying and political activities was an unconstitutional restriction on the organization’s
freedom of speech. In so doing, the court stated:
In light of the fact that tax exemption is a privilege, a matter of
grace rather than right, we hold that the limitations contained in
section
501(c)(3)
withholding
exemption
from
nonprofit
corporations do not deprive Christian Echoes of its constitutionally
guaranteed right of freedom of speech. The taxpayer may engage
in all such activities without restraint, subject, however, to
withholding of the exemption, or, in the alternative, the taxpayer
may refrain from such activities and obtain the privilege of
exemption. . . . The congressional purposes evidenced by the 1934
and 1954 amendments are clearly constitutionally justified in
keeping with the separation and neutrality principles particularly
applicable in this case and, more succinctly, the principle that the
government shall not subsidize, directly or indirectly, those
organizations whose substantial activities are directed toward the
accomplishment of legislative goals or the election or defeat of
particular candidates. 470 F.2d at 857.
501(h) exceeds the permitted lobbying expenditures or where a private foundation engages in any
political lobbying activities.
268
Lobbying Issues
Taxation With Representation of Washington (TWR) attacked the IRC 501(c)(3) lobbying
restriction not only on the ground that it violated the freedom of speech guarantee of the First
Amendment, but also on the ground that it violated the equal protection language of the Fifth
Amendment’s Due Process Clause. The latter argument was based on the contention that those
veterans organizations which qualify for exempt status under IRC 501(c)(19) and for deductible
contributions under IRC 170(c)(3) are permitted to lobby; therefore, organizations qualifying for
exemption under IRC 501(c)(3) and for deductible contributions under IRC 170(c)(2) should be
permitted to lobby as well.
The Supreme Court unanimously held that the IRC 501(c)(3) restriction on lobbying
activities violates neither the freedom of speech guarantee of the First Amendment nor the equal
protection doctrine of the Fifth Amendment. Concerning the First Amendment issue, the Court
stated that this aspect of the case was controlled by its decision in Cammarano v. United States,
358 U.S. 498 (1959). In Cammarano (which is discussed in Part 6, below), the Court upheld
a Treasury Regulation (antecedent to the passage of IRC 162(e)), that denied business expense
deductions for lobbying activities.
As to TWR’s equal protection claim, the Court stated that the general rule of statutory
classifications is that such classifications are valid if they bear a rational relation to a legitimate
governmental purpose, and that
[l]egislatures have especially broad latitude in creating
classifications and distinctions in tax statutes.” 461 U.S. at 547. The Court noted that while
statutes are subject to a higher level of scrutiny if they interfere with the exercise of a
fundamental right, such as freedom of speech, the IRC 501(c)(3) legislative restriction does not
infringe upon freedom of speech; therefore, the statutory distinction in
treatment of
IRC 501(c)(3) and IRC 501(c)(19) organizations need only have a rational basis.
The Court
found such a basis by concluding:
It is not irrational for Congress to decide that tax exempt charities
such as TWR should not further benefit at the expense of taxpayers
at large by obtaining a subsidy for lobbying.
It is also not irrational for Congress to decide that, even though it
will not subsidize substantial lobbying by charities generally it will
subsidize lobbying by veterans organizations. . . . Our country has
a long standing policy of compensating veterans for their past
contributions by providing them with numerous advantages. This
policy has
always been deemed to be legitimate.”
Personnel
Administrator v. Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 279 n. 25 (1979). Id. at
550-551.
269
Lobbying Issues
B.
Specific Issues
(1)
The Meaning of Legislation”
Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3)(ii) provides that
1.
What is the general meaning
of the term legislation?”
the term
legislation” includes
action by the
Congress, by any State legislature, by any local
council or similar governing body, or by the
public in a referendum, initiative, constitutional
amendment, or similar procedure.”
Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3)(ii)
does
not
2.
What
is
the
meaning
of
action” as used in the phrase
action by the Congress?”
elaborate on the precise meaning of the word
action.” In this situation, however, one should
consider the meaning of the phrase action by the
Congress” for purposes of IRC 4911(e).14
In
IRC 4911(e), the phrase
action . . . by the
Congress” is used in the definition of the term
legislation” and the term
legislation” is used to delineate the extent to which certain
organizations described in IRC 501(c)(3) may conduct certain types of lobbying activities.
IRC 4911(e)(2) provides that, for purposes of IRC 4911, [t]he term legislation' includes
action with respect to Acts, bills, resolutions, or similar items by the Congress, any State
legislature, any local council, or similar governing body, or by the public in a referendum,
initiative, constitutional amendment or similar procedure.” In IRC 4911(e)(3), Congress limited
the meaning of the term
action,” as that term is used in IRC 4911, to the
introduction,
amendment, enactment, defeat, or repeal of Acts, bills, resolutions, or similar items.”
G.C.M. 39694 (Jan. 21, 1988) notes that it is unclear whether the phrase action by the
Congress” as used in the regulations implementing the lobbying restriction of IRC 501(c)(3) for
nonelecting public charities is also limited to the introduction, amendment, enactment, defeat, or
repeal of Acts, bills, resolutions, or similar items. Nevertheless, G.C.M. 39694 concludes that
the administration of, and compliance with, IRC 501(c)(3), IRC 501(h), IRC 4911, and IRC 4945
would be best effectuated by the application of a single definition of action by the Congress”
as a phrase referring to the introduction, amendment, enactment, defeat, or repeal of Acts, bills,
resolutions, or similar items.
The common denominator among Acts, bills, and resolutions is the fact that all are items
that are voted upon by a legislative body. Resolutions differ from Acts in that they are a formal
expression of opinion by a legislative body that has only a temporary effect or no effect at all
as a legal matter. G.C.M. 39694, discussing 77 C.J.S. Resolution” § 1 (1952); Black’s Law
14 Prior to amendment in 1990, the regulations under IRC 4945 also referred to action by the Congress” in
defining legislation.
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(1) now expressly adopts the definition of legislation in the IRC 4911
regulations.
270
Lobbying Issues
Dictionary 1178 (5th ed. 1979).
Therefore, the
3.
What is meant by resolutions
or similar matters?”
determining factor in whether an action is a
similar matter” is not the legal effect of the
action, but whether it is an item voted upon by a
legislative body.
Yes. The confirmation vote comes within
4.
Does the term
legislation”
include the Senate’s vote on
Executive Branch nominees?
the category of a
similar item” since it is an
item
voted
upon
by
a
legislative
body as
discussed above. It is similar to a resolution, but
is stronger than a resolution since it has a final
force and effect. Notice 88-76, 1988-2 C.B. 392
(lobbying on confirmation vote on nominee for
federal judgeship constitutes attempting to influence legislation for purposes of IRC 501(c)(3),
IRC 4911, and IRC 4945(d)).
See also Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(ii)(B), Example (6) (mailing
requesting recipients to write to Senators on the Senate Committee that will consider a
nomination for a cabinet level post is a grass roots lobbying communication).
Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3)(ii)
limits
the
5.
Does the term
legislation”
i n c l u d e
a c t i o n s
b y
administrative bodies?
definition of legislation to actions by legislatures
or by the public through referendum, initiative,
constitutional amendment, etc.
The implication
that actions by administrative bodies do not
constitute legislation is made explicit in the
regulations under IRC 4911.
Reg. 56.4911-2(d)(3) provides that legislation does not include actions by executive,
judicial, or administrative bodies. Reg. 56.4911-2(d)(4) provides that the term administrative
bodies” includes school boards, housing authorities, sewer and water districts, zoning boards, and
other similar Federal, State, or local special purpose bodies, whether elective or appointive.
Accordingly, an organization would not be influencing legislation for purposes of IRC 4911, if
it proposed to a Park Authority that it purchase a particular tract of land for a new park, even
though such an attempt would necessarily require the Park Authority eventually to seek
appropriations to support a new park.15
15
Reg. 56.4911-2(d)(4) nevertheless concludes that, in such a case, the organization would be influencing
legislation if it provided the Park Authority with a proposed budget to be submitted to a legislative body, unless such
submission is described by one of the exceptions to influencing legislation.
271
Lobbying Issues
The consideration of zoning matters varies
6.
Does the term
legislation”
include zoning matters?
from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. As noted above,
zoning boards may be considered administrative
bodies
whose
actions
will
not
constitute
legislation”
within
the
meaning
of
IRC 501(c)(3). However, where zoning issues are
under the jurisdiction of legislators, who express their will in the form of an Act, etc., the matter
is within the purview of the term legislation.” See Rev. Rul. 67-6, 1967-1 C.B. 135, which
holds that a historical preservation association engaged primarily in reviewing zoning variances
may not qualify for recognition of exemption under IRC 501(c)(3) since the association as a
substantial part of its activities is engaged in attempts to influence local legislative representatives
with respect to the association’s programs.” (Emphasis added.)
No.
Although
the
regulations
refer
7.
Is
the
term
legislation”
limited to actions by Federal,
State, and local legislatures?
specifically to Federal, state and local legislative
bodies,
the
term
legislation”
contemplates
foreign as well as domestic laws.
Rev. Rul.
73-440, 1973-2 C.B. 177.
As with domestic
governments, the critical issue here is whether
there is a legislative body involved. Furthermore,
legislative actions by Indian tribal governments also may be considered legislation since these
governments are treated as State governments pursuant to IRC 7871.
For purposes of IRC 501(c)(3), there is no
8.
Is there a distinction between
good” legislation and
bad”
legislation?
distinction between good” legislation and bad”
legislation.
For example, Rev. Rul. 67-293,
1967-2 C.B. 185, holds that an organization
substantially engaged in promoting legislation to
protect or otherwise benefit animals is not exempt
under IRC 501(c)(3) even though the legislation
it advocates may be beneficial to the community. See also Rev. Rul. 67-6, supra.
This is in
accord with a dictum of the Supreme Court to the effect that the statutory restriction on attempts
to influence legislation simply made explicit” a longstanding judicial principle that political
agitation as such is outside the statute, however innocent the aim.” Cammarano v. United States,
358 U.S. 498, 512 (1959), citing Slee, supra. For a direct holding, see Kuper v. Commissioner,
332 F.2d 562 (3rd Cir. 1964), cert. denied, 379 U.S. 920 (1964). In Kuper, the Third Circuit
stated that it is immaterial . . . that the legislation advocated from time to time was intended
to promote sound government and was for the benefit of all citizens rather than in the interests
of a limited or selfish group.” Id. at 563. Likewise, in Haswell v. United States, 500 F.2d 1133
(Ct. Cl. 1974), cert. denied, 419 U.S. 1107 (1975), the Court of Claims concluded:
An organization that engages in substantial activity aimed at
influencing legislation is disqualified from a tax exemption,
whatever the motivation.
The applicability of the influencing
legislation clause is not affected by the selfish and unselfish
motives and interests of the organization, and it applies to all
272
Lobbying Issues
organizations whether they represent private interests or the
interests of the public. Id. at 1142.
See also League of Women Voters of the United States v. United States, 180 F. Supp. 379
(Ct. Cl. 1960), cert. denied, 364 U.S. 822 (1960).
(2)
Attempts to Influence Legislation
Attempts to influence legislation are not
1.
What activities are
attempts
to influence legislation?”
limited to direct communications to members of
the legislature ( direct” lobbying).
Indirect
communications through the electorate or general
public ( grass roots” lobbying) also constitute
attempts to influence legislation.
Of course,
whether a communication constitutes an attempt to influence legislation is determined on the
basis of the facts and circumstances surrounding the communication in question. Both direct and
grass roots lobbying are nonexempt activities subject to the IRC 501(c)(3) limitation on
substantial legislative action.16 Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3)(ii).17
Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3)(ii) also provides that, more generally, advocating the adoption
or rejection of legislation constitutes an attempt to influence legislation for purposes of the
IRC 501(c)(3) lobbying restriction. This provision was tested in the case of Christian Echoes
National Ministry, Inc. v. United States, 470 F.2d 849 (10th Cir. 1972); cert. denied, 414 U.S.
864 (1973).
Christian Echoes National Ministry published articles and produced radio and
television broadcasts that urged recipients to become involved in politics and to write to their
representatives in Congress to urge that they support prayer in public schools and oppose foreign
aid. The organization argued that attempts to influence legislation would occur only if legislation
were actually pending. The Tenth Circuit concluded that the regulation properly interpreted the
statute, and that the organization was engaged in attempting to influence legislation, even if
legislation was not pending.
The IRC 501(c)(3) regulations provide that
2.
W h a t
i s
a n
a c t i o n
organization?”
an organization is not operated exclusively for
exempt purposes if it is an action” organization.
Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3) uses the term
action”
organizations to describe both organizations that
16 For IRC 501(c)(3) purposes, the distinction between direct and indirect lobbying becomes important for public
charities making the IRC 501(h) lobbying election. As discussed in Part 3, there are separate limits for total lobbying
and for indirect lobbying. In addition, certain communications made to members are not considered attempts to
influence legislation, while other communications to members are considered lobbying.
17 The regulation, with its specific inclusion of grass roots lobbying, makes clear that the portion of the decision
in Seasongood v. Commissioner, 227 F.2d 907 (6th Cir. 1955), that limited attempting to influence legislation” to
direct appeals to the legislature is not reflective of the statute.
273
Lobbying Issues
attempt to influence legislation and organizations that intervene in political campaigns.
For purposes of the lobbying restriction, an organization is an action” organization on
either of two distinct grounds.
The first occurs if a substantial part of the organization’s
activities involves attempting to influence legislation. Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3)(ii) states that an
organization will be regarded as attempting to influence legislation if it does the following:
(A)
Contacts, or urges the public to contact, members of a legislative body for
the purpose of proposing, supporting, or opposing legislation, or
(B)
Advocates the adoption or rejection of legislation.
The second ground is found in Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3)(iv), which provides that an
organization is an action” organization if it has the following two characteristics:
(A)
Its main or primary objective or objectives (as distinguished from its
incidental or secondary objectives) may be attained only by legislation or
a defeat of proposed legislation; and
(B)
It advocates, or campaigns for, the attainment of such main or primary
objective or objectives as distinguished from engaging in nonpartisan
analysis, study, or research and making the results thereof available to the
public.
In determining whether an organization has these two characteristics, all of the
surrounding facts and circumstances, including the articles and all activities of the organization,
are to be considered.
Under IRC 501(c)(3), there are certain
3.
How is nonpartisan analysis
distinguished from attempts to
influence legislation?
circumstances where nonpartisan analysis, study,
or research of matters pertaining to legislation
may be educational and will not constitute
attempts to influence legislation.18
This occurs
where the material is available to the public,
governmental bodies, officials, and employees,
and where the organization does not advocate the adoption or rejection of legislation.
See
Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3)(iv). Several revenue rulings discuss this issue.
18 In Haswell v. U.S., 500 F.2d 1133, 1144 (Ct. Cl. 1974), cert. denied, 419 U.S. 1107 (1975), the Court of
Claims explained what nonpartisan” means as follows:
Nonpartisan,” as used in the statute and regulations, need not refer to
organized political parties. Nonpartisan analysis, study, or research is oriented
to issues and requires a fair exposition of both sides of the issue involved.
274
Lobbying Issues
In Rev. Rul. 64-195, 1964-2 C.B. 138, an IRC 501(c)(3) organization that conducted
educational activities relating to the law, legal education, and lawyers became interested in the
question of court reform in the particular state in which it was organized.
A constitutional
amendment requiring revision of the state’s court system was agreed to by the state legislature
and submitted to the public for approval. The organization embarked upon a program of study,
research, and assembly of the materials necessary to make an evaluation of the legislation.
Experts were assembled and employed to conduct an extensive analysis of all materials relating
to court reform in the United States and a detailed study and analysis of the pertinent existing
case and statutory law of the state. The organization did not expend any funds or otherwise
participate in any campaign to present the bills or persuade the public to vote for the amendment.
The revenue ruling finds that the organization clearly did not expend funds or participate in any
way in the presentation of any proposed bills to the State legislature or advocate either approval
or disapproval of the proposed constitutional amendment by the electorate.
Instead, the
organization’s involvement with court reform consisted of the study, research, and assembling
of materials on a nonpartisan basis and the dissemination of such materials to the public.
Accordingly, the revenue ruling concludes that the organization is not an action” organization
as that term is defined in Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3). Therefore, this activity does not affect its
IRC 501(c)(3) status.
In contrast, the IRC 501(c)(4) organization described in Rev. Rul. 68-656, 1968-2 C.B.
216, drafted legislation and presented petitions supporting such legislation.
These activities
placed the organization beyond the purview of engagement in nonpartisan analysis, study, or
research of matters pertaining to legislation; it had crossed over into attempting to influence
legislation.19
In Rev. Rul. 70-79, 1970-1 C.B. 127, an organization was created to assist local
governments of a metropolitan region by studying and recommending regional policies directed
at the solution of mutual problems. Although some of the plans and policies formulated by the
organization could only be carried out through legislative enactments, the organization did not
direct its efforts or expend funds in making any legislative recommendations, preparing
prospective legislation, or contacting legislators for the purpose of influencing legislation. Rev.
Rul. 70-79 holds that the organization qualifies for IRC 501(c)(3) status because of the
educational nature of its activities and because it abstained from advocating the adoption of any
legislation or legislative action to implement its findings.
19 The facts described in Rev. Rul. 64-195 and Rev. Rul 68-656 bear a distinct resemblance to the facts litigated
in Dulles v. Johnson, 273 F. 2d 362 (2d Cir. 1959). In Dulles, the Second Circuit found that bequests to various
Bar Associations were deductible from the taxable estate under the predecessor statute to IRC 2055, in part because
the legislative recommendations of the Associations . . . are designed to improve court procedure and or to clarify
some technical matter of substantive law. They are not intended for the economic aggrandizement of a particular
group or to promote some larger principle of governmental policy.” Id. at 367. Rev. Rul. 64-195 also reaches a
favorable conclusion, but on the basis of the absence of advocacy. By implication, therefore, it rejects the Dulles
basis -- the nature of the legislation. Rev. Rul. 64-195, accordingly, is yet another repudiation of the good/bad”
or selfish/unselfish” analysis.
275
Lobbying Issues
The organization described in Rev. Rul. 70-79 can be distinguished from the organization
discussed in Rev. Rul. 62-71, 1962-1 C.B. 85. The latter organization is a corporation formed
for the purpose of supporting an educational program with regard to a particular doctrine or
theory. It was the announced policy of the organization to promote its philosophy by educational
methods as well as by the encouragement of political action.
Most of the publications
disseminated by the organization, together with a substantial part of its other activities, dealt with
the theory advocated. This theory or doctrine can be put into effect only by legislative action.
Rev. Rul. 62-71 concludes that while the portion of the organization’s activities that
consisted of engaging in nonpartisan analysis, study and research and making the results thereof
available to the public, when considered alone, may be classified as educational within the
meaning of IRC 501(c)(3), the organization was primarily engaged in not only teaching but
advocating the adoption of a particular doctrine or theory that can become effective only by the
enactment of legislation. Since the primary objective of the organization can be attained only
by legislative action, a step that the organization encouraged or advocated as a part of its
announced policy, as opposed to merely engaging in nonpartisan analysis, study and research and
making the results thereof available to the public, it is an action” organization as that term is
defined in Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3) of the regulations. Accordingly, the organization does not
qualify for IRC 501(c)(3) exempt status.
In addition, it should be noted that activities which appear by themselves to be educational
in nature may, in fact, be part of a broader purpose to influence specific legislative action. For
example, in the case of Roberts Dairy Company v. Commissioner, 195 F.2d 948 (8th Cir. 1952),
cert. denied, 344 U.S. 865 (1952), the organization prepared and distributed materials to inform
its members and the public of certain tax disparities between business organizations. The court,
apparently looking beyond the actual material distributed, held that since the ultimate objective
was the revision of the tax laws, the organization was attempting to influence legislation.
Generally,
if
an
organization
appears
4.
May
appearances
before
legislative
committees
constitute
attempts
to
influence legislation?
before
a
legislative
committee
to
discuss
legislation, that action will be an attempt to
influence legislation.
However, attempting to
influence
legislation
does
not
include
such
appearances when the organization appears before
legislative committees in response to official
requests for testimony.
The Service has ruled
that a university’s exemption would not be jeopardized when, in response to an official request,
it sent representatives who could advise a Congressional committee on the possible effects of
specific legislation. See Rev. Rul. 70-449, 1970-2 C.B. 111, where the Service concludes that
attempts to influence legislation as described in the regulations imply an affirmative act and
require something more than a mere passive response to a Committee invitation.” While stating
that the legislative history is silent on this point, the Service concludes that it is unlikely that
276
Lobbying Issues
Congress, in framing the language of this provision, intended to deny itself access to the best
technical expertise available on any matter with which it concerns itself.”20
As noted above, legislation does not
5.
May
requests
to
executive
bodies constitute attempts to
influence legislation?
include actions by executive bodies. Therefore,
requesting executive bodies to take some action
would generally not constitute attempting to
influence legislation. This is not the case where
the organization requests the executive bodies to
support
or
oppose
legislation.
Requesting
executive bodies to support or oppose legislation is included in the purview of attempting to
influence legislation.”
Rev. Rul. 67-293, 1967-2 C.B. 185; Roberts Dairy Company v.
Commissioner, 195 F.2d 948 (8th Cir. 1952), cert. denied, 344 U.S. 865 (1952); American
Hardware and Equipment Company v. Commissioner, 202 F.2d 126 (4th Cir. 1953), cert. denied,
346 U.S. 814 (1953).
Where an IRC 501(c)(3) organization is
6.
May
lobbying
activities
of
individuals be attributable to
IRC 501(c)(3) organizations?
involved, it is frequently necessary to determine
whether a lobbying activity is attributable to the
organization or merely the act of an individual.
The Service has developed attribution rules to fit
a number of situations.
Questions involving
lobbying activity, political campaign activity, and
illegal activity have provided a body of administrative law that may be used to address issues of
attribution.
As is noted in G.C.M. 34631 (Oct. 4, 1971) and G.C.M. 39414 (Feb. 29, 1984), principles
of agency law apply to this determination. A further discussion of the standards used is found
in G.C.M. 34523 (June 11, 1971), which addresses actions attributable to colleges and universities
in considering their exempt status:
Only actions by the exempt organization can disqualify it from
501(c)(3) status. Since organizations act through individuals, it is
necessary to distinguish those activities of individuals done in an
official capacity from those that are not. Only official acts can be
attributed to the organization. Provision is made in the articles of
organization by which a school is created, by its bylaws, and by
other valid and proper means, for delegating authority and
20 Publication of Rev. Rul. 70-449 was approved in G.C.M. 34289 (May 3, 1970). G.C.M. 34289 furnished a
second rationale, i.e., the 1969 enactment of IRC 4945, with the exceptions for nonpartisan analysis, technical advice,
and self-defense, was intended to restate, rather than revise, the existing definition of attempting to influence
legislation. The same conclusion is expressed in G.C.M. 36127 (Jan. 2, 1975).
Rev. Rul. 70-449 did not adopt this
position, however; instead, as noted above, the revenue ruling states that the legislative history is silent on this point.
As to whether the self-defense exception applies to nonelecting public charities, the Service has not published a
precedential document adopting the favorable conclusion of G.C.M. 34289.
277
Lobbying Issues
responsibility for operating the school to various people; trustees,
administrators, faculty members, student leaders, etc.
Each are
assigned various tasks. The school is responsible for their acts in
discharging these assigned duties. Their personal activities (those
not associated with official duties) are not attributable to the
school, and are, therefore, not relevant to an investigation of the
school’s qualification for 501(c)(3) status.
Actions by a person in excess of his official authority should not,
as a rule, be considered those of the school. If the school allows
such usurpation of authority to go unchallenged, however, it
impliedly ratifies the act.
G.C.M. 34631, in considering the effect of possibly illegal activities by members of an
organization, makes the following observation:
We caution, however, that actions of [the organization’s] members
and officers do not always reflect on the organization.
Only
(1) acts by [the organization’s] officials under actual or purported
authority to act for the organization, (2) acts by agents of the
organization within their authority to act, or (3) acts ratified by the
organization, should be considered as activities of the organization.
The activities of individuals who are not officials of the organization may also be
attributed to an organization. In G.C.M. 39414, the political campaign activities of individual
members were attributed to an IRC 501(c)(3) organization. The organization’s publication stated
that the organization would be sending members to work on political campaigns, members
working on political campaigns identified themselves as representing the organization, the
organization paid some of the costs incurred by members working on political campaigns, and
officials of the organization knew about the members’ political activities on behalf of the
organization and made no effort to prevent the members’ political activities.
On the other hand, in Rev. Rul. 72-513, 1972-2 C.B. 246, the legislative activities of a
student newspaper did not jeopardize the exemption of the sponsoring university, despite the fact
that the university provided office space and financial support for the publication of the student
newspaper and made available several professors to serve as advisors to the staff. The student
newspaper provided training for students in various aspects of newspaper publication (including
editorial policy) and was distributed primarily to students of the university. Editorial policy was
determined by the student editors and not by the university or the faculty advisors. A statement
on the editorial page clearly indicated that the views expressed were those of the students and
not of the university. The revenue ruling concludes that the legislative activities of the student
editors are not attributable to the university despite the university’s provision of support to the
newspaper.
278
Lobbying Issues
(3)
Limits on Attempts to Influence Legislation
A determination of whether attempts to
1.
When
are
attempts
to
i n f l u e n c e
l e g i s l a t i o n
considered substantial?
influence legislation constitute a
substantial”
portion of an organization’s total activities is a
factual one and there is no simple rule as to what
amount of activities is substantial. An often cited
case on the subject, Seasongood v. Commissioner,
227 F.2d 907 (6th Cir. 1955), is of limited help.
Seasongood held that attempts to influence legislation that constituted five percent of total
activities were not substantial. The case presents limited guidance because the court’s view of
what set of activities were to be measured is no longer supported by the weight of precedent.
Moreover, it is not clear how the court arrived at the five percent figure.
Most cases have either tended to avoid any attempt at percentage measurement of
activities or, at least, have stated that a percentage test is not conclusive.
Thus, in Christian
Echoes National Ministry, Inc. v. United States, 470 F.2d 849 (10th Cir. 1972), cert. denied, 414
U.S. 864 (1974), the Tenth Circuit rejected the use of a percentage test to determine whether
activities were substantial, stating that [a] percentage test to determine whether activities were
substantial obscures the complexity of balancing the organization’s activities in relation to its
objectives and circumstances.” In Haswell v. United States, 500 F.2d 1133 (Ct. Cl. 1974), cert.
denied, 419 U.S. 1107 (1975), the Court of Claims cited percentage figures in support of its
determination that an organization’s lobbying activities were substantial. (The amount of the
organization’s expenditures for lobbying activities ranged from 16.6 percent to 20.5 percent of
total expenditures during the four years at issue.) While the court stated that a percentage test
is only one measure of substantiality (and not, by itself, determinative), it held that these
percentages were a strong indication that the organization’s purposes were no longer consistent
with charity.
G.C.M. 36148 (Jan. 28, 1975) characterized the substantiality issue as a problem [that]
does not lend itself to ready numerical boundaries.” The G.C.M. then stated:
Moreover, the percentage of the budget dedicated to a given
activity is only one type of evidence of substantiality. Others are
the amount of volunteer time devoted to the activity, the amount of
publicity the organization assigns to the activity, and the
continuous or intermittent nature of the organization’s attention to
it. All such factors have a bearing on the relative importance of
the activity, and should be given due consideration in determining
whether its conduct is reconcilable with the requirement that it
operate exclusively for exempt purposes.
We therefore think that the Service should not adopt a percentage
of total expenditures test for the substantiality of nonexempt
activities conducted by exempt organizations. We also think that
ten percent would be unjustifiably high, even if a percentage test
279
Lobbying Issues
were merely adopted for use as a threshold for more intensive
auditing in which the Service can give due consideration to the
relative importance of volunteer services and the like.
Nevertheless, while neither the Service nor the courts have adopted a percentage test for
determining whether a substantial part of an organization’s activities consist of lobbying, some
guidance can be derived from Seasongood and Haswell. Under Seasongood, a five percent safe
harbor has been frequently applied as a general rule of thumb regarding what is substantial.
Similarly, lobbying activities that exceed the roughly 16 to 20 percent range of total activities
found in Haswell are generally considered substantial. (Compare these percentages to the sliding
scale of percentage of expenditures allowed to organizations that elect to be governed by
IRC 501(h) as discussed below.)
In determining whether an organization
2.
May supporting activities also
be
considered
attempts
to
influence legislation?
has engaged in attempts to influence legislation as
a substantial activity, it is sometimes difficult to
determine what supporting activities should be
included with the proscribed attempts to influence
legislation.
This is often a problem where an
organization
has
some
activities
that
are
admittedly educational. Frequently, much effort is devoted to research, discussion, and similar
activities. The problem is how much of these back-up activities should be considered part of the
attempts to influence legislation. In League of Women Voters of the United States v. United
States, 180 F. Supp, 379 (Ct. Cl. 1960), cert. denied, 364 U.S. 882 (1960), the time spent in
discussing public issues, formulating and agreeing upon positions, and studying them preparatory
to adopting a position was taken into account and compared with the other activities in
determining the substantiality of the attempts to influence legislation. Attempting to influence
legislation does not necessarily begin at the moment the organization first addresses itself to the
public or to the legislature. See also Kuper v. Commissioner, 332 F.2d 562 (3d Cir. 1964), cert.
denied, 379 U.S. 920 (1964). Furthermore, all facts and circumstances must be considered in
determining whether the lobbying activities of an IRC 501(c)(3) organization are substantial, not
just the amount of expenditures made.
3.
Lobbying Activities of IRC 501(c)(3) Electing Public Charities
A.
Legislative and Regulatory History
(1)
Enactment of the Statutes
During the period from 1934 to 1976, the lobbying limitation was subject to increasing
public criticism. The passage of IRC 162(e) in 1962, permitting a business expense deduction
for direct lobbying expenses, led to the argument that equal treatment should be given to
charitable organizations.
Meanwhile, the courts were having a difficult time measuring the
substantiality” of these activities.
280
Lobbying Issues
Congress enacted IRC 501(h) and IRC 4911 as part of the Tax Reform Act of 1976.21
These provisions were intended to remedy some of the problems that had arisen under existing
law by setting specific permissible expenditure limits. The Joint Committee on Taxation, in its
General Explanation of the Tax Reform Act of 1976, 1976-3 C.B. (Vol. 2) 419-420, explains the
reasons for enactment of these statutes:
The language of the lobbying provision was first enacted in 1934.
Since that time neither Treasury regulations nor court decisions
gave enough detailed meaning to the statutory language to permit
most charitable organizations to know approximately where the
limits were between what was permitted by the statute and what
was forbidden by it. The vagueness was, in large part, a function
of the uncertainty in the meaning of the terms substantial part”
and activities.”
Many believed that the standards as to the permissible level of
activities under prior law were too vague and thereby tended to
encourage subjective and selective enforcement.
Except in the case of private foundations, the only sanctions
available under prior law with respect to an organization which
exceeded the limits on permitted lobbying were loss of exempt
status under section 501(c)(3) and loss of qualification to receive
charitable
contributions.
Some
organizations
(particularly
organizations which had already built substantial endowments)
could split up their activities between a lobbying organization and
a charitable organization. For such organizations, these sanctions
may have had little effect, and the lack of effect may have tended
to discourage enforcement effort.
For other organizations which could not split up their activities
between a lobbying organization and a charitable organization and
which had to continue to rely on the receipt of deductible
contributions to carry on their exempt purposes, loss of section
501(c)(3) status could not be so easily compensated for and
constituted a severe blow to the organization.
The Act is designed to set relatively specific expenditure limits to
replace the uncertain standards of prior law, to provide a more
rational relationship between the sanctions and the violation of
standards, and to make it more practical to properly enforce the
21 For an account of the progress of the legislation until its enactment, see Bruce R. Hopkins, The Law of
Tax-Exempt Organizations, 310-312 (4th ed. 1993).
For another history, written just before passage of the
legislation, see Pepper, Hamilton & Sheetz, Legislative Activities of Charitable Organizations Other Than Private
Foundations,” in 5 Commission on Private Philanthropy and Public Needs, Research Papers, 2917, 2926-2928 (1975).
281
Lobbying Issues
law.
However, these new rules replace prior law only as to
charitable organizations which elect to come under the Standards
of the Act.
The new rules also do not apply to churches and
organizations affiliated with churches, nor do they apply to private
foundations; prior law continues to apply to these organizations.
The Act provides for a tax of 25 percent of the amount by which
the expenditures exceed the permissible level.
Revocation of
exemption is reserved for those cases where the excess is
unreasonably great over a period of time.
At the same time, Congress enacted IRC 504.22 This provision provided, with certain
exceptions, that IRC 501(c)(3) organizations that lose exempt status due to excessive lobbying
may not at any time thereafter be treated as IRC 501(c)(4) organizations. IRC 504 is discussed
in Part 5.
(2)
Overview of the Statutes
Eligible public charities (listed in IRC 501(h)(4)) may elect to be governed by the
IRC 501(h) substantiality test.
Non-electing organizations (whether eligible or not) will be
subject to the ordinary facts and circumstances substantiality test of IRC 501(c)(3) as discussed
above.
IRC 501(h) establishes a sliding scale of permissible
lobbying nontaxable amounts.”
Nontaxable amounts are computed for both total and grass roots lobbying. These amounts are
deemed insubstantial, and expenditures under the nontaxable amounts will result in neither tax
nor revocation.
Expenditures in excess of the nontaxable amounts are
excess lobbying
expenditures.” An excise tax under IRC 4911 is imposed on excess lobbying expenditures. If
lobbying expenditures exceed both the permitted total lobbying amount and the grass roots
amount, the IRC 4911 tax is imposed on whichever excess is greater.
Affiliated” organizations
generally are treated as a single organization for purposes of computing lobbying expenditures.
IRC 501(h) applies for taxable years beginning after December 31, 1976.
For IRC 501(c)(3) organizations that elect to be covered by IRC 501(h), lobbying may
cause revocation of exempt status only if the amounts spent on lobbying normally” exceed 150
percent of either of the nontaxable amounts over a four year period.
Therefore, the tests of
whether an organization is an action” organization, set forth in Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(c)(3), should
not be used to determine whether an organization that has made the IRC 501(h) election has
engaged in substantial lobbying activities.
22 Prior to 1969, IRC 504 had provided a rule against unreasonable accumulations by charities. This provision
was repealed as part of the Tax Reform Act of 1969 and replaced with IRC 4942, which applies only to private
foundations.
282
Lobbying Issues
(3)
History of the Regulations
In 1986, proposed regulations were published to implement the provisions of IRC 501(h)
and IRC 4911.
51 FR 40211 (Nov. 5, 1986).
Controversy ensued.
The particular areas of
concern were the definition of grass roots lobbying and the allocation rules.
As the individuals who had primary responsibility for drafting the 1988 proposed
regulations, James J. McGovern, Paul G. Accetura, and Jerome P. Walsh Skelly, observe in The
Revised Lobbying Regulations, A Difficult Balance,” 41 Tax Notes 1426, 1428 (Dec. 26, 1988)
(hereinafter
McGovern 1988”):
The nonprofit community was effectively mobilized by a
number of umbrella groups and their constituent members.” The Service and Congress received
more than ten thousand letters from charities and their members requesting withdrawal of the
proposed regulations. These comments were generated by concerns that the regulations were
overly restrictive and would have a
chilling effect” on charities’ involvement in the policy
making process.23
Members of Congress also expressed concern. Sixteen members of the Senate Finance
Committee wrote a letter asking the Service to withdraw the proposed regulations. The letter
stated that the proposed regulations
appear to introduce ambiguity about what activities
constitute lobbying by such groups, and we believe that may restrict lobbying in ways not
intended by the 1976 Act.”
Congressional Tax Writers Seek Withdrawal of Proposed Regs on
Lobbying by Tax-Exempt Groups,” 34 Tax Notes 929 (Mar. 2, 1987). House Ways and Means
Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski also requested that the proposal regulations be
withdrawn, suggesting that the Service consult with an advisory group comprised of
representatives of the public and private sector.
He emphasized, however, that he would
strongly resist any suggestion that the pending controversy be settled legislatively by the
Congress.” See McGovern 1988” at 1428.
While the Service did not withdraw the 1986 proposed regulations, it publicly stated in
an information release, IR-87-49 (April 9, 1987), that it would reconsider key portions of the
regulations.
Two days of public hearings were held in 1987.
In June 1987, the Service
announced the establishment of a Commissioner’s Exempt Organizations Advisory Group (as had
been suggested by Mr. Rostenkowski). At public meetings held on September 17, 1987, and
February 26, 1988, possible revisions to the 1986 proposed regulations were discussed with this
Advisory Group. Substantial revisions to the regulations were published in proposed form in
23 For example, approximately 200 organizations signed an Independent Sector position statement asking that
the rules be permanently withdrawn.
Opposition to IRS Lobbying Rules Solidifies: Senate Tax Writers Join
Cause,” Daily Tax Report (BNA) No. 29, at G-5 (Feb. 13, 1987).
Similarly, OMB Watch, an IRC 501(c)(4)
organization formed to monitor activities of the Office of Management and Budget and other executive agencies,
asked readers to contact Congress to tell the Service to withdraw these regulations through passing a bill, a sense
of Congress resolution, an appropriations rider denying funds to the IRS for any work on or enforcement of these
regulations, or any other method Congress thinks best.”
Congressional Support Sought for Protest of IRS Lobbying
Proposal,” Daily Tax Report (BNA) No. 15, at G-1 (Jan. 23, 1987). In addition, OMB Watch held community
briefings throughout the country to educate people about the proposed rules and encourage a grass roots campaign
to force IRS to withdraw them.” Id.
283
Lobbying Issues
1988. 53 FR 51826 (Dec. 23, 1988). Messrs. McGovern, Accetura, and Walsh Skelly, The
Final Lobbying Regulations: A Challenge for Both the IRS and Charities,” 48 Tax Notes 1305,
1306 (Sept. 3, 1990); 3 EOTR 766, 767 (Sept. 1990) (hereinafter McGovern 1990”), explained
the approach of the 1988 proposed regulations as follows:
The 1988 proposed regulations were an attempt to address
charities’ legitimate concerns without eliminating the statutory
limits and thus opening the Service up to charges of failing to
fulfill its statutory mandate.
To accomplish this, the Service
crafted a number of bright-line objective rules. Like all bright-line
objective rules, these rules are imperfect: in certain cases, the rules
will inevitably permit expenditures to be treated as nonlobbying
even though the public would probably consider those expenditures
to be clear examples of lobbying.
In contrast to the reception accorded the 1986 proposed regulations, the publication of the
1988 proposed regulations resulted in less than 100 written comments.
The comments were
almost uniformly favorable.
The 1988 proposed regulations were discussed with the
Commissioner’s Exempt Organizations Advisory Group at a public meeting held on January 10,
1989, and a formal public hearing was held on April 3, 1989.
The final regulations were
published in 1990 and contained few technical changes from the 1988 proposed regulations. They
were made effective as of the date of publication. T.D. 8308, 55 FR 35579 (Aug. 31, 1990).
B.
Specific Issues
(1)
The IRC 501(h) Election
IRC 501(h)(3) provides that the provisions
1.
What organizations may make
an election under IRC 501(h)?
of
IRC 501(h)
will
apply
to
any
eligible
IRC 501(c)(3) organization that has elected to
have those provisions apply.24 To be eligible to
make the IRC 501(h) election, the IRC 501(c)(3)
organization must be an organization described in
IRC 501(h)(4) and it must not be a disqualified organization described in IRC 501(h)(5). The
IRC 501(c)(3) organizations described in IRC 501(h)(4) are as follows:
(1)
Educational institutions as described in IRC 170(b)(1)(A)(ii);
24 The Service’s records indicate that, as of April 1996, 6,087 organizations have made the election by filing
Form 5768 over the past five years. The IRC 501(c)(3) population eligible to make the election, as of March 1,
1996, is approximately 452,000 organizations.
In contrast, during that same time period, 2,407 organizations checked yes” to the attempted to influence
legislation” question (Question 1, Part III of Schedule A, Form 990), but did not file Form 5768.
284
Lobbying Issues
(2)
Hospitals and medical research organizations as described in
IRC 170(b)(1)(A)(iii);
(3)
Organizations that support government schools as described in
IRC 170(b)(1)(A)(iv);
(4)
Organizations publicly supported by charitable contributions as
described in IRC 170(b)(1)(A)(vi);
(5)
Organizations publicly supported by admissions, sales, etc. related
to their exempt purpose as described in IRC 509(a)(2); and
(6)
Organizations that are public charities because they are a supporting
organization described in IRC 509(a)(3) of an IRC 501(c)(3) organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1) or IRC 509(a)(2).
IRC 501(c)(3) organizations may not elect
2.
What organizations may not
use the IRC 501(h) election?
to be covered by the provisions of IRC 501(h) if
they are not described under IRC 501(h)(4) or if
they are disqualified under IRC 501(h)(5).
The
organizations that are ineligible to make an
IRC 501(h) election are as follows:
(1)
Churches or conventions or associations of churches as described in
IRC 170(b)(1)(A)(i);
(2)
Integrated auxiliaries of a church or convention or association of churches
(IRC 508(c) and IRC 6033);
(3)
Organizations described in IRC 501(c)(3) and affiliated with at least one
church or convention or association of churches or an integrated auxiliary
(an affiliated group” within the meaning of IRC 4911(f)(2));
(4)
Organizations that are public charities because they are a supporting
organization described in IRC 509(a)(3) of certain organizations exempt
under IRC 501(c)(4), IRC 501(c)(5), or IRC 501(c)(6);
(5)
Organizations engaged in testing for public safety and thus described in
IRC 509(a)(4); and
285
Lobbying Issues
(6)
Private foundations.
Churches,
along
with
church-related
3.
Why are churches precluded
from
making
an
election
under IRC 501(h)?
organizations, were precluded from making an
election under IRC 501(h) at their own request.
The Joint Committee on Taxation, in its General
Explanation of the Tax Reform Act of 1976,
1976-3 C.B. (Vol. 2) 415-416, notes that church
groups expressed concern that any restriction on
their lobbying activities might violate their rights under the First Amendment. More particularly,
the church groups were concerned that including them among the class of organizations eligible
to elect might imply Congressional ratification of the decision in Christian Echoes National
Ministry, Inc. v. United States, 470 F.2d 849 (10th Cir. 1972), cert. denied, 414 U.S. 864 (1973),
which held that the limitations on lobbying were constitutionally valid and that First Amendment
rights in the face of such limitations were not absolute.
By disqualifying churches and church-related organizations from making the election,
Congress sought to remain neutral on the constitutional issue; in fact the Joint Committee on
Taxation’s Explanation explicitly states:
So that unwarranted inferences may not be drawn from
the enactment of this Act, the Congress states that its actions are not to be regarded in any way
as an approval or disapproval of the decision [in Christian Echoes], or of the reasoning in any
of the opinions leading to that decision.” Id. at 420.
An eligible IRC 501(c)(3) organization
4.
How
is
an
election
under
IRC 501(h) made?
may make an IRC 501(h) election for any taxable
year of the organization beginning after December
31, 1976, other than the first taxable year for
which a voluntary revocation of the election is
effective.
Voluntary revocations are discussed
below. The election is made by filing a completed Form 5768, Election/Revocation of Election
by an Eligible Section 501(c)(3) Organization to Make Expenditures to Influence Legislation,
with the appropriate Internal Revenue Service Center.
Under
IRC 501(h)(6),
the
election
is
5.
When is an election under
IRC 501(h) effective?
effective with the beginning of the taxable year in
which the Form 5768 is filed. For example, an
eligible organization with the calendar year as its
taxable
year
files
Form 5768
making
the
IRC 501(h) election on December 31, 1996. The
organization’s IRC 501(h) election is effective for its taxable year beginning January 1, 1996.
Once the IRC 501(h) election is made, it is effective (without again filing Form 5768) for each
succeeding taxable year for which the organization is an eligible organization and which begins
before a notice of revocation is filed. Reg. 1.501(h)-2(a).
A newly created organization may submit Form 5768 to elect the expenditure test under
IRC 501(h) at the time it submits its Form 1023, Application for Recognition of Exemption under
286
Lobbying Issues
Section
501(c)(3)
of
the
Internal
Revenue
6.
When may a newly created
organization make an election
under IRC 501(h)?
Code.25
If the organization is determined to be
eligible under IRC 501(h), the election will be
effective with the beginning of the taxable year in
which the Form 5768 is filed.
However, if the
organization is determined by the Service not to
be eligible to make an IRC 501(h) election, the
election will not be effective and the substantial part test will apply from the effective date of
its IRC 501(c)(3) classification. Reg. 1.501(h)-2(c).
An organization may voluntarily revoke an
7.
How
may
an
organization
voluntarily
revoke
its
IRC 501(h) election?
expenditure test election by filing a notice of
voluntary
revocation
(Form 5768)
with
the
appropriate Service Center. IRC 501(h)(6)(B), a
voluntary
revocation
is
effective
with
the
beginning of the first taxable year after the
taxable year in which the notice is filed.
For example, an eligible organization with the calendar year as its taxable year files
Form 5768 revoking its IRC 501(h) election on May 31, 1996. The organization’s IRC 501(h)
election remains in effect for its taxable year beginning January 1, 1996, but is no longer in
effect for its taxable year beginning January 1, 1997. When an organization voluntarily revokes
its election, the substantial part test of IRC 501(c)(3) (as discussed above) will apply with respect
to the organization’s activities in attempting to influence legislation beginning with the taxable
year for which the voluntary revocation is effective. Reg. 1.501(h)-2(d)(1).
An organization that voluntarily revokes
8.
May
an
organization
that
voluntarily revoked its election
make the election again?
its election under IRC 501(h) may make the
IRC 501(h)
expenditure
test
election
again.
However, the new election may be effective no
earlier than the taxable year following the first
taxable year for which the voluntary revocation is
effective.
Reg. 1.501(h)-2(d) ( 2) .
Reg. 1.501(h)-2(d)(3) furnishes the following example:
X, an organization whose taxable year is the calendar year, plans
to
voluntarily
revoke
its
expenditure
test
election
effective
beginning with its taxable year 1985.
X must file its notice of
voluntary revocation on Form 5768 after December 31, 1983, and
before January 1, 1985. If X files a notice of voluntary revocation
on December 31, 1984, the revocation is effective beginning with
its taxable year 1985.
The organization may again elect the
25 The organization may submit its Form 5768 to the appropriate key district office as long as its application
for recognition of IRC 501(c)(3) exemption is being considered by that office.
287
Lobbying Issues
expenditure test by filing Form 5768. Under Reg. 1.501(h)-2(d)(2),
the election may not be made for taxable year 1985.
Under
Reg. 1.501(h)-2(a), a new expenditure test election will be effective
for taxable years beginning with taxable year 1986, if the
Form 5768 is filed after December 31, 1985, and before January
1, 1987.
If, while an election under IRC 501(h) by
9.
May an IRC 501(h) election
be involuntarily revoked?
an
eligible
organization
is
in
effect,
the
organization ceases to qualify as an eligible
organization, its election is automatically revoked.
The revocation is effective with the beginning of
the first full taxable year for which it is
determined that the organization is not an eligible organization. If an organization’s expenditure
test election is involuntarily revoked but the organization continues to be described in
IRC 501(c)(3), the substantial part test of IRC 501(c)(3) will apply with respect to the
organization’s activities in attempting to influence legislation beginning with the first taxable year
for which the involuntary revocation is effective.26 Reg. 1.501(h)-2(e).
(2)
Limits on Lobbying Expenditures
As previously noted, a tax is imposed
1.
What
are
excess
lobbying
expenditures”?
under IRC 4911(a)(1) on the excess lobbying
expenditures of public charities that have elected
to be covered by IRC 501(h). The tax imposed is
equal to 25 percent of the amount of the
organization’s excess lobbying expenditures for
the taxable year.
IRC 4911(a)(2) provides that, for purposes of IRC 4911, the term
excess
lobbying expenditures” for a taxable year means the greater of the following amounts:
(A)
The amount by which the lobbying expenditures made by the organization during
the taxable year exceed the lobbying nontaxable amount for such organization
during such taxable year, or
(B)
The amount by which the grass roots expenditures made by the organization
during the taxable year exceed the grass roots nontaxable amount for such
organization for such taxable year.
IRC 4911(c)(2) provides that the nontaxable amount of lobbying expenditures is the lesser
of $1,000,000 or an amount determined under a sliding scale, set forth in the statute, of
percentage of exempt purpose expenditures.
The nontaxable amount of grassroots lobbying
26 The situations contemplated here include, for example, an IRC 501(c)(3) public charity that becomes a private
foundation or a public charity that continues to be described in IRC 501(c)(3) but becomes a supporting organization
of an IRC 501(c)(4), IRC 501(c)(5), or IRC 501(c)(6) entity.
288
Lobbying Issues
expenditures is 25 percent of the nontaxable
2.
What
are
the
nontaxable
amounts?
amount
of
lobbying
expenditures.
IRC 4911(c)(4).
The following table sets forth
the nontaxable amounts:
Exempt Purpose Expenditures
Total Nontaxable
Grass Roots Nontaxable
Up to $500,000
20%
5%
$500,000 to $1,000,000
$100,000 + 15% of
excess over $500,000
$25,000 + 3.75% of
excess over $500,000
$1,000,000 to $1,500,000
$175,000 + 10% of
excess over $1,000,000
$43,750 + 2.5% of
excess over $1,000,000
$1,500,000 to $17,000,000
$225,000 + 5% of
excess over $1,500,000
$56,250 + 1.25% of
excess over $1,500,000
Over $17,000,000
$1,000,000
$250,000
An IRC 501(c)(3) organization that has
3.
What are the lobbying and
grass roots ceiling amounts?
made the election to be covered by IRC 501(h)
will not be denied exemption due to substantial
lobbying activities unless it normally makes
lobbying or grass roots expenditures in excess of
the applicable ceiling amounts.
The applicable
ceiling amounts for lobbying expenditures is 150 percent of the lobbying nontaxable amount for
the base years (IRC 501(h)(2)(B)) and for grass roots expenditures is 150 percent of the
grassroots lobbying nontaxable amount for the base years (IRC 501(h)(2)(D)).
In general, the term base years” means the determination year and the three taxable years
immediately preceding the determination year.27 The base years, however, do not include any
taxable year preceding the taxable year for which the organization is first treated as described in
IRC 501(c)(3). Reg. 1.501(h)-3(c)(7).
Reg. 1.501(h)-3(b)(2), however, provides a special exception for an organization’s first
election. Under this exception, for the first, second, or third consecutive determination year for
which an organization’s first expenditure test election is in effect, the organization will not be
denied exemption from tax by reason of IRC 501(h) if, taking into account as base years only
those years for which the expenditure test election is in effect the following conditions are met:
(A)
The sum of the organization’s lobbying expenditures for such base years does not
exceed 150 percent of the sum of its lobbying nontaxable amounts for the same
base years; and
27 A taxable year is a determination year” if it is a year for which the expenditure test election is in effect,
other than the taxable year for which the organization is first treated as described in IRC 501(c)(3).
Reg. 1.501(h)-3(c)(8).
289
Lobbying Issues
(B)
The sum of the organization’s grass roots expenditure for those base years does
not exceed 150 percent of the sum of its grass roots nontaxable amounts for such
base years.
Thus, the mere fact that an organization pays tax under IRC 4911 does not indicate that
it will lose its exemption under IRC 501(c)(3).
On the contrary, using the election and
occasionally paying the tax, if necessary, was designed to allow that leeway.
Reg. 1.501(h)-3(e) provides a number of
4.
How are these rules applied?
examples
illustrating
how
excess
lobbying
expenditures are calculated, how the tax imposed
by IRC 4911(a)(1) is calculated, and how the
determination is made concerning whether the
electing public charity is denied exempt status under IRC 501(c)(3) because of its lobbying
activities.
One example involves an organization whose taxable year is the calendar year that has
been recognized as an IRC 501(c)(3) organization for a number of years prior to making the
expenditure test election under IRC 501(h) effective for taxable year 1979. The organization has
not revoked the election. The following table contains information used in this example.
Year
Exempt
purpose
expenditures
(EPE)
(dollars)
Calculation
Lobbying
nontaxable
amount
(LNTA)
(dollars)
Lobbying
expenditures
(LE)
(dollars)
Grass roots
nontaxable
amount (25%
of LNTA)
(dollars)
Grass roots
expenditures
(dollars)
1979
700,000
(20% of $500,000 +
15% of $200,000 =)
130,000
120,000
32,500
30,000
1980
800,000
(20% of $500,000 +
15% of $300,000 =)
145,000
100,000
36,250
60,000
1981
800,000
(20% of $500,000 +
15% of $300,000 =)
145,000
100,000
36,250
65,000
1982
900,000
(20% of $500,000 +
15% of $400,000 =)
160,000
150,000
40,000
65,000
Total
3,200,000
580,000
470,000
145,000
220,000
In this example, the organization is liable for the tax imposed under IRC 4911 for 1980,
1981, and 1982 because its grass roots expenditures exceeded its grass roots nontaxable amount
in each of those years, even though its total lobbying expenditures did not exceed the lobbying
nontaxable amount. The tax imposed by IRC 4911(a) for 1980 is $5,937.50 which is equal to
25 percent of $13,750 (the difference between $60,000 and $36,250).
For 1981, the tax is
$7,187.50 and for 1982, the tax is $6,250.
For the tax years 1979, 1980, and 1981, the
organization meets the special exception under Reg. 1.501(h)-3(b)(2). However, for the taxable
year 1982, the total grass roots expenditures for the base years (1979 through 1982) exceeds the
grass roots ceiling amount of $217,500 (150 percent of $145,000). Consequently, for the taxable
year 1983, the organization is denied tax exemption as an organization described in
IRC 501(c)(3).
The organization must again apply for recognition of exemption pursuant to
Reg. 1.501(h)-3(d) for taxable years after 1983. Reg. 1.501(h)-3(e), Example (2).
290
Lobbying Issues
Another example concerns an organization, whose taxable year is the calendar year, that
made its IRC 501(h) election effective for its taxable year 1977, the first year it was treated as
an organization described in IRC 501(c)(3). The organization has not revoked the election. The
following table contains information used in this example.
Taxable
Year
Exempt
purpose
expenditures
(EPE)
(dollars)
Calculation
Lobbying
nontaxable
amount
(LNTA)
(dollars)
Lobbying
expenditures
(LE)
(dollars)
Grass roots
nontaxable
amount (25%
of LNTA)
(dollars)
Grass roots
expenditures
(dollars)
1977
700,000
(20% of $500,000 +
15% of $200,000 =)
130,000
182,000
32,500
30,000
1978
800,000
(20% of $500,000 +
15% of $300,000 =)
145,000
224,750
36,250
35,000
Subtotal
1,500,000
275,000
406,750
68,750
65,000
1979
900,000
(20% of $500,000 +
15% of $400,000 =)
160,000
264,000
40,000
50,000
Totals
2,400,000
435,000
670,750
108,750
115,000
In this example, the organization is liable for the tax imposed under IRC 4911 in 1977,
1978, and 1979 because its total lobbying expenditures exceed its lobbying nontaxable amount
in each of those years. Although its grass roots lobbying expenditures exceeded its grass roots
lobbying nontaxable amount in 1979, the tax is calculated based on the excess lobbying
expenditures in all three years since that amount is greater. The tax for 1977 is 25 percent of
the difference between $182,000 and $130,000 ($13,000). The tax for 1978 is $19,937.50 and
the tax for 1979 is $26,000. Pursuant to Reg. 1.501(h)-3(c)(8), the organization is not required
to determine if it continues to qualify for IRC 501(c)(3) exempt status for 1977 since that is its
first year as an IRC 501(c)(3) organization. For 1978, the total lobbying expenditures and grass
roots expenditures for the organization’s base years (1977 and 1978) do not exceed 150 percent
of its lobbying nontaxable amount or its grass roots nontaxable amount. However, for 1979, the
total lobbying expenditures of the organization for its base years (1977 through 1979) do exceed
$652,500 (150 percent of $435,000). As a result, for the taxable year 1980, the organization is
denied tax exemption as an organization described in IRC 501(c)(3).
The organization must
again apply for recognition of exemption pursuant to Reg. 1.501(h)-3(d) for taxable years after
1980. Reg. 1.501(h)-3(e), Example (3).
291
Lobbying Issues
(3)
Exempt Purpose Expenditures
Reg. 56.4911-4
provides
rules
under
1.
What are
exempt purpose
expenditures?”
IRC 4911(e) for determining an electing public
charity’s
exempt purpose expenditures.”
The
regulation also provides that, in determining
exempt purpose expenditures, no expenditure
shall be counted twice by an organization.
Under Reg. 56.4911-4(b), amounts paid or incurred by an organization that are exempt
purpose expenditures include the following:
(A)
Amounts paid or incurred to accomplish a purpose enumerated in
IRC 170(c)(2)(B) including certain transfers made by the organization;
(B)
Amounts paid or incurred as current or deferred compensation for an
employee’s services in connection with an IRC 170(c)(2)(B) purpose;
(C)
The allocable portion of administrative overhead and other general
expenditures attributed to accomplishing IRC 170(c)(2)(B) purposes;
(D)
All lobbying expenditures;
(E)
Amounts paid or incurred for activities that are not considered lobbying
because they are described in Reg. 56.4911-2(c), e.g., nonpartisan analysis,
study,
and
research,
or
member
communications
described
in
Reg. 56.4911-5 that are not lobbying expenditures;
(F)
A reasonable allowance for exhaustion, wear and tear, obsolescence or
amortization, of assets to the extent used for one or more of the above
purposes computed on a straight-line basis;28 and
(G)
Certain
fundraising
expenditures
(but
see
IRC 4911(e)(1)(C)
and
Reg. 56.4911-4(c)(3) and Reg. 56.4911-4(c)(4)).
Under Reg. 56.4911-4(c), exempt purpose
2.
What
are
not
exempt
purpose expenditures?”
expenditures do not include the following types of
expenditures:
(A)
Amounts paid or incurred
that are not described in
Reg. 56.4911-4(b);
28 For this purpose, an allowance for depreciation will be treated as reasonable if based on a useful life that
would satisfy IRC 321(k)(3)(A) as in effect on January 1, 1985.
292
Lobbying Issues
(B)
The amounts of any transfer described in Reg. 56.4911-4(e);
(C)
Amounts paid to or incurred for a
separate fundraising unit” of the
organization or of an affiliated organization;29
(D)
Amounts paid to or incurred for any person not an employee, or any
organization not an affiliated organization, if paid or incurred primarily for
fundraising, but only if such person or organization engages in fundraising,
fundraising counselling or the provision of similar advice or services;
(E)
Amounts paid or incurred chargeable to a capital account, determined in
accordance with the principles that apply under IRC 263 or IRC 263A,
with respect to an unrelated trade or business;
(F)
Amounts paid or incurred for a tax that is not imposed in connection with
the organization’s efforts to accomplish an IRC 170(c)(2)(B) purpose, such
as taxes imposed under IRC 511(a)(1) and IRC 4911(a); and
(G)
Amounts paid or incurred for the production of income.30
There are two types of transfers that will
3.
When are transfers exempt
purpose expenditures?
be treated as an exempt purpose expenditure.
The first is a transfer made to an organization
described in IRC 501(c)(3) in furtherance of the
transferor’s
exempt
purposes
that
is
not
earmarked
for any
purpose other
than one
described in IRC 170(c)(2)(B). Therefore, a payment of dues by a local or state organization to,
respectively, a state or national organization that is described in IRC 501(c)(3) is considered an
exempt purpose expenditure of the transferor to the extent it is not otherwise earmarked.
29 Reg. 56.4911-4(f)(2) provides that, for this purpose, a separate fundraising unit of any organization must
consist of either two or more individuals a majority of whose time is spent on fundraising for the organization, or
any separate accounting unit of the organization that is devoted to fundraising.
Furthermore, for this purpose,
amounts paid to or incurred for a separate fundraising unit include all amounts incurred for the creation, production,
copying, and distribution of the fundraising portion of a separate fundraising unit’s communication. (For example,
an electing public charity that has a separate fundraising unit may not count the cost of postage for a separate
fundraising unit’s communication as an exempt purpose expenditure even though, under the electing public charity’s
accounting system, that cost is attributable to the mailroom rather than to the separate fundraising unit.)
30 For purposes of this section, amounts are paid or incurred for the production of income if they are paid or
incurred for a purpose or activity that is not substantially related (aside from the need of the organization for income
or funds or the use it makes of the profits derived) to the exercise or performance by the organization of its
charitable, educational or other purpose or function constituting the basis for its exemption under IRC 501. For
example, the costs of managing an endowment are amounts that are paid or incurred for the production of income
and are thus not exempt purpose expenditures.
Fundraising expenditures are not, for purposes of this section,
amounts that are paid or incurred for the production of income. Instead, the determination of whether fundraising
costs are exempt purpose expenditures must be made with reference to IRC 4911(e)(1)(C), Reg. 56.4911-4(b)(8),
Reg. 56.4911-4(c)(3), and Reg. 56.4911-4(c)(4).
293
Lobbying Issues
Reg. 56.4911-4(d)(2).
The second type is a controlled grant,” but only to the extent of the
amounts that are paid or incurred by the transferee that would be exempt purpose expenditures
if paid or incurred by the transferor.31 Reg. 56.4911-4(d)(3).
On the other hand, Reg. 56.4911-4(e) provides that three types of transfers cannot be
considered exempt purpose expenditures. The first type is a transfer made to a member of any
affiliated group (as defined in Reg. 56.4911-7(e)) of which the transferor is a member.
Reg. 56.4911-4(e)(2).
The second type is a transfer that the Commissioner determines artificially inflates the
amount of the transferor’s or transferee’s exempt purpose expenditures. The regulation provides
that this determination generally will be made if a substantial purpose of a transfer is to inflate
those exempt purpose expenditures. When this determination is made, the transfer will not be
considered an exempt purpose expenditure of the transferor; rather, it will be an exempt purpose
expenditure of the transferee to the extent that the transferee expends the transfer in the active
conduct of its charitable activities or attempts to influence legislation. Standards similar to those
found in Reg. 53.4942(b)-1(b) (relating to operating foundations) may be applied in determining
whether the transferee has expended amounts in the active conduct” of its charitable activities
or attempts to influence legislation. Reg. 56.4911-4(e)(3).
The third type is a transfer that is not a controlled grant” and is made to an organization
not
described
in
IRC 501(c)(3)
that
does
not
attempt
to
influence
legislation.
Reg. 56.4911-4(e)(4).
Reg. 56.4911-4(g) illustrates the provisions
4.
How
are
exempt
purpose
expenditures determined?
relating to the determination of exempt purpose
expenditures by discussing the example of an
organization that is an exempt organization
described in IRC 501(c)(3) organized for the
purpose
of
rehabilitating
alcoholics.
The
organization elected to be subject to the provisions of IRC 501(h) in 1981.
For 1981, the
organization had expenditures as indicated in the following chart.
Those expenditures are
included in its exempt purpose expenditures to the extent indicated.
31 Reg. 56.4911-4(f)(3) defines a controlled grant” as a grant made by an organization eligible to elect the
expenditure test to an organization not described in IRC 501(c)(3) that meets the following requirements:
(i)
The donor limits the grant to a specific project of the recipient that is in furtherance of
the donor’s (nonlobbying) exempt purposes; and
(ii)
The donor maintains records to establish that the grant is used in furtherance of the
donor’s (nonlobbying) exempt purposes.
294
Lobbying Issues
Description
Total
(dollars)
Includible
(dollars)
Cost of real estate purchased for use as half-way house for
alcoholics, attributable to the following:
Land
30,000
Building
200,000
Depreciation (based on 40-year useful life)
5,000
Expenses of operating its half-way house
170,000
170,000
Administrative expenses of the organization allocated to the operation
of its half-way house
95,000
95,000
Depreciation and allowances for equipment
10,000
10,000
Expenses related to attempts to influence legislation
(lobbying expenditures)
40,000
40,000
Amounts paid to Z by the Organization for fundraising
35,000
Total
580,000
320,000
Thus, for 1981, the organization’s exempt purpose expenditures total $320,000.
This
amount includes both the direct costs of operating the half-way house as well as the
administrative costs allocable to its operation.
It also includes all lobbying expenses in full.
Only depreciation computed on a straight-line basis is included in exempt purpose expenditures.
The cost of capital expenditures (the land and building) is not included in exempt purpose
expenditures. In addition, the $35,000 paid by the organization for fundraising is not included
in the exempt purpose expenditures total.
(4)
Direct Lobbying and Grass Roots Lobbying
For public charities that elect to be
1.
W h a t
a r e
l o b b y i n g
expenditures?
covered by IRC 501(h), lobbying expenditures are
expenditures made for the purpose of influencing
legislation
(as
defined
in
IRC 4911(d)).
IRC 501(h)(2)(A).
An electing public charity’s
lobbying expenditures for a year are the sum of
its expenditures during that year for direct lobbying communications ( direct lobbying
expenditures”) plus its expenditures during that year for grass roots lobbying communications
( grass roots expenditures”).
Direct” lobbying involves attempts to
2.
What
is
the
distinction
between
direct” and
grass
roots” lobbying?
influence legislation through communication with
any member or employee of a legislative body.
It also involves attempts to influence legislation
through communication with any government
official or employee (other than a member or
employee
of
a
legislative
body)
who
may
participate in the formulation of the legislation, but only if the principal purpose of the
295
Lobbying Issues
communication is to influence legislation.32
IRC 4911(d)(1)(B); Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1)(i).
Grass roots” lobbying involves attempts to influence legislation through an attempt to affect the
opinions
of
the
general
public
or
any
segment
of
the
public.
IRC 4911(d)(1)(A);
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(i).
Reg. 56.4911-2(d)(1)(i)
provides
that
3.
What is legislation?”
legislation” includes action by the Congress, any
state legislature, any local council, or similar
legislative body, or by the public in a referendum,
ballot initiative, constitutional amendment, or
similar procedure. (See the discussion regarding the meaning of action of the Congress” for
purposes of the lobbying restriction for nonelecting charities.)
Legislation” includes a proposed
treaty required to be submitted by the President to the Senate for its advice and consent from the
time the President’s representative begins to negotiate its position with the prospective parties to
the proposed treaty.
Under Reg. 56.4911-2(d)(1)(ii),
specific
4.
What is specific legislation?”
legislation” includes both legislation that has
already been introduced in a legislative body and
specific legislative proposals that the organization
either support or oppose.
In the case of a
referendum, ballot initiative, constitutional amendment, or other measure that is placed on the
ballot by petitions signed by a required number or percentage of voters, an item becomes
specific legislation” when the petition is first circulated among voters for signature.
Prior to amendment in 1990, the regulations under IRC 4945 provided that attempts to
influence legislation” included communications with respect to legislation being considered by,
or to be submitted imminently to, a legislative body.” Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(1) (1990). When the
regulations under IRC 4911 were finalized, the standard to be submitted imminently” was not
used in Reg. 56.4911-2(d)(1)(ii) and it was deleted from the IRC 4945 regulations.
As the
Preamble to the regulations explains, a temporal standard is inappropriate and underinclusive
given the nature of the legislative process. For example, long before many specific legislative
proposals are formally introduced as a bill, they are subject to intensive scrutiny, debate, and
controversy.
Moreover, effective lobbying could prevent a bill from ever being introduced.
Consequently, reference to legislation proposed or adopted in one state that urges its adoption
in another state constitutes a specific legislative proposal in the other state even though no such
bill has been introduced there. Reg. 56.4911-2(d)(1)(iii), Example (2).
Legislation may be identified either by its formal name or by a term that has been widely
used in connection with specific pending legislation, e.g., the President’s plan for a drug-free
America.” Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(ii)(B), Example (1). Legislation may also be identified merely
by its content and effect. See Reg. 56.4911-2(d)(1)(iii), Example (1).
32
In this regard, Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(i), Example (4), notes that a letter sent to an administrative agency
proposing standards for regulations implementing recently enacted legislation is not a lobbying communication.
296
Lobbying Issues
A communication with a legislator or
5.
What
is
a
direct
lobbying
communication?
government official will not be treated as a direct
lobbying communication in accordance with
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1) unless it both refers to
specific legislation” and reflects a view on such
legislation. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1)(ii). Therefore,
a position letter on a pending bill prepared by an organization’s employee and distributed to
members of Congress or personal contacts by the employee with members of Congress or their
staffs to seek support for the organization’s position on the bill would constitute direct lobbying.
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(i), Example (1).
In contrast, a letter sent to a member of Congress
requesting that she write an administrative agency regarding proposed regulations recently
published by that agency and also requesting that she state her support for a particular type of
permit granted by the agency is not a direct lobbying communication. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(i),
Example (2). Similarly, sending a paper to a state legislator on a particular state’s environmental
problems that does not reflect a view on any specific legislation that the organization either
supports or opposes likewise is not a direct lobbying communication. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(i),
Example (3).
Yes. The regulations furnish an example
6.
May some, but not all, of the
expenses
associated
with
a
study
be
treated
as
direct
lobbying expenditures?
of an organization that researched, prepared, and
printed a safety code for electrical wiring. The
organization sold the code to the public and it
was
widely
used
by
professionals
in
the
installation of electrical wiring.
A number of
states have codified all, or part, of the code of
standards as mandatory safety standards.
On
occasion, the organization lobbied state legislators for passage of the code of standards for safety
reasons. Because the primary purpose of preparing the code of standards was the promotion of
public safety and the standards were specifically used in a profession for that purpose, separate
from any legislative requirement, the research, preparation, printing and public distribution of the
code of standards is not an expenditure for a direct (or grass roots) lobbying communication.
However, costs, such as transportation, photocopying, and other similar expenses, incurred in
lobbying state legislators for passage of the code of standards into law are expenditures for direct
lobbying communications. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(i), Example (5).
In some situations, the news media may
7.
Will
news
media
reports
convert a communication from
direct to grass roots lobbying?
report that an organization has communicated
with the legislature in support or opposition to
particular legislation.
The mere fact that the
organization’s position on the legislation has been
reported
in
the
news
media,
and
therefore
communicated to the general public, does not
convert it into a grass-roots lobbying communication.
The communication remains a direct
lobbying communication. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(i), Example (6).
297
Lobbying Issues
Yes, such a situation is set forth in
8.
May indirect communications
with a legislator that express a
view
on
legislation
not
constitute direct lobbying?
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(i), Example (7).
In the
example, an organization monthly newsletter
contained an editorial column that referred to and
reflected a view on specific pending bills. One of
the newsletter’s 10,000 nonmember subscribers is
a
legislator.
The
editorial
column
in
the
newsletter copy sent to the legislator is not a
direct lobbying communication because the newsletter is sent to her in her capacity as a
subscriber rather than her capacity as a legislator.33
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(ii)
sets
forth
a
9.
What
is
a
grass
roots”
lobbying communication?
three-part
test
for
determining
whether
communications with the general public will be
treated as grass roots lobbying communications.
The communication will be considered a grass
roots lobbying communication only if it meets all
three of the following requirements:
(A)
The communication refers to specific legislation;
(B)
The communication reflects a view on such legislation; and
(C)
The communication encourages the recipient of the communication to take action
with respect to such legislation.
The third element (requiring the communication to encourage the recipient to take action)
is commonly referred to as the call to action” requirement. Essentially, what this requirement
means is that no matter how clearly an organization identifies the specific legislation and
comments on the merits of that legislation (for example, passage of S. 549 would mean the end
of civilization as we know it”) when it communicates with the general public, the absence of any
further statement that encourages the recipient to take action would mean that the communication
33 The example notes, however, that the editorial column may be a grass roots lobbying communication if it
encourages recipients to take action with respect to the pending bills it refers to and on which it reflects a view. A
further cautionary note is set forth in Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(i), Example (8), which states that if one of the legislator’s
staff members sees the editorial and requests additional information, and the organization responds with a letter that
refers to and reflects a view on specific legislation, the letter would be a direct lobbying communication unless it
is within one of the exceptions (such as the exception for nonpartisan analysis, study or research). (The letter would
not be within the scope of the exception for technical advice or assistance because the letter is not in response to
a written request from a legislative body or committee.)
298
Lobbying Issues
could not be considered a grass roots lobbying communication. The lack of such a requirement
was one of the major complaints directed at the 1986 proposed regulations.34
As noted above, unless a communication
10.
Are all communications to the
general public grass roots”?
with the general public meets all three of the
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(ii) requirements, it will not
be
a
grass
roots
lobbying
communication.
Furthermore, in certain cases, a communication
that does meet all three of the requirements may
not be a grass roots lobbying communication. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1)(iii) provides that, solely for
34 The definition of grass roots lobbying was by far the most controversial part of the 1986 proposed regulations.
The 1986 proposed definition of grass roots lobbying was patterned after a test set forth in proposed IRC 162(e)
regulations published in 1980. 45 FR 78167, 78169 (Nov. 25, 1980). (Those proposed regulations have not been
finalized.)
Under the 1986 definition, grass roots lobbying included any communication that met the following
requirements:
(A)
The communication pertains to legislation being considered by a legislative body, or seeks
or opposes legislation;
(B)
The communication reflects a view with respect to the desirability of the legislation (for
this purpose, a communication that pertains to legislation but expresses no explicit view
on the legislation shall be deemed to reflect a view on legislation if the communication
is selectively disseminated to persons reasonably expected to share a common view of the
legislation); and
(C)
The communication is communicated in a form and distributed to individuals as members
of the general public, that is, as voters or constituents, as opposed to a communication
designed for academic, scientific, or similar purposes. A communication may meet this
test even if it reaches the public only indirectly, as in a news release submitted to the
media. 51 FR 40211, 40222 (Nov. 5, 1986).
IRC 501(c)(3) public charities strenuously contended that the definition of grass roots lobbying was overly
broad and included many communications that were not lobbying. In particular, they objected that communications
were treated as grass roots lobbying even where the communications did not include some sort of call to action.”
They also contended that the definition arbitrarily concluded that a discussion of legislation reflected a view solely
on the basis of its dissemination.
At the second meeting of the Commissioner’s Exempt Organizations Advisory Group, February 26, 1988,
Service, Chief Counsel, and Treasury representatives stated they were considering revisions to the proposed
regulations that would include a call to action” requirement and would otherwise create rules different from those
under IRC 162(e). All of the Group’s members that spoke on the subject stated that a call to action” requirement
should be adopted. As to the issue of severing the IRC 4911 and 4945 proposed regulations from the proposed
regulations under IRC 162(e), three of the Group’s eighteen members dissented, stating they saw no reason for a
difference in treatment. The remainder of the Group felt that a reading of the legislative histories discloses that the
policy issues are different, as are the fiscal issues -- the consideration under IRC 162(e) is to police the tax base,
whereas the exempt organization provisions regulate a segment of society that is entitled to more protection under
the First Amendment than businesses.
Minutes [of] Commissioner’s Exempt Organization’s Advisory Group,
February 25-26, 1988,” EOTR, Jan. 1989, 7, 12-15.
The 1988 proposed regulations, as well as the final
regulations, thus accommodated the concerns of charities by (1) creating rules different from those proposed in
IRC 162(e), (2) removing the dissemination” criterion, (3) adding a definition of specific legislation,” and (4)
requiring a call to action.”
299
Lobbying Issues
purposes of IRC 4911, where a communication refers to and reflects a view on a measure that
is the subject of a referendum, ballot initiative or similar procedure, the general public in the
State or locality where the vote will take place constitutes the legislative body, and individual
members of the general public are considered legislators. Accordingly, if such a communication
is made to one or more members of the general public in that state or locality, the
communication is a direct lobbying communication (unless it comes under the exception for
nonpartisan analysis, study or research (discussed below)).35
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(iii)
provides
a
11.
What is meant by encourages
the recipient to take action?”
definition of encouraging a recipient to take
action
with
respect
to
legislation.
To
be
considered a
call to action,” a communication
must do any one of the following:
(A)
The communication states that the recipient should contact an individual
described in Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1)(i);
(B)
The communication states the address, telephone number, or similar
information of a legislator or an employee of a legislative body;
(C)
The communication provides a petition, tear-off postcard or similar
material for the recipient to communicate with any individual described in
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1)(i); or
(D)
The communication specifically identifies one or more legislators who will
vote on the legislation as: opposing the organization’s view with respect
to the legislation; being undecided with respect to the legislation; being the
recipient’s representative in the legislature; or being a member of the
legislative committee or subcommittee that will consider the legislation.
Merely naming the main sponsor(s) of the legislation for purposes of
identifying the legislation will not constitute encouraging the recipient to
take action.
35
McGovern 1990” Tax Notes at 1311; EOTR at 771, discusses the rather tangled considerations that were
brought to bear on this issue:
One factor that doubtless motivated the Service to carefully consider the issue
in developing the final regulations was concern that the lobbying restriction not
become a prohibition on influencing legislation, including legislation subject to
defeat or approval at the ballot box. Because of the more restrictive limit on
grass roots lobbying, and because of the inherently high costs of reaching voters
(particularly in large states such as California), treating such lobbying as grass
roots lobbying could amount to an effective prohibition, rather than the intended
limitation.
Accordingly, given the slight ambiguity in the statute, the final
regulations treat such lobbying as direct lobbying.
300
Lobbying Issues
Therefore, adding an exhortation such as oppose S. 549” to the previously discussed
example ( passage of S. 549 would mean the end of civilization as we know it”) would not
affect the analysis. The statement still would not constitute grass roots lobbying because the
exhortation does not reach the level of specificity set forth in the above paragraphs.
Furthermore, there is a distinction to be observed here. Communications described in
paragraphs (A) through (C) not only encourage,” but also directly encourage” the recipient to
take action with respect to legislation. Communications described in paragraph (D), however,
do not directly encourage” the recipient to take action with respect to legislation. Therefore,
a communication would encourage” the recipient to take action with respect to legislation, but
not
directly encourage” such action, if the communication does no more than identify a
legislator who will vote on the legislation as opposing the organization’s view with respect to the
legislation.
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(iv).
Communications that encourage the recipient to take
action with respect to legislation but that do not directly encourage the recipient to take action
with respect to legislation may be within the exception for nonpartisan analysis, study or research
and thus not be grass roots lobbying communications. Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(1)(vi). The distinction
also
assumes
importance
in
the
rules
regarding
membership
communications.
Reg. 56.4911-5(f)(6).
Legislators may be identified by name or by specific reference, e.g., the junior Senator
from State Z.” Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(ii)(C), Example (6). However, a more general reference,
e.g., most of the Senators from the Farm Belt states are inexplicably in favor of the bill,” would
not identify a legislator. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(ii)(C), Example (7).
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(4)(ii)(C), Example (8),
12.
Must volunteer activity costs
be treated as lobbying costs?
discusses an organization that trains volunteers to
go door-to-door to seek signatures for petitions to
be sent to legislators in favor of a specific bill.
When the organization asks the volunteers to
contact others and urge them to sign the petitions,
it encourages those volunteers to take action in favor of the specific bill. The organization does
not reimburse the volunteers for their time and expenses. Any costs incurred by the volunteers
in carrying on this activity are not lobbying or exempt purpose expenditures made by the
organization. Furthermore, the volunteers may not deduct their out-of-pocket expenditures. See
IRC 170(f)(6). However, the organization’s costs of soliciting the volunteers’ help and its costs
of training the volunteers are grass roots expenditures.
In addition, the costs of preparing,
copying, distributing, etc., the petitions (and any other materials on the same specific subject used
in the door-to-door signature gathering effort) are grass roots expenditures.
Nevertheless, as noted in Reg. 1.501(h)-3(e), Example (5), the fact that numerous unpaid
volunteers conduct lobbying activities with no reimbursement on behalf of an electing public
charity will not be considered in determining whether the organization has engaged in substantial
lobbying for purposes of its exemption under IRC 501(c)(3).
Unlike the test for nonelecting
public charities where such activities would be considered, the test under IRC 501(h) is solely
based upon expenditures.
301
Lobbying Issues
(5)
Exceptions
i.
Nonpartisan Analysis
Pursuant
to
IRC 4911(d)(2)(A)
and
1.
What
is
the
exception
for
nonpartisan analysis?
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(1)(i), engaging in nonpartisan
analysis, study, or research and making the results
of such work available to the general public, or a
segment or members thereof, or to governmental
bodies, officials, or employees will not constitute
a direct lobbying communication under Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1) or a grass roots lobbying
communication under Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2).
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(1)(ii)
provides
that
2.
What is nonpartisan analysis,
study, or research?”
nonpartisan analysis, study, or research” means
an independent and objective exposition of a
particular subject matter, including any activity
that is
educational” within the meaning of
Reg. 1.501(c)(3)-1(d)(3).
Thus,
nonpartisan
analysis, study, or research” may advocate a particular position or viewpoint so long as there
is a sufficiently full and fair exposition of the pertinent facts to enable the public or an individual
to form an independent opinion or conclusion, as opposed to the mere presentation of
unsupported opinion.
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(1)(vi) provides that a
3.
May a communication that
contains a
call to action”
come within the exception?
communication that reflects a view on specific
legislation is not within the nonpartisan analysis,
study, or research exception if the communication
directly encourages the recipient to take action
with respect to such legislation.
As set forth
above, directly encouraging a recipient to take
action with respect to legislation means that the communication:
(A)
States that the recipient should contact legislators;
(B)
States a legislator’s address, telephone number, etc.; or
(C)
Provides a petition, tear-off postcard or similar material for the recipient
to communicate with a legislator.
Note, however, that a communication would encourage the recipient to take action with
respect to legislation, but not directly encourage such action, if the communication does no more
than specifically identify one or more legislators who will vote on the legislation as:
(1) opposing the organization’s view with respect to the legislation; (2) being undecided with
respect to the legislation; (3) being the recipient’s representative in the legislature; or (4) being
a member of the legislative committee or subcommittee that will consider the legislation.
302
Lobbying Issues
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(1)(vii), Examples (8) and (9), provide illustrations of the difference between
encouraging” and directly encouraging.” In Example (8), an analysis of a pending bill study
names certain undecided Senators on the Senate committee considering the bill. Although the
study meets the three part test for determining whether a communication is a grass roots lobbying
communication, the study is within the exception for nonpartisan analysis, study or research,
because it does not directly encourage recipients of the communication to urge a legislator to
oppose the bill. In Example (9), the facts are identical except that the study concludes:
You
should write to the undecided committee members to support this crucial bill.” The study is not
within the exception for nonpartisan analysis, study or research because it directly encourages
the recipients to urge a legislator to support a specific piece of legislation.
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(1)(iv) provides that an
4.
How may nonpartisan analysis
results be distributed?
organization may choose any suitable means to
distribute the results of its nonpartisan analysis,
study, or research, including oral or written
presentations, with or without charge.
This
includes distribution of reprints of speeches,
articles and reports; presentation of information through conferences, meetings and discussions;
and dissemination to the news media, including radio, television and newspapers, and to other
public forums. However, such communications may not be limited to, or be directed toward,
persons who are interested solely in one side of a particular issue.
Normally,
whether
a
publication
or
5.
What happens when results
are distributed in a series?
broadcast
qualifies
as
nonpartisan
analysis,
study, or research” is determined based upon each
presentation.
However,
if
the
results
are
presented as a series prepared or supported by the
organization and the series as a whole meets the
standards of Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(1)(ii), then any individual presentation within the series is not a
direct or grass roots lobbying communication even though such individual presentation does not,
by itself, meet the standards for
nonpartisan analysis, study, or research.”
Whether a
presentation is considered part of a series will depend upon all the facts and circumstances of
each particular situation. However, with respect to broadcast activities, all broadcasts within any
period of six consecutive months will ordinarily be eligible to be considered as part of a series.
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(1)(iii).
Nevertheless, if an electing organization times or channels a part of a series in a manner
designed to influence the general public or the action of a legislative body with respect to a
specific legislative proposal, the expenses of preparing and distributing such part of the analysis,
study, or research will be expenditures for a direct or grass roots lobbying communications, as
the case may be. An example of such an circumstance is set forth in Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(1)(vii),
Example (7).
In the example, an organization presented within a period of six consecutive
months a two-program television series relating to a pesticide issue. The organization arranges
for the first program, which contains information, arguments, and conclusions favoring
legislation, to be televised at 8:00pm on a Thursday. It arranges for the second program, which
opposes such legislation, to be televised at 7:00am on a Sunday. The example concludes that
303
Lobbying Issues
the organization’s presentation is not within the exception for nonpartisan analysis, study, or
research, since the organization disseminated its information in a manner prejudicial to one side
of the legislative controversy since the program favoring the legislation was aired at a more
convenient viewing time than the second program.
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(1)(v) provides that even
6.
What is the rule concerning
subsequent use”?
though an activity is initially within the exception
for nonpartisan analysis, study, or research,
subsequent grass roots lobbying use may cause it
to
be
treated
as
a
grass
roots
lobbying
communication that is not within this exception.
However, subsequent use will never cause any analysis, study, or research to be considered a
direct lobbying communication.
According to Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(v), certain communications or research materials that
are initially not grass roots lobbying communications under the three-part definition may be
treated as such due to subsequent use of the materials for grass roots lobbying. However, this
occurs only if the materials are considered advocacy communications or research materials.”
Advocacy communications or research
7.
W h a t
a r e
a d v o c a c y
communications or research
materials?”
materials” are communications or materials that
both refer to and reflect a view on specific
legislation but that do not, in their initial format,
contain a direct encouragement for recipients to
take action with respect to the specific legislation.
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(v)(B).
Therefore,
the
subsequent use rules do not embrace such items as assemblages of raw data.
An example of an
advocacy communication” is described in Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(vii),
Example (8). That example discusses an organization that distributes a study that indicates a
pending bill is an appropriate remedy for problems discussed in the study and identifies certain
senators who are undecided with regard to the bill.
As discussed above, while this
communication encourages the recipient to take action with respect to the legislation, it does not
directly encourage such action. Since the study does refer to and reflect a view on the legislation
without directly encouraging action with respect to that legislation, it is an advocacy
communication. However, the communication discussed in Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(vii), Example (4),
would not be considered an advocacy communication. In that example, an organization publishes
a newsletter that contains notices and impartial summaries of proposed legislation. Although the
newsletter refers to specific legislation, it does not reflect a view on that legislation.
Advocacy communications or research materials may be treated as grass roots lobbying
communications when they are subsequently accompanied by a direct encouragement for
recipients to take action with respect to legislation.
For example, if the study discussed in
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(vii), Example (8), were subsequently distributed with a letter stating You
should write to the undecided committee members to support this crucial bill,” the study itself
could be treated as a grass roots lobbying communication.
However, the advocacy
304
Lobbying Issues
communications or research materials themselves
8.
When
will
advocacy
communications”
become
grass roots lobbying?
will not be treated as grass roots lobbying
communications unless the organization’s primary
purpose in undertaking or preparing the advocacy
communications or research materials was not for
use in lobbying. If no such primary nonlobbying
purpose is shown to exist, all expenses of
preparing and distributing the advocacy communications or research materials will be treated as
grass roots expenditures. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(v)(C).
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(v)(E) sets forth a
9.
How is the primary purpose
determined?
safe harbor for determining the primary purpose
of an organization when it undertakes or prepares
advocacy communications or research materials.
It states that the activity’s primary purpose will
not be considered to be for use in lobbying if the
organization makes a substantial nonlobbying distribution of the advocacy communications or
research materials (without the direct encouragement to action) prior to or contemporaneously
with the use of those materials with the direct encouragement to action. In determining whether
a distribution is substantial, all of the facts and circumstances will be considered, including the
normal distribution pattern of similar nonpartisan analyses, studies, or research by that and similar
organizations.36
If the organization does not meet the safe harbor because the nonlobbying distribution of
advocacy communications or research materials is not substantial, Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(v)(G)
provides that all of the facts and circumstances must be weighed to determine whether the
organization’s primary purpose in preparing the advocacy communications or research materials
was for use in lobbying. One factor that is particularly relevant is the extent of the organization’s
nonlobbying distribution of the advocacy communications or research materials, especially when
compared to the extent of their distribution with the direct encouragement to action. Another
particularly relevant factor is whether the lobbying use of the advocacy communications or
research materials is by the organization that prepared the document, a related organization, or
an unrelated organization. Where the subsequent lobbying distribution is made by an unrelated
organization, clear and convincing evidence (which must include evidence demonstrating
cooperation or collusion between the two organizations) will be required to establish that the
primary purpose for preparing the communication for use in lobbying.
Yes. Under the subsequent use” rule, the characterization of expenditures as grass roots
lobbying expenditures regulation applies only to expenditures paid less than six months before
the first time advocacy communications or research materials are used with a direct
encouragement to action with respect to legislation. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(v)(D). The six month
36 Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(v)(F) provides a special rule for partisan analysis, study or research,” that is, in the
case of advocacy communications or research materials that are not nonpartisan analysis, study or research, the
nonlobbying distribution thereof will not be considered substantial” unless that distribution is at least as extensive
as the lobbying distribution thereof.
305
Lobbying Issues
rule eliminates the possibility of years of research
10.
Is there a time limit on the
subsequent use” rule?
costs being retroactively characterized as lobbying
costs.
ii.
Other Exceptions
The
exception
for
examinations
and
1.
What
is
the
exception
for
examinations and discussions
of broad social problems?
discussions of broad social, economic, and similar
problems in Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(2) is implicit in
the definitions of direct lobbying and grass roots
lobbying
communications.
The
regulation
provides that such discussions are neither direct
lobbying
communications
nor
grass
roots
lobbying communications even if the problems are of the type with which government would be
expected to deal ultimately. In describing the scope of this exception, the regulation provides
that communications regarding a subject that is also the subject of legislation before a legislative
body will not be considered lobbying communications so long as the discussion does not address
itself to the merits of a specific legislative proposal and does not directly encourage recipients
to take action with respect to legislation. Both direct and grass roots lobbying communications
must reflect a view on specific legislation so any communication coming within this exception
would fail to qualify as either a direct or grass roots lobbying communication. The regulation
provides that this exception excludes from grass roots lobbying an organization’s discussions of
problems such as environmental pollution or population growth that are being considered by
Congress and various State legislatures, but only where the discussions do not directly address
the specific legislation being considered and do not directly encourage recipients of the
communication to contact a legislator, an employee of a legislative body, or a government official
or employee who may participate in the formulation of legislation. Such discussions would also
fail to qualify as grass roots lobbying under the three-part test of Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(2)(ii) since
they do not reflect a view on the specific legislation.37
37 Prior to the adoption of the final regulations under IRC 4911, the IRC 4945 regulations had included an
exception for discussion of broad social problems. This exception was included in the IRC 4911 regulations to
provide parity with the IRC 4945 regulations. However, as a substantive matter, the exception seems superfluous.
306
Lobbying Issues
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(3)
provides
that
a
2.
What
is
the
exception
for
requests for technical advice?
communication will not be considered a direct
lobbying communication when it consists of
providing technical advice or assistance to a
governmental body, a governmental committee, or
a subdivision of either in response to a written
request by that body, committee, or subdivision, as set forth in Reg. 53.4945-2(d)(2).
Requests made by individual members of a governmental body, committee, or subdivision
of either will not qualify under this exception since Reg. 53.4945-2(d)(2)(i) requires that the
request for assistance or advice must be made in the name of the requesting governmental body,
committee or subdivision. Likewise, the response to such request must be available to every
member of the requesting body, committee or subdivision to qualify for the exception.
The
regulations provide an example of a written response submitted to the person making a request
for technical assistance in the name of a congressional committee, making it clear that the
response is for the use of all the members of the committee. In that situation, the response will
be considered available to every member of the requesting committee if the response is.
Oral or written presentation of technical assistance or advice coming under this exception
does not need to qualify as nonpartisan analysis, study or research. The offering of opinions or
recommendations will ordinarily qualify under this exception only if such opinions or
recommendations are specifically requested by the governmental body, committee or subdivision
or are directly related to the materials so requested. Reg. 53.4945-2(d)(2)(ii). The regulations
illustrate these rules with the example of a Congressional committee that is studying the
feasibility of legislation to provide funds for scholarships to U.S. students attending schools
abroad. The committee made a written request to an organization that has engaged in a private
scholarship program of this type to describe the manner in which it selects candidates for its
program. If the organization’s response not only included a description of its own grant-making
procedures, but also its views regarding the wisdom of adopting such a program, the technical
advice or assistance exception would still apply (because such views are directly related to the
subject matter of the request for technical advice or assistance). Similarly, the exception would
still apply if the organization was requested, in addition, to give any views it considered relevant
and the organization’s response included a discussion of alternative scholarship programs and
their relative merits. Reg. 53.4945-2(d)(2)(iii), Examples (1), (2), and (3).
Under the
self-defense” exception of
3.
What
is
the
exception
for
self-defense”?
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(4), a communication is not a
direct
lobbying
communication
if
the
communication
is
an
appearance
before,
or
communication with, any legislative body with
respect to a possible action by the body that
might affect the existence of the electing public charity, its powers and duties, its tax-exempt
status,
or
the
deductibility
of
contributions
to
the
organization,
as
set
forth
in
Reg. 53.4945-2(d)(3).
Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(4) also contains special rules for membership
communications, as well as communications among an affiliated group and a limited affiliated
group.
307
Lobbying Issues
Under this exception, a charity may communicate with an entire legislative body, with
committees or subcommittees of a legislative body, with individual legislators, with legislative
staff members, or with representatives of the executive branch who are involved with the
legislative process, so long as such communication is limited to the prescribed subjects.
Similarly, under the self-defense exception, a charity may make expenditures in order to initiate
legislation if such legislation concerns only matters which might affect the existence of the
charity, its powers and duties, its tax-exempt status, or the deductibility of contributions to such
charity.
Therefore, if a bill would cause an organization to lose its exemption from taxation if it
engages in certain transactions, expenditures paid or incurred with respect to the organization’s
submissions on the bill do not constitute taxable expenditures since they are made with respect
to a possible decision of Congress which might affect the existence of the organization, its
powers and duties, its tax-exempt status, or the deduction of contributions to such foundation.
Reg. 53.4945-2(d)(3)(ii), Example (1). However, the exception would not apply to expenditures
incurred by an organization that appeared before an appropriations committee in order to attempt
to persuade the committee of the advisability of continuing a contract research program whose
discontinuance would affect the organization financially.
Expenditures paid or incurred with
respect to such appearance are not made with respect to possible decisions of the legislature that
might affect the existence of the organization, its powers and duties, its tax-exempt status, or the
deduction of contributions to such foundation, but rather merely affect the scope of the
organization’s future activities. Reg. 53.4945-2(d)(3)(ii), Example (4).
(6)
Special Rules for Mass Media Advertising
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(5) contains a special
1.
What are the rules concerning
mass media advertising?
rule for certain mass media advertisements.
Under this rule, a mass media advertisement that
does not qualify as a grass roots lobbying
communication under the three-part definition (as
discussed above) may nevertheless be considered
a grass roots lobbying communication. This special rule generally applies only to a limited type
of paid advertisements that appear in the mass media.
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(5)(ii) contains a presumption regarding certain paid mass media
advertisements about highly publicized legislation. Under this presumption, if an organization’s
paid advertisement appears in the mass media within two weeks before a vote by a legislative
body, or a committee (but not a subcommittee) of such body, on a highly publicized piece of
legislation, the paid advertisement will be considered to be a grass roots lobbying communication
if the paid advertisement both reflects a view on the general subject of such legislation and either
refers to the highly publicized legislation or encourages the public to communicate with
legislators on the general subject of such legislation.
This presumption can be rebutted by
demonstrating that the paid advertisement is a type of mass media communication regularly made
by the organization without regard to the timing of legislation (that is, a customary course of
business exception) or that the timing of the paid advertisement was unrelated to the upcoming
308
Lobbying Issues
legislative action.38
A mass media communication that otherwise meets the presumption but
is made more than two weeks before a legislative vote will not be considered a grass roots
lobbying communication under this rule, even if it is presented only one day more than two
weeks. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(5)(iv), Examples (2) and (4). Furthermore, there must be a legislative
vote on the legislation for this rule to apply. If, because of public pressure resulting from an
advertising campaign opposing a bill that would meet the presumption, the bill is withdrawn and
no vote is ever taken, none of the advertisements will be considered a grass roots lobbying
communication under this rule. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(5)(iv), Example (5).
For purpose of this special rule, the term
2.
What is mass media?”
mass media” means television, radio, billboards
and
general
circulation
newspapers
and
magazines.
Newspapers or magazines that are
published by an IRC 501(c)(3) organization that
has made an IRC 501(h) election will not be considered general circulation newspapers or
magazines unless the total circulation of the newspaper or magazine is greater than 100,000 and
fewer than one-half of the recipients are members of the organization (as defined in
Reg. 56.4911-5(f)). Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(5)(iii)(A). Where an electing public charity is itself a
mass media publisher or broadcaster, all portions of that organization’s mass media publications
or broadcasts are treated as paid advertisements in the mass media, except those specific portions
that are advertisements paid for by another person. Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(5)(iii)(B).
Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(5)(iii)
provides
that
3.
What is highly publicized?”
legislation is highly publicized” for purpose of
this
special
rule
when
it
receives
frequent
coverage on television and radio, and in general
circulation newspapers, during the two weeks
preceding the vote by the legislative body or committee. In the case of state or local legislation,
it is highly publicized” when it receives frequent coverage in the mass media that serve the
State or local jurisdiction in question. Even where legislation receives frequent coverage, it is
highly publicized” only if the pendency of the legislation or the legislation’s general terms,
purpose, or effect are known to a significant segment of the general public (as opposed to the
particular interest groups directly affected) in the area in which the paid mass media
advertisement appears.
38 However, even if the organization successfully rebuts the presumption, a mass media communication is a
grass roots lobbying communication if the communication would be a grass roots lobbying communication under
the general rules of the three-part test.
309
Lobbying Issues
(7)
Earmarking
When an electing public charity makes a
1.
What are the rules relating to
transfers by electing charities?
transfer that is earmarked for grass roots lobbying
purposes, the transfer is a grass roots expenditure.
Reg. 56.4911-3(c)(1).
When an electing public
charity makes a transfer that is earmarked for
direct lobbying purposes or for direct lobbying
and grass roots lobbying purposes, the transfer is treated as a grass roots expenditure in full
except to the extent the electing public charity demonstrates that all or part of the amounts
transferred were expended for direct lobbying purposes, in which case that part of the amounts
transferred
is
a
direct
lobbying
expenditure
by
the
electing
public
charity.39
Reg. 56.4911-3(c)(2).
A transfer for less than fair market value by an electing public charity to any organization
(other than those described in IRC 501(c)) that makes lobbying expenditures is not an exempt
purpose expenditure unless the public charity makes the benefit generally available at less than
fair market value in the course of an activity that is substantially related to accomplishing the
exempt purpose of the charity.40 Reg. 56.4911-3(c)(3). Transfers for fair market value, whether
to related or unrelated organizations, are not covered by this rule.
The amount by which the cost or fair market value (whichever is greater) of the transfer
exceeds the value given to the electing public charity in return for the transfer is the amount
subject to this rule.
Reg. 56.4911-3(c)(3)(i)(E).
This amount is treated as a grass roots
expenditure to the extent of the transferee’s grass roots expenditures. If the transferred amount
exceeds the transferee’s grass roots expenditures, the excess is treated as a direct lobbying
expenditure to the extent of the transferee’s direct lobbying expenditures. If the transfer exceeds
both grass roots and direct lobbying expenditures by the transferee, the excess is not treated as
a lobbying expenditure.
Reg. 56.4911-3(c)(3)(ii).
Reg. 56.4911-3(c)(3)(iii) illustrates this
provision by the following example:
Organization C, an electing public charity, shares employee E with
N, a noncharity that makes lobbying expenditures. N’s grass roots
expenditures are $5,000 and its direct lobbying expenditures are
$25,000.
Each organization pays one-half of the $100,000 in
direct and overhead costs associated with E. E devotes one-quarter
of his time to C and three-quarters of his time to N. In substance,
this arrangement is a transfer (for less than fair market value)
from C to N in the amount of $25,000 (one-quarter of the $100,000
of
direct
and
overhead
costs
associated
with
E’s
work).
39 These rules do not apply to transfers that are not exempt purpose expenditures because they are described
in Reg. 56.4911-4(e).
40 This rule also does not apply to controlled grants or to transfers that are not exempt purpose expenditures
because they are described in Reg. 56.4911-4(e).
310
Lobbying Issues
Accordingly, C is treated as having made a $5,000 grass roots
expenditure (the lesser of N’s grass roots expenditures ($5,000) or
the amount of the transfer ($25,000)). C is also treated as having
made a $20,000 direct lobbying expenditure (the lesser of N’s
direct lobbying expenditures ($25,000) or the remaining amount of
the transfer ($20,000)).
To be treated as a lobbying expenditure in
2.
When is a transfer earmarked
for a specific purpose?
accordance
with
Reg. 56.4911-3(c)(1)
or
Reg. 56.4911-3(c)(2),
a
transfer
must
be
earmarked” for direct or grass roots lobbying
purposes pursuant to Reg. 56.4911-4(f)(4). This
regulation provides that a transfer, including a
grant or payment of dues, is earmarked” for direct or grass roots lobbying purposes to the extent
the transfer meets either one of the following requirements:
(A)
The transferor directs the transferee to add the amount transferred to a
fund established to accomplish the direct or grass roots lobbying purpose,
or
(B)
The amount transferred or, if less, the amount agreed upon to the expended
to accomplish the purpose, if there exists an agreement, oral or written,
whereby the transferor may cause the transferee to expend amounts to
accomplish the direct or grass roots lobbying purpose or whereby the
transferee agrees to expend an amount to accomplish the direct or grass
roots lobbying purpose.
(8)
Allocation Rules
Reg. 56.4911-3 contains allocation rules
1.
What are the principles of the
allocation rules?
for determining what portion of the costs of a
lobbying communication is a direct lobbying
expenditure,
what
portion
is
a
grass
roots
lobbying expenditure, and what portion is not a
lobbying expenditure.
The general principle
involved is that all costs of preparing a direct or grass roots lobbying communication are included
as expenditures for direct or grass roots lobbying ( lobbying expenditures”), including both direct
and indirect costs. Therefore, lobbying expenditures include amounts paid or incurred as current
or deferred compensation for an employee’s services as well as the allocable portion of
administrative, overhead, and other general expenditures attributable to the direct or grass roots
lobbying communication.
For example, as a general rule, all expenditures for researching,
drafting, reviewing, copying, publishing and mailing a direct or grass roots lobbying
communication, as well as an allocable share of overhead expenses, are included as expenditures
for direct or grass roots lobbying. Reg. 56.4911-3(a)(1).
311
Lobbying Issues
When an electing public charity makes a
2.
How
are
expenditures
for
nonmember
communications
allocated?
lobbying communication that is not sent only or
primarily to members and that also has a bona
fide nonlobbying purpose, the allocable lobbying
expenditures must include all costs that are
attributable to those parts of the communication
on the same specific subject as the lobbying
message. Reg. 56.4911-3(a)(2)(i). All costs attributable to those parts of the communication that
are not on the same specific subject as the lobbying message are not included as lobbying
expenditures for allocation purposes. Whether or not a portion of a communication is on the
same specific subject as the lobbying message will depend on the surrounding facts and
circumstances.41
A portion of a communication will be on
3.
When
are
portions
of
a
communication
on the same
specific subject?”
the same specific subject” as the lobbying
message if that portion discusses an activity or
specific issue that would be directly affected by
the specific legislation that is the subject of the
lobbying message.
Moreover, discussion of the
background or consequences of the specific
legislation, or discussion of the background or consequences of an activity or specific issue
affected by the specific legislation, is also considered to be on the same specific subject as the
lobbying communication. Reg. 56.4911-3(a)(2)(i).
Reg. 56.4911-3(b), Examples (8) and (9), illustrate the same specific subject” rule. In
the examples, a nonmembership organization prepared and mailed a four page document. The
first two pages, titled
The Need for Child Care,” support the need for additional child care
programs, and include statistics on the number of children living in homes where both parents
work or in homes with a single parent. The two pages also make note of the inadequacy of the
number of day care providers to meet the needs of these parents. The third page, titled H.R.
1,” indicates the organization’s support of H.R. 1, a bill pending in the U.S. House of
Representatives.
The document states that H.R. 1 will provide for $10,000,000 in additional
subsidies to child care providers, primarily for those providers caring for lower income children.
The third page also notes that H.R. 1 includes new federal standards regulating the quality of
child care providers.
The document ends with T’s request that recipients contact their
Congressional representative in support of H.R. 1. The fourth page does not refer to the general
need for child care or the specific need for additional child care providers. Instead, the fourth
page advocates that a particular federal agency commence, under its existing statutory authority,
licensing of day care providers in order to promote safe and effective child care. The examples
41 With the exception of the definition of grass roots lobbying, the provision of the 1986 proposed regulations
that created the biggest stir was the proposed rule that all expenditures for a fundraising communication would be
treated as grass roots lobbying if any part of the communication also consists of grass roots lobbying. 51 FR 40211,
40222-3 (Nov. 5, 1986). The 1988 proposed regulations revised this allocation rule by providing two different rules:
a same specific subject” rule for nonmember communications and a reasonable allocation rule for membership
communications. The 1990 regulations also adopted these rules.
312
Lobbying Issues
conclude that the first three pages of the document are on the same specific subject; therefore,
all expenditures of preparing and distributing those three pages are grass roots lobbying
expenditures. However, the cost of the fourth page is not a lobbying expenditure since it is not
on the same specific subject.
Reg. 56.4911-3(a)(2)(ii) provides that in
4.
How
are
expenditures
for
member
communications
allocated?
the
case
of
lobbying
expenditures
for
a
communication
that
also
has
a
bona
fide
nonlobbying purpose and that is sent only or
primarily to members, an electing public charity
must make a reasonable allocation between the
amount expended for the lobbying purpose and
the amount expended for the nonlobbying purpose. For the purpose of applying this rule, if more
than half of the recipients of a lobbying communication are members of the organization within
the meaning of Reg. 4911-5, then the communication is considered to be sent only or primarily
to members. (See the discussion below for the rules regarding communications with members.)
The regulation further provides that an electing public charity that includes as a lobbying
expenditure only the amount expended for the specific sentence or sentences that encourage the
recipient to take action with respect to legislation has not made a reasonable allocation.
Reg. 56.4911-3(b), Examples (10) and (11), illustrate these principles. A member organization
that prepared and mailed a document primarily to members that discusses the need for child care,
refers to and reflects a view on specific legislation concerning child care, and states that readers
should contact the legislature regarding the specific legislation. The organization determines that
the document has a bona fide nonlobbying purpose, educating its members about the need for
child care.
In Example (10), the organization allocates one-half of the preparation and
distribution costs to lobbying, which the regulation concludes is reasonable.
However, in
Example (11), the regulations conclude that an allocation of only one percent of the costs to
lobbying based upon the fact that only two lines out of 200 state that the recipient should contact
the legislature was not reasonable.
Generally, a communication (to which the
5.
How
are
mixed
lobbying
expenditures allocated?
membership rules of Reg. 56.4911-5 does not
apply)
that
is
both
a
direct
lobbying
communication
and
a
grass
roots
lobbying
communication will be treated as a grass roots
lobbying communication. However, to the extent
the electing public charity demonstrates that the communication was made primarily for direct
lobbying purposes, the organization may make a reasonable allocation between the direct and the
grass roots lobbying purposes served by the communication. Reg. 56.4911-3(a)(3).42
42 Under the proposed 1986 regulations, the organization had to demonstrate that the expenditure was incurred
solely for direct lobbying purposes. 51 FR 40211, 40223 (Nov. 5, 1986).
313
Lobbying Issues
(9)
Special Rules for Membership Communications
Reg. 56.4911-5 provides that expenditures
1.
What are the rules concerning
membership communications?
for
certain
communications
between
an
organization
and
its
members
( membership
communications”) are treated more leniently for
purposes
of
IRC 4911
than
are
similar
communications to nonmembers. Pursuant to the
regulation, certain membership communication expenditures are not lobbying expenditures even
though those expenditures would be lobbying expenditures if the communication were to
nonmembers.
In other cases, expenditures that would be grass roots expenditures if the
communication were to nonmembers are direct lobbying expenditures when made to members.
Under Reg. 56.4911-5(f)(1), a person is a
2.
Who is a member”?
member of an electing public charity if the person
(either an individual or organization) pays dues or
makes a contribution of more than a nominal
amount, makes a contribution of more than a
nominal amount of time, or is one of a limited number of honorary” or life” members who
have more than a nominal connection with the electing public charity and who have been chosen
for a valid reason (such as length of service to the organization or involvement in activities
forming the basis of the electing public charity’s exemption) unrelated to the electing public
charity’s dissemination of information to its members.
A person may be treated as a member of an electing public charity even though that
person does not qualify as a member under the tests set forth in Reg. 56.4911-5(f)(1) if the
electing public charity demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Service that there is a good reason
for its membership requirements not meeting the above requirements and that its membership
requirements do not operate to permit an abuse of these rules. This rule has been applied, for
example, in PLR 93-32-042 (May 19, 1993), in which members of separately incorporated state
and local organizations were treated as members of a national organization based upon
coordinated activities and payment of a share of dues to the national organization.
Pursuant
to
Reg. 56.4911-5(b),
3.
When are expenditures for
member communications not
lobbying expenditures?
expenditures for a communication that refers to,
and reflects a view on, specific legislation will
not be considered lobbying expenditures if the
communication
satisfies
the
following
four
requirements:
(A)
The communication is directed only to members of the organization;
(B)
The specific legislation the communication refers to, and reflects a view
on, is of direct interest to the organization and its members;
314
Lobbying Issues
(C)
The communication does not directly encourage the member to engage in
direct lobbying (whether individually or through the organization); and
(D)
The communication does not directly encourage the member to engage in
grass roots lobbying (whether individually or through the organization).
A communication that otherwise meets the
4.
What
happens
when
a
member
communication
encourages direct lobbying?
requirements set forth in Reg. 56.4911-5(b) but
does not come within that rule because it directly
encourages the members to engage in direct
lobbying will be treated as a direct lobbying
communication.
IRC 4911(d)(3)(A);
Reg. 56.4911-5(c).
Reg. 56.4911-5(f)(6)(i)(A)
provides that a member communication directly encourages a recipient to engage in direct
lobbying, whether individually or through the organization, if the communication does any of the
following:
(A)
The communication states the recipient should contact an individual
described in Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1)(i);
(B)
The communication states the address, telephone number, or similar
information of a legislator or an employee of a legislative body; or
(C)
The communication provides a petition, tear-off postcard or similar
material for the recipient to communicate his or her views to an individual
described in Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1)(i).
A
communication
that
meets
the
5.
What happens when member
communications
encourage
grass roots lobbying?
requirements of Reg. 56.4911-5(b) that it be
directed only to members and refer to and reflect
a view on specific legislation of direct interest
and concern to the organization and its members,
but does not qualify under that rule because it
directly encourages the members to urge persons
other than members to engage in direct or grass roots lobbying is treated as grass roots lobbying.
IRC 4911(d)(3)(B); Reg. 56.4911-5(d). Reg. 56.4911-5(f)(6)(ii) provides that a communication
directly encourages recipients to engage individually or collectively (whether through the
organization or otherwise) in grass roots lobbying if the communication does any of the
following:
(A)
The communication states the member should encourage nonmembers to
contact an individual described in Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1)(i);
(B)
The communication states the recipient should provide to nonmembers the
address, telephone number, or similar information of a legislator or an
employee of a legislative body; or
315
Lobbying Issues
(C)
The communication provides (or requests the recipient provide to
nonmembers) a petition, tear-off postcard or similar material for the
recipient (or nonmember) to use to ask nonmembers to communicate views
to an individual described in Reg. 56.4911-2(b)(1)(i).
For example, a
petition that has an entire page of preprinted signature blocks is considered
to be provided to the member to ask nonmembers to communicate views.
Similarly, where a communication is distributed to a single member and
provides several tear-off postcards addressed to a legislator, the postcards
are presumed to be provided for the member to use to ask nonmembers to
communicate with the legislator.
Yes, in some instances a communication
6.
Is
there
a
self-defense”
exception for members?
by an electing public charity on behalf of its
members will come within the
self-defense”
exception. Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(4)(iii) provides that
the exception applies to an electing public charity
when more than 75 percent of its members are
other organizations that are described in IRC 501(c)(3). Appearances before, or communications
with, any legislative body with respect to a possible action by the body which might affect the
existence of one or more of the IRC 501(c)(3) member organizations, their powers, duties, or
tax-exempt status, or the deductibility (under IRC 170) of contributions to one or more of the
IRC 501(c)(3) member organizations are covered by this exception.
However, the exception
applies only if the principal purpose of the appearance or communication is to defend the
IRC 501(c)(3) member organizations. It does not apply if the principle purpose is to defend any
member organizations that are not described in IRC 501(c)(3).
In addition, Reg. 56.4911-5(f)(6)(i)(B) provides an exception for communications with
members. A communication that directly encourages a member to engage in direct lobbying
activities that would not be attempts to influence legislation because of the
self-defense”
exception if engaged in directly by the organization is treated as a communication that does not
directly encourage a member to engage in direct lobbying.
While not treated quite as leniently as
7.
What happens when written
communications
are
not
directed solely to members?
communications directed only to members of an
organization, written communications that are
designed primarily for the members but are not
directed only to members also qualify for special
treatment. Under Reg. 56.4911-5(e), expenditures
for such written communications that refer to, and
reflect a view on, specific legislation of direct interest to the organization and its members, are
treated as expenditures for direct or grass roots lobbying depending upon the type of lobbying
encouraged.
For purposes of Reg. 56.4911-5(e), a communication is designed primarily for
members of an organization if more than half of the recipients of the communication are
members of the organization.
316
Lobbying Issues
Reg. 56.4911-5(e)(2) provides allocation
8.
What are the allocation rules
for such communications that
encourage direct lobbying but
not grass roots lobbying?
rules for a written communication distributed
primarily to members (as described above) that
directly encourages recipients (individually or
through the organization) to engage in direct
lobbying but does not directly encourage them to
engage in grass roots lobbying.
In those cases,
the
cost
of
preparing
and
distributing
the
communication is allocated between direct lobbying and grass roots lobbying expenditures. The
regulation cross references the rules concerning computation of advertising income contained in
Reg. 1.512(a)-1(f)(6) and indicates that the portion of the cost to be allocated includes all costs
of preparing all the material with respect to which readers are urged to engage in direct lobbying
plus the mechanical and distribution costs attributable to the lineage devoted to this material.
The amount to be allocated as determined above is then multiplied by the sum of the
nonmember subscribers percentage” and the all other distribution percentage,” both as defined
in Reg. 56.4911-5(f)(7), to determine the amount allocable as a grass roots lobbying expenditure
for the communication.43
(Solely for purposes of this particular allocation, the nonmember
subscribers percentage is treated as zero unless it is greater than 15 percent of total distribution.)
The grass roots lobbying expenditure is subtracted from the amount to be allocated to determine
the direct lobbying expenditure.
If a written communication is directed
9.
What are the allocation rules
for such communications that
encourage
grass
roots
lobbying?
primarily for, but not only to, the members of the
organization, as described above, and it directly
encourages recipients to engage in grass roots
lobbying (either individually or through the
organization or otherwise), the expenditures for
the communication are treated as a grass roots
lobbying expenditure.
The communication is
treated as a grass roots lobbying communication even if it also encourages readers to engage in
direct lobbying. As with the amount to be allocated between direct lobbying expenditures and
grass roots lobbying expenditures as discussed above, grass roots lobbying expenditures includes
all the costs of preparing all the material with respect to which readers are urged to engage in
grass roots lobbying plus the mechanical and distribution costs attributable to the lineage devoted
to this material. See Reg. 1.512(a)-1(f)(6)).
43
With respect to the term
subscriber,” Reg. 56.4911-5(f)(5) provides that a subscriber to a written
communication is a person that either (1) is a member of the publishing organization and the membership dues
expressly include the right to receive the written communication, or (2) has affirmatively expressed a desire to
receive the written communication and has paid more than a nominal amount for the communication.
317
Lobbying Issues
(10)
Affiliated Groups
i.
Affiliation Rules
IRC 4911(f)(1) through IRC 4911(f)(3)
1.
What are the affiliation rules?
contain a limited anti-abuse rule for affiliated
organizations.
In general, the rule prevents
avoiding the sliding-scale percentage limitation on
lobbying expenditures (as well as avoiding the
$1,000,000 cap on lobbying expenditures) through creation of numerous organizations.44 With
one exception, this is accomplished by treating the members of an affiliated group as a single
organization for purposes of measuring both lobbying expenditures and permitted lobbying
expenditures.45
Therefore, if the expenditures of the group as a whole do not exceed the permitted limits,
then each of the electing member organizations is treated as not exceeding the permitted limits.
Conversely, if the expenditures of the group as a whole exceed the permitted limits, then each
of the electing members is treated as having exceeded the limits and would pay tax on its
proportionate share of the group’s excess lobbying expenditures. Note, however, that only those
members of the affiliated group that have made the IRC 501(h) election are subject to the tax,
nonelecting members remain subject to the
no substantial part” test.
Joint Committee on
Taxation, General Explanation of the Tax Reform Act of 1976, 1976-3 C.B. Vol. 2 at 423.
As will be discussed more fully below, membership in an affiliated group includes only
IRC 501(c)(3) organizations that are eligible to make the IRC 501(h) election. Organizations
described in other subparagraphs of IRC 501(c)(3) are not eligible for membership in an affiliated
group even if they are affiliated within the meaning of IRC 4911(f)(2) with an eligible
organization.
For purposes of the regulations under
2.
When are two organizations
considered to be affiliated?
IRC 4911, two organizations are affiliated if one
organization
is
able
to
control
action
on
legislative
issues
by
the
other
organization
because of interlocking governing boards or
because
of
provisions
in
the
governing
44 For example, a large organization, by dividing in two, would increase its overall cap from $1 million to $2
million. Because of declining percentages at higher levels, creating a second organization allows additional permitted
lobbying expenditures for organizations whose exempt purpose expenditures exceed $500,000. An organization with
$1 million of exempt purpose expenditures is permitted to have $175,000 of total lobbying expenditures without
incurring tax, but two organizations with $500,000 of exempt purpose expenditures each would be permitted to have
$100,000 of total lobbying expenditures, for a total amount of $200,000.
45 The single exception to the general rule relates to members of a limited affiliated group of organizations”
(organizations that are affiliated solely by reason of governing instrument provisions that extend control solely with
respect to national legislation). IRC 4911(f)(4) and Reg. 56.4911-10.
318
Lobbying Issues
instruments
of
the
controlled
organization
(subject
to
the
limitation
described
in
Reg. 56.4911-7(a)(2)).46
The organizations are affiliated due to the ability of the controlling
organization to control action on legislative issues by the controlled organization, not because
such control is exercised. Reg. 56.4911-7(a)(1).
Reg. 56.4911-7(a)(3) provides that the
3.
What
is
action
on
legislative issues?”
term action on legislative issues” includes taking
a
position
in
the
organization’s
name
on
legislation, authorizing any person to take a
position on legislation in the organization’s name,
and authorizing lobbying expenditures.
Action
on legislative issues” does not include actions taken merely to correct unauthorized actions taken
in the organization’s name.
Reg. 56.4911-7(b)(1)
provides
that,
in
4.
What
are
interlocking
governing boards”?
general,
two
organizations
have
interlocking
governing
boards
if
one
organization
(the
controlling organization) has a sufficient number
of representatives on the governing board of the
second organization (the controlled organization)
so that by aggregating their votes, the representatives of the controlling organization can cause
or prevent action on legislative issues by the controlled organization. If two organizations have
interlocking governing boards, the organizations are affiliated without regard to how or whether
the representatives of the controlling organization vote on any particular matter.
Generally, Reg. 56.4911-7(b)(2) provides that the number of representatives of the
controlling organization who are members of the controlled organization’s governing board will
be presumed sufficient to cause or prevent action on legislative issues by the controlled
organization if it either (1) constitutes a majority of incumbents on the governing board, or
(2) constitutes a quorum, or is sufficient to prevent a quorum, for acting on legislative issues.
However, if under the governing documents of the controlled organization, it can be determined
that a lesser number of votes than the number described in Reg. 56.4911-7(b)(2) is necessary or
sufficient to cause or to prevent action on legislative issues, a number of representatives of the
controlling organization who are members of the controlled organization’s governing board that
equals or exceeds that number will be considered sufficient to cause or prevent action on
legislative issues. Reg. 56.4911-7(b)(3). Nevertheless, if the number of representatives of one
organization is less than 15 percent of the incumbents on the governing board of a second
organization, the two organizations are not affiliated by reason of interlocking governing boards.
Reg. 56.4911-7(b)(4).
46 The exception provided in Reg. 56.4911-7(a)(2) states that two organizations, neither of which is described
in IRC 501(c)(3), are affiliated only if there exists at least one organization described in IRC 501(c)(3) that is
affiliated with both organizations.
319
Lobbying Issues
Furthermore, there is no affiliation through interlocking boards where the board consists
of representatives of unrelated organizations, none of which satisfies the control tests. Therefore,
where five unrelated organizations each appoint two members to the board of an organization,
it is not affiliated with any of the five organizations due to interlocking governing boards.
Reg. 56.4911-7(f), Example (2).
This rule has been applied in situations involving national
organizations that have boards consisting of delegates from separately incorporated state or
regional associations. See PLR 91-45-039 (Aug. 14, 1991) and PLR 93-32-042 (May 19, 1993).
There are three circumstances under which
5.
When
are
board
members
considered representatives of
another organization?
members of the governing board of the controlled
organization are considered representatives of the
controlling organization. The first occurs if the
controlling
organization
has
specifically
designated that person to be a board member of
the controlled organization. A board member of
the controlled organization is specifically designated by the controlling organization if the board
member is selected by virtue of the right of the controlling organization, under the governing
instruments of the controlled organization, either to designate a person to be a member of the
controlled organization’s governing board, or to select a person for a position that entitles the
holder of that position to be a member of the controlled organization’s governing board.
Reg. 56.4911-7(b)(5)(ii).47 The second occurs when a member of the governing board of one
organization serves on the governing board of a second organization. In this instance, the person
is a representative of the second organization. Reg. 56.4911-7(b)(5)(iv). The third occurs when
the board member is an officer or paid executive staff member of the other organization. In that
situation, the person is a representative of the other organization. Although titles are significant
in determining whether a person is a member of the executive staff of an organization, any
employee of an organization who possesses authority commonly exercised by an executive is
considered an executive staff member for these purposes. Reg. 56.4911-7(b)(5)(v).
Reg. 56.4911-7(c)
provides
that
the
6.
What are the rules relating to
governing instruments?
controlling organization is affiliated with the
controlled organization due to the governing
instruments of the controlled organization if those
instruments limit the independent action of the
controlled organization on legislative issues by
requiring it to be bound by decisions of the controlling organization on such issues.
Organizations also are affiliated if the controlled organization’s governing instrument allows the
controlling organization to veto positions on legislation that the controlled organization might
take, even if the veto power is never exercised. Reg. 56.4911-7(f), Example (3).
47 A board member of one organization who is specifically designated by a second organization, a majority of
the governing board of which is made up of representatives of a third organization, is a representative of the third
organization
as
well
as
being
a
representative
of
the
second
organization
pursuant
to
the
rules
of
Reg. 56.4911-7(b)(5)(ii). Reg. 56.4911-7(b)(5)(iii).
320
Lobbying Issues
To be affiliated under IRC 4911, two
7.
May board actions establish
affiliation other than through
amendments to the governing
instrument?
organizations must have interlocking boards or
one organization must be bound by the other
organization on legislative issues by provisions in
its
governing
instruments.
Assuming
the
organization does not have an interlocking board
with
another
organization,
actions
by
the
organization’s board of directors that do not
constitute amendments to its governing instrument will not establish affiliation under IRC 4911.
This is discussed in Reg. 56.4911-7(f), Example (4), the governing board of an organization
resolves to adopt positions taken on legislative issues by another organization.
The two
organizations are eligible organizations and do not have interlocking governing boards.
The
governing instruments of the first organization do not mention the other organization and do not
indicate that the first organization is to be bound by the decisions on legislation of any
organization. The two organizations are not affiliated under IRC 4911.
A determination that organizations are not
8.
How are organizations that
file a group return treated?
affiliated for purposes of IRC 4911 does not
indicate that those organizations are not affiliated
for purposes of filing a group return.
In
PLR 91-45-039, (Aug. 14, 1991) the Service
concluded that affiliated” has a broader meaning
as used in Reg. 1.6033-2(d) than it does under IRC 4911.
Therefore, the mere fact that
organizations file a group return does not indicate that the organizations are affiliated under
IRC 4911. Furthermore, a group return may be filed even if some of the organizations have made
the IRC 501(h) election.
However, pursuant to Reg. 56.4911-6, which sets out the record
keeping requirements for electing organizations, the group return will include separate statements
regarding each organization that has made the election. Furthermore, for purposes of determining
the liability for tax under IRC 4911(a), a separate schedule on the group return must be
completed for each organization (other than any that are part of an affiliated group under
IRC 4911(f)) that has made the IRC 501(h) election. Each schedule must show the lobbying
expenditures, the lobbying nontaxable amount, the grass roots expenditures, and the grass roots
nontaxable amount for each electing organization. Computation of the IRC 4911 tax must be
made for each such organization on Form 4720, Return of Certain Excise Taxes on Charities and
Other Persons Under Chapters 41 and 42 of the Internal Revenue Code. The computation must
be based only upon the amounts applicable to the individual organization; it may not be based
upon the composite figures for the group. A separate Form 4720 must be filed for each electing
organization with IRC 4911(a) tax liability.
Yes,
organizations
may
be
indirectly
9.
May
organizations
be
indirectly affiliated?
affiliated either because they are controlled by the
same controlling organization or because the
controlling
organization
affiliated
with
one
organization is a controlled organization affiliated
with the other organization. When a controlling
organization is affiliated with each of two or more controlled organizations, then the controlled
321
Lobbying Issues
organizations are affiliated with each other.
Reg. 56.4911-7(d)(1). Therefore, if two or more
organizations are controlled directly by the same controlling organization, they are affiliated with
each other even if the method of control is different.
Under the
chain rule” of
Reg. 56.4911-7(d)(2), if one organization is a controlling organization described in this section
with respect to a second organization and that second organization is a controlling organization
with respect to a third organization, then the first organization is affiliated with the third. Again,
the method of control does not need to be the same at each level of the chain for the
organizations to be affiliated. See Reg. 56.4911-7(f), Example (6), for an illustration of these
rules.
The same affiliation rules would apply if
10.
What happens if a controlling
organization is not described
in IRC 501(c)(3)?
the controlling organization is not described in
IRC 501(c)(3)
since
organizations
may
be
indirectly
affiliated,
as
noted
above.
This
situation
is
discussed
in
Reg. 56.4911-7(f),
Example (7).
In the example, an organization
that is described in IRC 501(c)(4) is affiliated, as
the controlling organization, with two organizations that are described in IRC 501(c)(3) and are
eligible to elect under IRC 501(h). The two IRC 501(c)(3) organizations are affiliated and will
be an affiliated group if either makes an election under IRC 501(h).
Even though the
IRC 501(c)(4) organization is affiliated with the two IRC 501(c)(3) organizations, it is not a
member of that affiliated group of organizations because it is not an eligible organization within
the meaning of Reg. 1.501(h)-2(b)(1). The rules regarding an affiliated group of organizations
are discussed immediately below.
ii.
The Affiliated Group
For purposes of the anti-abuse rules of
1.
What is an
affiliated group
of organizations?”
IRC 4911, Reg. 56.4911-7(e)(1) provides that an
affiliated group of organizations” consists of a
group of organizations that meet each of the
following conditions:
(A)
Each of the organizations is affiliated with every other member for at least thirty
days of the taxable year of the affiliated group (determined without regard to the
election provided for in Reg. 56.4911-7(e)(5));
(B)
Each of the organizations is eligible to elect the expenditure test; and
(C)
At least one of the organizations is an electing member organization.
Each organization in a group of organizations that satisfies the above requirements is a
member of the affiliated group of organizations for the taxable year of the affiliated group.
322
Lobbying Issues
Yes, an organization may have multiple
2.
May an organization be a
member of more than one
affiliated group?
affiliated group memberships.
That is, for any
taxable year of the organization, it may be a
member of two or more affiliated groups of
organizations. Reg. 56.4911-7(e)(2).
An electing member organization” is an
3.
What is an electing member
organization?”
organization to which the expenditure test election
applies on at least one day of the taxable year of
the affiliated group of which it is a member. For
these purposes, the election is not considered to
apply to the organization on any day before the
date on which it files the Form 5768 making the IRC 501(h) election, notwithstanding
Reg. 1.501(h)-2(a)). Reg. 56.4911-7(e)(4).
There are three different rules that can
4.
What is the taxable year of an
affiliated group?
apply here. The first rule is that if all members
of an affiliated group have the same taxable year,
that is the taxable year of the affiliated group.
The second rule applies when the members of an
affiliated group do not all have the same taxable
year.
In that case, the taxable year of the affiliated group is the calendar year.
Reg. 56.4911-7(e)(3).
A third rule applies when all the members elect to be covered by the
provisions of Reg. 56.4911-7(e)(5). Under Reg. 56.4911-7(e)(5), each member organization treats
its own taxable year as the taxable year of the affiliated group. The election may be made by
an electing member organization by attaching to its annual return a statement from itself and
every other member of the affiliated group that contains: the organization’s name, address, and
employer identification number; and its signed consent to the election. The election must be
made no later than the due date of the first annual return of any electing member for its taxable
year for which the member is liable for tax under IRC 4911(a), determined under
Reg. 56.4911-8(d). The election may not be made or revoked after the due date of the return
except upon such terms and conditions as the Commissioner may prescribe.
Yes, Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(4)(ii) provides that
5.
Is
there
an
exception
for
self-defense”?
the
self-defense”
exception
applies
to
a
communication by a member of an affiliated
group of organizations (within the meaning of
Reg. 56.4911-7(e)) that is an appearance before,
or communication with, a legislative body with
respect to a possible action by the body that might affect the existence of any other member of
the affiliated group, its powers and duties, its tax-exempt status, or the deductibility of
contributions to it.
Therefore, such communications will not be considered lobbying
communications.
323
Lobbying Issues
Yes,
for
purposes
of
the
member
6.
Is there a special membership
communication rule?
communication rules of Reg. 56.4911-5, a person
who is a member of an organization that is a
member of an affiliated group is treated as a
member of each organization in the affiliated
group. Reg. 56.4911-5(f)(3).
iii.
Excess Lobbying Expenditures
Under IRC 4911(f), an affiliated group of
1.
How is an affiliated group
treated for purposes of the
IRC 4911 tax?
organizations is treated as one organization for
purposes of the IRC 4911(a) tax.
Thus, the
affiliated group’s direct lobbying expenditures,
grass roots lobbying expenditures, and exempt
purpose expenditures are equal to the sum of such
expenditures paid or incurred during the taxable
year by each member of the affiliated group. Similarly, the lobbying and grass roots nontaxable
amounts for the affiliated group are determined under the rules of IRC 4911(c)(2) and
IRC 4911(c)(4) based on the sum of the group’s exempt purpose expenditures.
The group’s
lobbying and grass roots ceiling amounts are then calculated under the IRC 501(h) regulations.
Reg. 56.4911-8(b).
The tax under IRC 4911(a) is imposed on
2.
When is the IRC 4911 tax
imposed
on
an
affiliated
group?
an affiliated group if the group has excess
lobbying
expenditures.
Reg. 56.4911-8(c)
provides
that
the
affiliated
group’s
excess
lobbying expenditures for any taxable year are the
greater of the following amounts:
(A)
The amount by which the group’s lobbying expenditures exceed the group’s
lobbying nontaxable amount; or
(B)
The amount by which the group’s grass roots expenditures exceed the group’s
grass roots nontaxable amount.
Reg. 56.4911-8(d) provides three rules for
3.
What is the tax liability of an
electing member?
allocating the IRC 4911(a) tax between the
electing member organizations of an affiliated
group.
Each electing member organization is
liable for all or a portion of the tax, but no
member of the affiliated group that has not made
an IRC 501(h) election is liable for any portion of the tax with respect to the affiliated group,
even if they made direct or grass roots lobbying expenditures.
The first rule applies when the affiliated group’s excess lobbying expenditures equal the
amount determined under Reg. 56.4911-8(c)(1) and at least one electing member has made
324
Lobbying Issues
lobbying expenditures. Each electing member organization is liable for a portion of the tax equal
to the amount of the tax multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the electing member
organization’s lobbying expenditures paid or incurred during the taxable year of the affiliated
group, and the denominator of which is the sum of the lobbying expenditures of all electing
member organizations in the group paid or incurred during the taxable year of the affiliated
group. Reg. 56.4911-8(d)(2)
The second rule applies when the affiliated group’s excess lobbying expenditures equal
the amount determined under Reg. 56.4911-8(c)(2) and at least one electing member has made
grass roots expenditures. The same rule is applied as described above, except that grass roots
expenditures” is substituted for lobbying expenditures.” Reg. 56.4911-8(d)(3).
The third rule applies when the affiliated group has excess lobbying expenditures, but no
electing organization has made either lobbying or grass roots expenditures.
Each electing
member organization is liable for a portion of the tax equal to the amount of tax multiplied by
a fraction, the numerator of which is the electing member organization’s exempt purpose
expenditures and the denominator of which is the exempt purpose expenditures of all the electing
member organizations in the affiliated group. Reg. 56.4911-8(d)(4).
Pursuant
to
Reg. 56.4911-8(d)(5),
an
4.
When is an organization liable
for the tax?
electing member organization liable for the
IRC 4911 tax of an affiliated group is liable for
the tax as if the tax were imposed for its taxable
year with which or in which the taxable year of
the affiliated group ends.
When an organization is a member of two
5.
What if an organization is a
member of two groups having
excess lobbying expenditures?
or more affiliated groups and is liable for the
IRC 4911 tax during a taxable year for the excess
lobbying expenditures of more than one group,
then the organization is liable only for the greater
tax. Reg. 56.4911-8(d)(6).
An electing member organization that
6.
What
happens
when
a
member organization ceases to
be a member of a group?
ceases to be a member of an affiliated group of
organizations that had a taxable year different
from its own, must thereafter determine its
liability under Reg. 56.4911-1 for the IRC 4911
tax as if its taxable year were the taxable year of
the affiliated group of which it was formerly a
member. An organization to which this rule applies that is liable for the IRC 4911 tax is liable
as if the tax were imposed for its taxable year in which ends the taxable year of the affiliated
group of which it was formerly a member.
The Commissioner may, at the Commissioner’s
discretion, permit an organization to disregard this rule and to determine any liability under
IRC 4911(a) based upon its own taxable year. Reg. 56.4911-8(e).
325
Lobbying Issues
iv.
Application of IRC 501(h)
As with the calculation of IRC 4911 tax,
1.
When might affiliated group
members lose exempt status?
affiliated groups are treated as one entity for
purposes of determining whether members are
denied exemption as organizations described in
IRC 501(c)(3) pursuant to IRC 501(h). If, for a
taxable
year
of
an
affiliated
group,
it
is
determined that the sum of the affiliated group’s lobbying or grass roots expenditures for the
group’s base years exceeds 150 percent of the sum of the group’s nontaxable amounts for the
base years, then each member that was an electing member organization at any time in the
taxable year shall be denied tax exemption beginning with its first taxable year beginning after
the end of the taxable year of the affiliated group. Thereafter, exemption shall be denied unless
the organization reapplies and is recognized as exempt as an organization described in
IRC 501(c)(3). For purposes of this section, the term base years” generally means the taxable
year of the affiliated group for which a determination is made and the group’s three preceding
taxable years. Base years, however, do not include any year preceding the first year in which
at least one member of the group was treated as described in IRC 501(c)(3). Reg. 56.4911-9(b).
An organization that is a member of an
2.
W h a t
h a p p e n s
t o
a
nonelecting
member
of
an
affiliated group?
affiliated group of organizations but that is not an
electing member organization remains subject to
the
substantial
part
test”
described
in
IRC 501(c)(3)
with
respect
to
its
activities
involving
attempts
to
influence
legislation.
Reg. 56.4911-9(c).
The
filing
requirements
for
affiliated
3.
What
are
the
filing
requirements?
groups are set forth in Reg. 56.4911-9(c) and
apply to each member of the group for the
taxable year of the member in which ends the
taxable year of the affiliated group.
Each
member of the group must provide to every other
member, before the first day of the second month following the close of the affiliated group’s
taxable year, its name, identification number, and the information required under the reporting
rules of Reg. 1.6033-2(a)(2)(ii)(k) for its expenditures during the group’s taxable year and for
prior taxable years of the group that are base years.
For groups that elect under
Reg. 56.4911-7(e)(5) to have each member file information with respect to the group based on
its taxable year, each member shall provide the above information, treating each taxable year of
any member of the group as a taxable year for the group. In addition to the information required
by the reporting rules of Reg. 1.6033-2(a)(2)(ii)(k), each member of the group must provide on
its
annual
information
return
the
group’s
taxable
year
and,
if
the
election
under
Reg. 56.4911-7(e)(5) is made, the name, identification number, and taxable year identifying the
return with which its consent to the election was filed.
Furthermore, in addition to the
326
Lobbying Issues
information required above, each electing member organization must provide the following on
its annual return:
(A)
The name and identification number of each member of the group, and
(B)
The calculation of the group’s excess lobbying expenditures if the
organization is liable for all or any portion of the IRC 4911 tax.
Reg. 56.4911-9(e) provides an example
4.
How are these rules applied?
illustrating the application of IRC 501(h) to an
affiliated group of organizations, M, N, and O.
M and O filed IRC 501(h) elections in 1979 and
have not revoked them.
N did not make an
IRC 501(h) election. M’s taxable year ends November 30, N’s taxable year ends January 31, and
O’s taxable year ends June 30. Since the organizations have different taxable years, the calendar
year is the taxable year of the group. The following tables summarize the group’s expenditures
for the calendar years indicated.
(None of the lobbying expenditures were for grass roots
lobbying.)
Table I.
Group’s Expenditures
Year
Exempt purpose
expenditures (EPE)
Calculation
Lobbying nontaxable
amount (LNTA)
Lobbying
expenditures (LE)
1979
$400,000
(20% of $400,000 =)
$80,000
$100,000
1980
300,000
(20% of $300,000 =)
60,000
100,000
1981
600,000
(20% of $500,000 +
15% of $100,000 =)
115,000
120,000
1982
500,000
(20% of $500,000 =)
100,000
220,000
Total
1,800,000
355,000
540,000
Table II.
Expenditures of M and O
Year
Exempt purpose
expenditures
Lobbying nontaxable
amount
Lobbying expenditures
M plus O
M
O
M
O
M
O
1979
125,000
100,000
25,000
20,000
60,000
20,000
80,000
1980
100,000
50,000
20,000
10,000
40,000
40,000
80,000
1981
250,000
100,000
50,000
20,000
60,000
40,000
100,000
1982
200,000
100,000
40,000
20,000
160,000
40,000
200,000
The affiliated group had excess lobbying expenditures in each of the years shown and M
and O are liable for the IRC 4911 tax. The tax is allocated between M and O based on the ratio
of their lobbying expenditures for the year to the total lobbying expenditures the two of them
incurred. N is not liable for any tax under IRC 4911. For 1979, the tax due is $5,000 (25% of
$20,000). M is liable for $3,750 and O is liable for $1,250. For 1980, the tax is $10,000 and
each owe $5,000. For 1981, M is liable for $750 and O is liable for $500. For 1982, M is liable
327
Lobbying Issues
for $24,000 and O is liable for $6,000. In 1982, the sum of group’s lobbying expenditures for
the base years (1979 through 1982) exceeded 150 percent of the sum of the group’s lobbying
nontaxable amounts for those years ($532,500). Therefore, M and O are denied exemption as
IRC 501(c)(3) organizations for their taxable years beginning in 1983 (beginning December 1,
1983 for M and July 1, 1983 for O). Whether N’s lobbying expenditures disqualify it for tax
exemption at any time after January 1, 1979, is determined under the substantial part test of
IRC 501(c)(3).
v.
Limited Affiliated Groups
IRC 4911(f)(4) provides for an exception
1.
What is a limited affiliated
group of organizations?
to the general rules applicable to affiliated groups
for
certain
limited
affiliated
groups
of
organizations. Reg. 56.4911-10(b) provides that
a limited affiliated group of organizations consists
of two or more organizations that meet each of
the following requirements:
(A)
Each organization is a member of an affiliated group of organizations;
(B)
No two members of the affiliated group are affiliated by reason of interlocking
governing boards;48 and
(C)
No member of the affiliated group is, under its governing instrument, bound by
decisions of one or more of the other such members on legislative issues other
than national legislative issues.
Each organization in an affiliated group of organizations that satisfies all three of these
requirements is a member of the limited affiliated group. However, if any of these requirements
are not met, the organizations will not be a limited affiliated group. Even if some organizations
within the group would meet all three requirements, those organizations would not constitute a
limited affiliated group if any organization within the group did not meet all three requirements.
Reg. 56.4911-10(h), Example (6), illustrates this rule.
Reg. 56.4911-10(g) provides that the term
2.
What is a national legislative
issue?”
national legislative issue” means legislation,
limited to action by the Congress of the United
States or by the public in any national procedure.
If an issue is both national and local, it is
characterized as a national legislative issue if the
contemplated legislation is Congressional legislation.
48 See Reg. 56.4911-10(h), Example (5).
328
Lobbying Issues
Reg. 56.4911-10(h), Examples (1) and (2) illustrate
national legislative issues.”
In
Example (1), a state has an income tax law that uses definitions contained in the Code as it may
be amended from time to time. Legislation to change a definition in the Code is pending in
Congress. This is a national legislative issue even though Congressional action may affect state
law. However, in Example (2), an organization takes a position favoring approval by Congress
of a proposed amendment to the United States Constitution. This is a national legislative issue.
After approval by Congress and submission to the states for ratification, the proposed amendment
ceases to be a national legislative issue.
Reg. 56.4911-10(c)
provides
that
a
3.
What is
controlling member
organization” and controlled
member organization?”
member of a limited affiliated group is a
controlling member organization” if it controls
one or more of the other members of the group.
A member is a controlled member organization”
if it is controlled by one or more of the other
members of the group. Whether an organization
controls a second organization shall be determined by whether the second organization is bound,
under its governing instruments, by actions taken by the first organization on national legislative
issues.
Expenditures for a controlling member
4.
How
are
expenditures
determined for
controlling”
and controlled” members?
organization that has made an election under
IRC 501(h) are determined in accordance with the
rules set forth in Reg. 56.4911-10(d), even if the
organization
is
also
a
controlled
member
organization.
In
determining
a
controlling
member
organization’s
expenditures,
no
expenditure shall be counted twice. The direct lobbying expenditures of a controlling member
organization that has made the IRC 501(h) election include the direct lobbying expenditures paid
or incurred with respect to national legislative issues during the taxable year by each organization
that is a member of the limited affiliated group and is controlled by the controlling member
organization.
Similarly, the grass roots lobbying expenditures of the controlling member
organization include the grass roots lobbying expenditures of the controlled member
organizations. However, the controlling member organization’s exempt purpose expenditures do
not include the exempt purpose expenditures (other than lobbying expenditures with respect to
national legislative issues) of any organization that is a controlled member organization with
respect to it.
A controlled member organization that has made an IRC 501(h) election but does not
control any organization in the limited affiliated group determines its lobbying expenditures based
on its own expenditures without regarding the expenditures of any other member of the limited
affiliated group. Reg. 56.4911-10(e).
Reg. 56.4911-10(h), Example (3), illustrates these rules regarding determination of
expenditures. The example concerns three organizations that constitute a limited affiliated group,
all of whom have made the IRC 501(h) election. One of the controlled organizations engages
329
Lobbying Issues
in direct lobbying on a national legislative issue. This cost is included in the direct lobbying and
the exempt purpose expenditures of both the controlling and that controlled organization, but will
not be included in the lobbying or exempt purpose expenditures of the other controlled
organization. The controlling organization also engages in direct lobbying on the same issue, but
the cost of hiring the lobbyist is includible only in the controlling organization’s lobbying
expenditures. Any lobbying expenditures incurred by either controlled organization on any issue
that is not a national legislative issue will not be included in the controlling organization’s
lobbying or exempt purpose expenditures.
In addition to the information required by
5.
What information
must be
reported
by
a
controlling
member organization?
Reg. 1.6033-2(a)(2)(ii)(k),
each
controlling
member organization that has made an election
under IRC 501(h) must provide on its annual
return the name and identification number of each
member
of
the
limited
affiliated
group.
Reg. 56.4911-10(f)(1).
Furthermore,
each
controlling member organization that has made the IRC 501(h) election must notify each member
that it controls of its taxable year in order for the controlled organization to prepare the report
required by Reg. 56.4911-10(f)(3).49 Such notification must be made before the beginning of
the second month after the close of each taxable year of the controlling member for which the
election is in effect. Reg. 56.4911-10(f)(2).
Yes, Reg. 56.4911-2(c)(4)(iv) provides that
6.
Is
there
a
self-defense”
exception?
the
self-defense”
exception
applies
to
a
communication by an electing public charity that
is a member of a limited affiliated group if it is
an appearance before, or communication with, the
Congress of the United States with respect to a
possible action by the Congress that might affect the existence of any member of the limited
affiliated group, its powers and duties, tax-exempt status, or the deductibility of contributions to
it.
Yes, Reg. 56.4911-5(f)(4) provides that a
7.
Is
there
a
membership
communication rule?
member of an organization that is a member of a
limited affiliated group are treated as members of
each organization in the limited affiliated group,
but only with respect to national legislative
issues.
49 Reg. 56.4911-10(f)(3) requires every controlled member organization (whether or not the expenditure test
election is in effect with respect to it) to provide to each member of the limited affiliated group that controls it,
before the first day of the second month following the close of the taxable year of each such controlling organization,
its name, identification number, and both the lobbying expenditures and grass roots expenditures on national
legislative issues incurred by the controlled member organization.
330
Lobbying Issues
4.
Lobbying Activities of IRC 501(c)(3) Private Foundations
A.
Legislative and Regulatory History
In the Tax Reform Act of 1969, Congress created the distinction between private
foundations and public charities and imposed a number of excise taxes on certain activities of
private foundations.
One of these provisions is an excise tax on the taxable expenditures of
private foundations and on foundation managers who agree to the making of the taxable
expenditure. IRC 4945. A taxable expenditure includes any amount paid or incurred by a private
foundation to carry on propaganda, or otherwise to attempt, to influence legislation, as well as
certain political campaign expenditures and grants to individuals and organizations. IRC 4945(d).
Taxes on these types of private foundation expenditures did not seem likely when the House
Committee on Ways and Means began its hearings on private foundation activities since the
Chairman’s press release, which outlined the hearings’ agenda, made no mention of this kind of
activity. Tax Reform 1969: Hearings Before the House Comm. on Ways and Means, 91st Cong.,
1st Sess. 3-11 (1969) (press release of Chairman Wilbur D. Mills). However, testimony given
almost at the outset of the hearings raised the specter of private foundation involvement in the
political process generally (although nothing specific was alleged about the lobbying activities
of private foundations), as well as raising concerns about various grants made to individuals by
private foundations. For example, the President of the Ford Foundation became embroiled in a
lengthy and often acrimonious discussion with various Committee members over both the
Foundation’s granting Travel & Study Awards” to members of Senator Robert Kennedy’s staff
following his assassination and its involvement in political campaign activities including an
extremely controversial school decentralization experiment in Brooklyn that included an election
and the Foundation’s financing of voter registration drives in Cleveland before the election of
Mayor Carl B. Stokes.50
Id. at 354-431 (statement and testimony of Mr. McGeorge Bundy).
To a considerable extent, those incidents seem to have impelled enactment of IRC 4945(d).
The Staff of the Joint Committee on Internal Revenue Taxation, in its General Explanation
of the Tax Reform Act of 1969, 48 (1969), explained the reasons for enactment of IRC 4945, and
for the inclusion of lobbying activity as a taxable expenditure, as follows:
The Congress concluded that more effective limitations must be
placed on the extent to which tax-deductible and tax-exempt funds
can be dispensed by private persons and that these limitations must
involve more effective sanctions.
Accordingly, the Congress
determined that a tax should be imposed upon expenditures by
private foundations for activities that should not be carried on by
exempt organizations (such as lobbying, electioneering and grass
roots” campaigning).
The Congress also believes that granting
50 Although no activities that would be characterized as lobbying for IRC 501(c)(3) purposes were discussed
during Mr. Bundy’s testimony, there was some concern expressed regarding influencing members of Congress
through payment of their travel and other expenses, such as when the Ford Foundation made a grant to sponsor a
Japanese-American Assembly in Japan attended by several members of Congress.
331
Lobbying Issues
foundations should take substantial responsibility for the proper
use of funds that they give away.
In general, the Congress’ decisions reflect the concept that private
foundations are stewards of public trusts and their assets are no
longer in the same status as assets of individuals who may dispose
of their own money in any lawful way they see fit.
Regulations implementing the provisions of IRC 4945(d)(1) were proposed in 1971 (36
FR 5357 (Mar. 20, 1971)) and adopted the next year. T.D. 7215, 37 FR 23161 (Oct. 31, 1972).
The regulations were amended by T.D. 8308, 55 FR 35579 (Aug. 31, 1990).
However, even though private foundations are subject to tax on their lobbying
expenditures, they remain subject to the no substantial part” test for determining whether they
retain their exempt status. Staff of the Joint Committee on Internal Revenue Taxation, General
Explanation of the Tax Reform Act of 1969, 49 n. 21 (1969).
B.
Specific Issues
Pursuant to IRC 4945(d)(1), any amount
1.
What is the tax on lobbying
by private foundations?
paid or incurred by a private foundation to carry
on propaganda, or otherwise to attempt, to
influence legislation is a taxable expenditure.
IRC 4945 imposes on the private foundation an
initial tax equal to 10 percent of the taxable
expenditure and an additional 100 percent tax on taxable expenditures that are not corrected
within the taxable period.
In addition, an initial tax equal to 2½ percent of the taxable
expenditure is imposed on foundation managers who knowingly agreed to the making of the
taxable expenditure.
Any foundation managers who refuse to agree to all or part of the
correction are subject to a tax equal to 50 percent of the taxable expenditure.
Generally, the rules for determining what
2.
What is attempt to influence
legislation” under IRC 4945?
is an attempt to influence legislation for purposes
of IRC 4945 are the same rules as for electing
public charities, as are the exceptions.
Where
there are different, or additional, rules for private
foundations, these are noted below.
No, Reg. 56.4911-5, which provides rules
3.
Is
there
a
membership
communication rule?
for electing public charities’ communications with
their
members,
does
not
apply
to
private
foundations.
Consequently, whether a private
foundation’s communications with its members
(assuming
it
has
any)
are
lobbying
communications is determined solely under the general rules enunciated under Reg. 56.4911-2.
However, where a private foundation makes a grant to an electing public charity, the membership
332
Lobbying Issues
rules apply to the electing public charity’s communications with its own members. Therefore,
in the limited context of determining whether a private foundation’s grant to an electing public
charity is a taxable expenditure, the membership rules apply.
For example, a grant is not a
taxable expenditure when it is specifically earmarked for a communication from an electing
public charity to its members that is a not considered lobbying because of the membership rules.
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(2).
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(2)
provides
that
a
4.
What are the rules relating to
jointly funded projects?
private foundation will not be treated as having
made a taxable expenditure merely because it
makes a grant conditional upon the recipient
obtaining a matching support appropriation from
a governmental body.
Furthermore, a private
foundation will not be treated as making taxable expenditures for carrying on discussions with
officials of governmental bodies that meet the following requirements:
(A)
The subject of the discussions is a program that is or may be jointly
funded by the foundation and the government;
(B)
The discussions are undertaken for the purpose of exchanging data and
information on the program’s subject matter; and
(C)
The discussions are not undertaken in order to make any direct attempt to
persuade governmental officials to take particular positions on specific
legislative issues other than the program.
Private
foundations
often
make
5.
Is lobbying by the recipient of
a program-related investment
attributed to the foundation?
program-related
investments”
(investments
described in IRC 4944(c) and Reg. 53.4944-3).
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(4) provides that any amount
paid or incurred by program-related investment
recipients in connection with an appearance
before, or communication with, any legislative
body with respect to legislation or proposed legislation of direct interest to the recipient shall not
be attributed to the investing foundation, if the following conditions are met:
(A)
The foundation does not earmark its funds to be used for any activities that
constitute attempting to influence legislation; and
(B)
A business expense deduction under IRC 162 is allowable to the recipient for such
amount.51
51
Note, however, that IRC 162(e), as amended by OBRA 1993, now disallows most business expense
deductions for amounts paid or incurred in connection with influencing legislation.
333
Lobbying Issues
A general support grant by a private
6.
What is the rule for general
support grants?
foundation to a
public charity” (organizations
described in IRC 509(a)(1), IRC 509(a)(2), or
IRC 509(a)(3)) is not a taxable expenditure if the
grant is not earmarked to be used in an attempt to
influence legislation, regardless of whether the
public charity has made the IRC 501(h) election.
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(6)(i).
One example of
where this rule applies is when a public charity that has received a general support grant informs
the grantor foundation that, as an insubstantial portion of its activities, it attempts to influence
the State legislature with regard to changes in the mental health laws. The use of the grant is
not earmarked for the legislative activities of the public charity.
The grant is not a taxable
expenditure even if it is subsequently used by the public charity in its legislative activities.
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(7)(ii), Example (1).
A grant by a private foundation to fund a
7.
What is the rule for specific
project grants?
specific project of a public charity is not a taxable
expenditure, even if the public charity engages in
lobbying activities as part of the project, to the
extent that each of the following requirements are
met:
(A)
The grant is not earmarked to be used in an attempt to influence
legislation; and
(B)
The sum of all grants made by the private foundation for the same project
for the same year, does not exceed the amount budgeted, for the year of
the grant, by the grantee organization for activities of the project that are
not attempts to influence legislation.
For example, a private foundation makes a specific project grant of $150,000 to a public
charity.
In requesting the grant, the public charity stated that the total budgeted cost of the
project is $200,000, of which $20,000 is allocated to attempts to influence legislation related to
the project. The private foundation relied on the budget figures provided and had no reason to
doubt their accuracy or reliability. The private foundation does not earmark any of the funds
from the grant to be used for attempts to influence legislation, so the grant is not a taxable
expenditure under IRC 4945(d)(1) because the amount of the grant does not exceed the amount
allocated
to
specific
project
activities
that
are
not
attempts
to
influence
legislation.
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(7)(ii), Example (3). Even if the grant letter to the public charity provides that
the private foundation has the right to renegotiate the terms of the grant if there is a substantial
deviation from those terms, this additional fact would not make the grant a taxable expenditure.
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(7)(ii), Example (4). However, if the specific project grant is $200,000, rather
than $150,000, part of the grant would be a taxable expenditure under IRC 4945(d)(1) because
the amount of the grant exceeds by $20,000 the amount the public charity allocated to specific
project activities that are not attempts to influence legislation. Therefore, the private foundation
has made a taxable expenditure of $20,000. Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(7)(ii), Example (5).
334
Lobbying Issues
If the grant is for more than one year, the
8.
What
is
the
rule
for
multi-year
specific
project
grants?
rule applies to each year of the grant with the
amount of the grant measured by the amount
actually disbursed by the private foundation in
each year or divided equally between years, at the
option of the private foundation.
The same
method of measuring the annual amount must be
used in all years of a grant.
As with the rule for general support grants, this rule applies
regardless
of
whether
the
public
charity
has
made
the
IRC 501(h)
election.
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(6)(ii).52
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(7)(ii), Example (11), discusses a private foundation makes a specific
project grant of $300,000 to a public charity for a three-year specific project studying child care
problems. The private charity provides budget material indicating that the specific project will
expend $200,000 in each of three years, with lobbying expenditures of $10,000 in the first year,
$20,000 in the second year and $100,000 in the third year. The private foundation pays $200,000
in the first year, $50,000 in the second year and $50,000 in the third year. The amount actually
disbursed by the private foundation in the first year exceeds the nonlobbying expenditures of the
public charity in that year. However, because the amount of the grant in each of the three years,
when divided equally among the three years is not more than the nonlobbying expenditures of
the public charity on the specific project for any of the three years, none of the grant is treated
as a taxable expenditure.
A less happy scenario is set forth in Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(7)(ii), Example (13), where a
private foundation makes a $120,000 specific project grant to a public charity for a three-year
project. The private foundation intends to pay the grant in three equal annual installments. The
public charity provides budget material indicating that the specific project will expend $100,000
each year, of which the project’s lobbying expenditures will be $50,000 each year. After the
private foundation pays the first annual installment, but before it pays the second installment,
reliable information comes to its attention that the public charity has spent $90,000 of the
project’s $100,000 first-year budget on lobbying expenditures, causing the private foundation to
doubt the accuracy and reliability of the budget materials. The private foundation nevertheless
pays the second-year installment. In the project’s second year, the public charity once again
spends $90,000 on lobbying expenditures. Because the private foundation doubts or reasonably
should doubt the accuracy or reliability of the budget materials when it makes the second-year
grant payment, it may not rely upon the budget documents at that time. Accordingly, although
none of the first installment is a taxable expenditure, only $10,000 of the second-year grant
52 Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(6)(iii) provides that for purposes of determining the amount budgeted by a prospective
grantee for specific project activities that are not attempts to influence legislation, a private foundation may rely on
budget documents or other sufficient evidence supplied by the grantee organization (such as a signed statement by
an authorized officer, director or trustee of such grantee organization) showing the proposed budget of the specific
project, unless the private foundation doubts or, in light of all the facts and circumstances, reasonably should doubt
the accuracy or reliability of the documents.
335
Lobbying Issues
payment is not a taxable expenditure.
The remaining $30,000 of the second installment is a
taxable expenditure.
Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(7)(i) provides that a
9.
What happens if the grantee
public charity loses its exempt
status due to lobbying?
grant to a public charity that subsequently ceases
to be described in IRC 501(c)(3) due to its
attempts to influence legislation will not be
considered a taxable expenditure provided the
following conditions are met:
(A)
The grant meets the requirements of the rules relating to general support
grants and specific project grants;
(B)
The grantee had received a ruling or determination letter, or an advance
ruling or determination letter, that it a public charity;
(C)
Notice of a change in the grantee’s status has not been made to the public,
and the private foundation has not acquired knowledge that the Service has
given notice to the grantee of a change in status; and
(D)
The grantee is not controlled by the private foundation.53
5.
Lobbying and Tax-Exempt Organizations Not Described in IRC 501(c)(3)
Unlike IRC 501(c)(3) organizations, other
1.
What restrictions are imposed
on the amount of lobbying by
IRC 501(c) organizations?
organizations
described
in
IRC 501(c)
may
engage in an unlimited amount of lobbying,
provided that such lobbying is related to the
organization’s exempt purpose.
The Service
enunciated this principle in Rev. Rul. 61-177,
1961-2 C.B. 117, which holds that a corporation
that was organized and operated primarily for the purpose of promoting a common business
interest is exempt under IRC 501(c)(6) even though its sole activity is influencing legislation
germane to such common business interest. Rev. Rul. 61-177 notes that there is no requirement,
by statute or regulations, that a business league or chamber of commerce must refrain from
lobbying activities to qualify for exemption.
The rule set forth in Rev. Rul 61-177 applies to organizations described in the other
subparagraphs of IRC 501(c). Outside of IRC 501(c)(3), there is no explicit statutory restriction
on lobbying in IRC 501(c).
As far as the regulations are concerned, the only mention of
lobbying is positive. Reg. 1.501(c)(4)-1(a)(2)(ii) provides that a social welfare organization may
53 A grantee organization is controlled by a private foundation for this purpose if the private foundation and its
disqualified persons (as defined in IRC 4946(a)(1)), by aggregating their votes or positions of authority, can cause
or prevent action on legislative issues by the grantee. Reg. 53.4945-2(a)(7)(i)(D).
336
Lobbying Issues
qualify under IRC 501(c)(4) even though its activities are described in the action organization”
regulations, provided that it otherwise meets the IRC 501(c)(4) qualification requirements. See
also, Rev. Rul. 67-6, 1967-1 C.B. 135; Rev. Rul. 67-293, 1967-2 C.B. 185; Rev. Rul. 68-656,
1968-2 C.B. 216; Rev. Rul. 71-530, 1970-2 C.B. 237; Rev. Rul. 76-81, 1976-1 C.B. 156; and
G.C.M. 31864 (Aug. 21, 1961). In determining whether lobbying is allowable under the other
subparagraphs of IRC 501(c), Slee lives.
The exempt status of an organization
2.
Why must lobbying be related
to the organization’s exempt
purposes?
under IRC 501(c) depends upon whether its
activities are consistent with the exempt purposes
described in the subparagraph of IRC 501(c)
under which it qualifies.
The requirements
imposed under the various subparagraphs of
IRC 501(c) differ extensively. For example, an
organization may continue to qualify for exemption under IRC 501(c)(4) so long as it is
primarily engaged in promoting in some way the common good and general welfare of the
people in the community. Reg. 1.501(c)(4)-2(i). Therefore, an IRC 501(c)(4) organization could
engage in a substantial amount of lobbying on other matters without affecting its exempt status.
At the other extreme are IRC 501(c)(2) title holding companies, which, under the terms of the
statute, are limited to
the exclusive purpose of holding title to property, collecting income
therefrom, and turning over the proceeds” to another exempt organization. Any lobbying by an
IRC 501(c)(2) organization, therefore, would defeat its exempt status, unless, perhaps, the purpose
of the lobbying was to preserve the exempt status of such title holders. (An unlikely possibility,
since the IRC 501(c)(2) exemption has remained undisturbed since its enactment in 1916.)
Yes, this is a rather common occurrence.
3.
May
an
IRC 501(c)(3)
organization have a related
IRC 501(c)(4)
lobbying
organization?
So long as the organizations are kept separate
(with appropriate record keeping and fair market
reimbursement for facilities and services), the
activities of an IRC 501(c)(4) organization will
not
jeopardize
the
related
IRC 501(c)(3)
organization’s exempt status.
The ability of an
IRC 501(c)(3) organization to establish a related
IRC 501(c)(4) lobbying organization was an important factor in the concurring opinion of Regan
v. Taxation with Representation of Washington, 461 U.S. 540 (1983), in which the Supreme
Court upheld the prohibition on substantial lobbying by IRC 501(c)(3) organizations. Taxation
with Representation of Washington was the successor to two other organizations, an
IRC 501(c)(3) organization and a related IRC 501(c)(4) organization, that applied for recognition
of exemption from federal income tax as an organization described in IRC 501(c)(3). It was
denied because it proposed to engage in substantial lobbying activity, although it would have
qualified as an IRC 501(c)(4) organization.
This structure does raise issues regarding whether the resources of the IRC 501(c)(3)
organization are used to subsidize lobbying activities of the IRC 501(c)(4) organization,
particularly in situations where the two organizations share staff, facilities or other expenses or
in which the two organizations conduct joint activities requiring an allocation of income and
337
Lobbying Issues
expenses. Any allocation of income or expenses between the two organizations must be carefully
reviewed to ensure that the allocation method is appropriate and that an arms’ length standard
is utilized. The determination of whether the method used is appropriate is based upon all the
facts and circumstances.
IRC 504(a) precludes an organization that
4.
May an organization that loses
IRC 501(c)(3) status due to
lobbying
qualify
as
an
IRC 501(c)(4) organization?
has lost its IRC 501(c)(3) status due to attempts
to influence legislation from qualifying as an
IRC 501(c)(4) organization.
In addition, an
organization prohibited from qualifying as an
IRC 501(c)(4) organization by IRC 504 may not
be treated as any IRC 501(c) organization, except
for IRC 501(c)(3). Reg. 1.504-1. Therefore, the
only route that an organization revoked for excessive lobbying may take to return to exempt
status is to reapply for recognition of exempt status under IRC 501(c)(3). The one exception to
this rule is for churches and church-related organizations that are ineligible to make an
IRC 501(h) election because they are described in IRC 501(h)(5) and Reg. 1.501(h)-2(b)(3).
IRC 504(c); Reg. 1.504-1.
IRC 504(b) authorized the Secretary of the
5.
May
an
IRC 501(c)(3)
organization that anticipates
loss of its status convert to an
IRC 501(c)(4) organization?
Treasury to prescribe regulations to prevent
avoidance of this rule, including avoidance by
transferring all or part of the assets of an
IRC 501(c)(3) organization to an organization that
is controlled by the same persons who control the
IRC 501(c)(3) organization.
These regulations
are set forth in Reg. 1.504-2.
In determining
whether an organization has attempted to avoid IRC 504 by transferring any of its assets, the
term transfer” includes any use by, or for the benefit of, the recipient, except transfers made
for adequate and full consideration.
Generally, a transfer that involves the following five
elements will cause loss of exemption to the recipient:
(A)
The transfer is from an IRC 501(c)(3) organization that is determined to
be an action” organization or is denied exemption by IRC 501(h);
(B)
At the time of the transfer or at any time during the recipient’s next ten taxable
years, the recipient is controlled (directly or indirectly) by the same persons who
control the transferor;54
54 For these purposes, the transferor will be presumed to control any organization with which it is affiliated
within the meaning of Reg. 56.4911-7(a) (or would be if both organizations were described in IRC 501(c)(3)), and
the recipient will be treated as controlled (directly or indirectly) by the same persons who control the transferor if
the recipient would be treated as controlled under the private foundation qualifying distribution rules
(Reg. 53.4942(a)-3(a)(3)) if the transferor were a private foundation. Reg. 1.504-2(f).
338
Lobbying Issues
(C)
The transfer is made (1) after the date that is 24 months before the earliest
of the effective date of the determination IRC 501(h) that the transferor is
not exempt, the effective date of the Commissioner’s determination that the
transferor is an
action” organization, or the date on which the
Commissioner proposes to treat it as no longer described in IRC 501(c)(3),
and (2) before the transferor again is recognized as an organization
described in IRC 501(c)(3);
(D)
The recipient is exempt from tax under IRC 501(a) but is neither an
organization described in IRC 501(c)(3), nor a qualified pension plan
described in IRC 401(a) to which the transferor contributes as an
employer; and
(E)
The amount of the transfer exceeds the lesser of 30 percent of the net fair
market value of the transferor’s assets or 50 percent of the net fair market
value of the recipient’s assets, computed immediately before the
transfer.55
Furthermore, even if the transferor and recipient are not commonly controlled, or the
amount of the transfer is less than the amount set forth in the fifth element above, or the recipient
is eligible to elect the expenditure test, the Commissioner may determine, based on all the facts
and circumstances, that the transfer was made to avoid IRC 504(a). In that case, the recipient
will cease to be exempt under IRC 501(a). One fact the Commissioner may consider is whether
the recipient engages, or has engaged, in attempts to influence legislation. The Commissioner
may also consider any factors enumerated in the special exception described below.
Reg. 1.504-2(c).
The Commissioner may determine, based
6.
Is there any exception to this
transfer rule?
on all the facts and circumstances, that a transfer
that does meet the five elements set forth above
was not made to avoid IRC 504 and the recipient
will not be denied exemption.
Reg. 1.504-2(e).
In making this determination, the Commissioner
may consider all relevant factors including the following:
(A)
Whether enforceable and effective conditions on the transfer preclude use
of any of the transferred assets for any purpose that, if it were a substantial
part of an organization’s activities, would be inconsistent with exemption
as an organization described in IRC 501(c)(3);
55 For these purposes, the amount of a transfer is the sum of the amounts transferred to any number of recipients
in any number of transfers, all of which are described in the previous four elements, and the time of the transfer is
the time of the first transfer so taken into account. Reg. 1.504-2(b)(6)(i). Furthermore, the amount of a transfer to
a recipient is the sum of the amounts transferred to the recipient in any number of transfers, all of which are
described in the previous four elements, and the time of the transfer is the time of the first transfer so taken into
account. Reg. 1.504-2(b)(6)(ii).
339
Lobbying Issues
(B)
In the absence of conditions described above, whether the transferred
assets are used exclusively for purposes that are consistent with the
transferor’s exemption as an organization described in IRC 501(c)(3);
(C)
Whether the assets transferred would be described in the private foundation
minimum investment return rules (Reg. 53.4942(a)-2(c)(3)) before and
after the transfer if both the transferor and recipient were private
foundations;
(D)
Whether the transfer would satisfy the private foundation termination rules
requiring
unencumbered
transfers
(Reg. 1.507-2(a)(7)
and
Reg. 1.507-2(a)(8)) if the transferor were a private foundation;
(E)
Whether all of the transferred assets have been expended during a period
when the recipient was not controlled (directly or indirectly) by the same
persons who controlled the transferor; and
(F)
Whether all of the transferred assets were transferred, before the close of
the recipient’s taxable year following the taxable year in which the
transferred assets were received, to one or more public charities described
in IRC 507(b)(1)(A) none of which are controlled by the same persons
who control either the original transferor or recipient.
Expenditures
to
support
or
oppose
7.
What is the tax status of a
ballot measure committee?
initiatives,
referenda,
etc.,
generally
are
considered to be lobbying expenditures rather
than political campaign activity. Consequently, a
ballot measure committee cannot qualify as an
IRC 501(c)(3) organization because it is an
action” organization. Furthermore, it cannot qualify as a political organization” under IRC 527
since a political organization’s exempt function” involves, in general, influencing or attempting
to influence the selection, nomination, election or appointment of an individual to a federal, state,
or local public office or office in a political organization. IRC 527(e)(2). Reg. 1.527-2(c)(1)
uses the term the selection process” to encapsulate what is contemplated by exempt function.”
Generally, expenditures to support or oppose a referendum or initiative measure are not for an
exempt function activity, since this activity generally does not further the purpose of influencing
or attempting to influence the selection process.56 However, a ballot measure committee may
qualify for exempt status under other subparagraphs of IRC 501(c), such as IRC 501(c)(4),
IRC 501(c)(5), or IRC 501(c)(6).
56 In addition to the statutory language ( individual”) and the regulatory language (the selection process”),
the legislative history treats ballot measure expenditures as outside the purview of exempt function activity. See S.
Rep. No. 93-1357, 93d Cong., 2d Sess. 27 (1974) reprinted in 1975-1 C.B. 517, 532, (stating, in discussing the
primary activities test, that a qualified organization could support the enactment or defeat of a ballot proposition,
as well as support or oppose a candidate, if the latter activity was not its primary activity”).
340
Lobbying Issues
6.
Lobbying and IRC 162(e)
A.
Legislative and Regulatory History
(1)
The Pre-Statutory Era
Like the restriction on lobbying by charities, the disallowance of a business expense
deduction for lobbying first appeared as a Treasury regulation. T.D. 2137, 17 Treas. Dec. 48,
57-58 (1915). The validity of the regulation was first addressed by the Supreme Court in Textile
Mills Security Corp. v. Commissioner, 314 U.S. 326 (1941). Textile Mills involved an attempt
to deduct expenses made on behalf of German textile interests to pass special legislation that
would enable the interests to recover property seized during World War I. The Court, without
any dissent, concluded that the regulation did not contravene any Congressional policy and
therefore upheld the denial of the deduction.57
The Supreme Court revisited the validity of the regulation almost two decades later, in
the companion cases of Cammarano v. United States, 358 U.S. 498 (1959), and F. Strauss & Son,
Inc. v. Commissioner, 358 U.S. 498 (1959). Both cases involved extensive grass roots lobbying
campaigns by liquor distributors against prohibition or state control of liquor distribution
proposals which would have destroyed the distributors’ businesses. Again, the Court upheld the
validity of the regulation, principally on the basis that the regulation had acquired the force of
law” because Congress had repeatedly reenacted the business expense deduction without rejecting
the regulation. Cammarano, at 508-509.
(2)
Allowance of the Lobbying Deduction
In 1962, Congress finally addressed the issue.
Over the objection of the Treasury
Department, it enacted IRC 162(e) as part of the Trade Expansion Act of 1962.58 IRC 162(e)(1)
specifically provided a deduction for direct lobbying expenses (including travel expenses, costs
of preparing testimony, and a portion of dues) paid in carrying on a trade or business if such
expenses are (1) in direct connection with appearances or communications involving legislation
or proposed legislation of direct interest to the taxpayer, or (2) in direct connection with
information communicated between the taxpayer and an organization of which it is a member as
to legislation or proposed legislation of direct interest to the taxpayer and the organization.
However, IRC 162(e)(2) provided that no deduction is allowed for any amount paid or incurred
(by contribution, gift, or otherwise) for participation or intervention in any political campaign or
57 It is difficult to imagine that there was any public dissent either, since the decision was handed down on
December 8, 1941, the day after the attack on Pearl Harbor.
58 Invoking the Slee principle, Secretary of the Treasury C. Douglas Dillon, in testimony before the Senate
Finance Committee, set forth the Treasury position as follows:
We are not against lobbying. We think lobbying is fine, the more of it the better,
because the representatives of the people know what the country wants. We are
only saying that the Government should not pay for it. Hearings on H.R. 10650
Before the Senate Comm. on Finance, 87th Cong., 2d Sess. 4,387 (1962).
341
Lobbying Issues
in connection with any attempt to influence the general public with respect to legislative matters,
elections, or referenda.
In explaining the reasons for the provisions, the House and Senate Reports stressed the
difficulties of separating lobbying costs from other business costs. Even more important, the
Reports stated, was the policy consideration that emanated from the anomalous” proposition that
permitted the deduction of expenses incurred from appearance with respect to executive or
judicial matters, but not legislative ones.59 H.R. Rep. No. 1447, 87th Cong., 2d Sess. 17 (1962),
reprinted in 1962-3 C.B. 405, 421; Sen. Rep. No. 1881, 87th Cong., 2d Sess. 22 (1962), reprinted
in 1962-3 C.B. 707, 728.
(3)
Disallowance of the Lobbying Deduction
In February 1993, the Treasury Department submitted a proposal to deny all business
deductions for lobbying expenses. Page 45 of the Summary of the Administration’s Revenue
Proposals states, in pertinent part, as follows:
Reasons for Change
The deduction for lobbying expenses inappropriately benefits
corporations and special interest groups for intervening in the
legislative process.60
Proposal
Businesses would no longer be allowed to deduct their lobbying
expenses. Lobbying expenditures for this purpose would be defined
similarly to the definition of expenditures to influence legislation
in section 4911(d) and would include attempts to influence
legislation through communications with the executive branch as
well as the legislative branch of government.
The current
restrictions on deductions for expenses of grassroots lobbying and
participation in political campaigns would remain.
These rules
would
prevent
charities
from
engaging
in
more
than
an
insubstantial amount of lobbying. No deduction would be allowed
for the part of membership dues that are used for lobbying, but as
under current law, trade associations and similar organizations
would not lose their exempt status for lobbying. Trade associations
and similar organizations would be required to report to their
members the portion of their dues used for lobbying activities.
59
As we have seen, however, this anomaly” persists for IRC 501(c)(3) organizations.
60 This position was spelled out, at much greater length, in the 1962 legislative history of IRC 162(e). See
Supplemental and Minority Views of Senators Paul Douglas and Albert Gore, 1962-3 C.B. 1092, 1116-1120.
342
Lobbying Issues
On May 4, 1993, House Ways and Means Chairman Rostenkowski introduced the
Administrations’s bill, H.R. 1960.
The Committee Report on the bill that emerged from the
House, H.R. 2264, stated a different reason for change:
The committee has determined that,
in the context of deficit reduction legislation, it is appropriate to limit the business deduction for
lobbying expense.”
H.R. Rep. No. 103-111, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. 659 (1993) reprinted in
1993-3 C.B. 235.
What finally resulted was § 13222 of OBRA 1993. It amended IRC 162(e) by replacing
the existing language with a new IRC 162(e) applicable to amounts paid or incurred after
December 31, 1993.61
The new IRC 162(e) disallows the deductibility of direct legislative
lobbying expenses at the Federal and state (but not the local) level. It also disallows deductions
for contacts with certain federal officials.
Grass roots lobbying and political campaign
expenditures continue to be nondeductible.
In addition, IRC 162(e)(3) includes pass-through
provisions affecting dues paid to exempt organizations, so organizations can not indirectly do
what is disallowed directly.
The regulations under IRC 162 have, since their adoption in 1965, provided for the
disallowance of dues paid to an organization to the extent the organization is engaged in an
activity prohibited under IRC 162(e). Reg. 1.162-20(c)(3). However, no mechanism existed at
the association level to ensure notification to members of the disallowance. Therefore, § 13222
of OBRA 1993 also amended IRC 6033, adding a new subsection to provide a system based on
the disallowance of dues that builds in an incentive (or penalty) to ensure that associations notify
their members. The trigger is contained in IRC 6033(e), which imposes reporting and notice
requirements on tax-exempt organizations incurring expenditures to which IRC 162(e) applies.
IRC 162(e)(3) denies a deduction for the dues (or other similar amounts) paid to certain
tax-exempt organizations to the extent that the organization, at the time the dues are assessed or
paid, notifies the dues payer that the dues are allocable to nondeductible lobbying and political
expenditures of the type described in IRC 162(e)(1).62
An exempt organization subject to IRC 6033(e) has several options. It may provide a
notice to its members when they pay dues that contains a reasonable estimate of the amount
allocable to lobbying expenditures. If it does not give notification, it must pay a proxy tax at the
highest rate imposed by IRC 11 (currently 35 percent) on its lobbying expenditures (up to the
amount of dues and other similar payments received by the organization) during the taxable year.
In addition, if the organization does provide notices to its members but underestimates the actual
amount of lobbying expenditures, it is subject to the proxy tax on the excess lobbying
expenditures paid during the applicable year that were not included in the notices. However, this
tax may be waived if the organization agrees to include the excess lobbying expenditures in the
following year’s notices.
61
A constitutional challenge to the provisions of § 13222 of OBRA 1993 was dismissed on jurisdictional
grounds. American Society of Association Executives v. Bentsen, 848 F. Supp. 245 (D.D.C. 1994).
62 Payments that are similar to dues include voluntary payments or special assessments used to conduct lobbying.
343
Lobbying Issues
This mechanism allows a membership organization to elect not to provide its members
with a disallowance notice in which case the organization will be required to pay the tax. If an
organization elects the proxy tax option, no portion of any dues or other payments made by
members of the organization will be deemed nondeductible as a result of the organization’s
lobbying activities.
(4)
History of Regulations and Administrative Pronouncements
Reg. 1.162-20, dealing with expenditures attributable to grass roots lobbying, political
campaigns, and certain advertising, was published in 1965 (T.D. 6819, 30 FR 5581 (Apr. 20,
1965)) and amended nearly four years later (T.D. 6996, 34 FR 835 (Jan. 18, 1969)). In general,
the regulation provides that if expenditures for lobbying purposes do not meet the requirements
of IRC 162(e)(1), such expenditures are not deductible as ordinary and necessary business
expenditures. Reg. 1.162-20(c)(1).63
As a result of the OBRA 1993 legislation, the Service published final regulations
providing allocation rules and rules concerning the definition of influencing legislation in 1995.
T.D 8602, 60 FR 37568 (July 21, 1995). These new regulations also provide that to the extent
the existing provisions of Reg. 1.162-20 are inconsistent with the new IRC 162, they are
superseded. Reg. 1.162-20(c)(5). At the same time, the Service published Rev. Proc. 95-35,
1995-2 C.B. 391, to provide procedures for organizations to determine whether they were
excepted from the reporting and notice requirements of IRC 6033(e) in accordance with
IRC 6033(e)(3).
B.
Specific Issues
(1)
Organizations Excepted from the Reporting and Notice Requirements
IRC 6033(e)(1)(B)(i) provides that the
1.
What
organizations
are
excepted from IRC 6033(e)?
IRC 6033(e) notice requirements do not apply to
IRC 501(c)(3)
organizations.
In
addition,
IRC 6033(e)(3)
provides
an
exception
for
organizations that establish to the satisfaction of
the Secretary that substantially all of the dues or
similar amounts received by the organization are not deducted by its members as business
expenses. Most IRC 501(c) organizations do not receive dues that are deducted by their members
as business expenses under IRC 162.
Therefore, the Service provides in Rev. Proc. 95-35,
§ 4.01, that, pursuant to IRC 6033(e)(3), the requirements of IRC 6033(e) shall not apply to
organizations recognized by the Service as exempt from taxation under IRC 501(a), other than
(1) IRC 501(c)(4) social welfare organizations that are not veterans organizations, (2) agricultural
and horticultural organizations described in IRC 501(c)(5), and (3) IRC 501(c)(6) organizations.
Organizations otherwise subject to IRC 6033(e) whose lobbying expenditures consist solely of
63 Proposed amendments to Reg. 1.162-20 were published in 1980 but have not been finalized. FR 78167 (Nov.
25, 1980).
344
Lobbying Issues
in-house expenditures that do not exceed $2000 in a taxable year are also excepted from these
requirements. IRC 6033(e)(1)(B)(ii).
IRC 501(c)(4) veterans’ organizations and
2.
Which
IRC 501(c)(4)
and
IRC 501(c)(5)
organizations
does Rev. Proc. 95-35 except?
IRC 501(c)(5) labor organizations are excepted by
the Service from the IRC 6033(e) requirements in
Rev. Proc. 95-35, § 4.01.
Other IRC 501(c)(4)
social welfare organizations and IRC 501(c)(5)
agricultural and horticultural organizations that
meet a safe harbor set forth in Rev. Proc. 95-35,
§ 4.02, also will be excepted from IRC 6033(e).
The safe harbor provides that these
organizations are not subject to IRC 6033(e) if more than 90 percent of their annual dues are
received from (1) members paying annual dues of $50 or less,64 (2) IRC 501(c)(3) organizations,
(3) state or local governments, (4) entities whose income is exempt from tax under IRC 115, or
(5) organizations excepted by § 4.01 of Rev. Proc. 95-35 as noted above. Organizations that do
not meet the safe harbor may establish that they satisfy the requirements of IRC 6033(e)(3) by
maintaining records establishing that at least 90 percent of the annual dues received by the
organization are not deductible by its members (without regard to IRC 162(e)) and notifying the
Service on its Form 990, Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax, that it is described
in IRC 6033(e)(3).65 Rev. Proc. 95-35, § 5.06.
Generally, IRC 501(c)(6) organizations are
3.
What organizations described
in IRC 501(c)(6) are excepted
by Rev. Proc. 95-35?
subject
to
the
IRC 6033(e)
requirements.
However, Rev. Proc. 95-35, § 4.03, provides an
exception for IRC 501(c)(6) organizations if over
90 percent of their annual dues are received from
(1) IRC 501(c)(3) organizations, (2) state or local
governments, (3) entities whose income is exempt
from tax under IRC 115, or (4) organizations excepted by § 4.01 of Rev. Proc. 95-35 4.01, as
noted above. IRC 501(c)(6) organizations that do not meet this test may also establish that they
satisfy the requirements of IRC 6033(e)(3) by maintaining records establishing that at least 90
percent of the annual dues received by the organization are not deductible by its members
(without regard to IRC 162(e)) in the same manner as IRC 501(c)(4) and IRC 501(c)(5)
organizations and notifying the Service on its Form 990 that it is described in IRC 6033(e)(3).66
Rev. Proc. 95-35, § 5.06.
64 The $50 amount will be increased for years after 1995 by a cost-of-living adjustment under IRC 1(f)(3),
rounded to the next highest dollar. Rev. Proc. 95-35, § 5.05.
65 The organization may also request a private letter ruling to this effect in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Rev. Proc. 96-4, 1996-1 I.R.B. 94. If an organization receives a favorable private letter ruling, the Service
will not contest its entitlement to exemption under IRC 6033(e)(3) for a subsequent year so long as the character
of its membership is substantially similar to its membership at the time of the ruling.
66 IRC 501(c)(6) organizations may also request a private letter ruling as discussed above.
345
Lobbying Issues
The term annual dues” means the amount
4.
What are
annual dues” and
similar amounts?”
an organization requires a person to pay to be
recognized by the organization as a member for
an annual period.
Similar amounts” includes,
but is not limited to, voluntary payments made by
persons, assessments made by the organization to
cover basic operating costs, and special assessments imposed by the organization to conduct
lobbying activities. Rev. Proc. 95-35, § 5.01.
Member” is used in its broadest sense and is not
limited to persons with voting rights in the organization. Rev. Proc. 95-35, § 5.02. If payment
for a
membership” is intended to provide more than one person with recognition by the
organization as a member for an annual period, annual dues is the full amount of payment request
for that category of membership.
Rev.
Proc.
95-35
provides
a
special
5.
How does Rev. Proc. 95-35
treat affiliated organizations?
aggregation rule that treats affiliated organizations
(e.g., a national trade association that has state
and local chapters) as a single organization for
purposes of IRC 6033(e). The rule provides that
if more than one organization described in
IRC 501(c)(4), IRC 501(c)(5), or IRC 501(c)(6) share a name, charter, historic affiliation, or
similar characteristics, and coordinate their activities, organizations in the affiliate structure are
treated as a single organization. In applying the tests set forth in the safe harbor, only dues paid
by the ultimate members,” whether paid to one level, which then remits the amounts to other
levels in the structure, or paid separately to each level. Amounts paid by one organizational level
to another are not considered, even if they are characterized as dues.” If the organization as
a whole meets the requirements of IRC 6033(e)(3), (e.g., more than 90 percent of the dues are
received from persons paying $50 or less) all organizations in the affiliated structure meet the
requirements.67 Rev. Proc. 95-35, § 5.03.
Rev. Proc. 95-35, § 5.04, provides an example applying the affiliation rule. A group of
national, state, and local IRC 501(c)(4) organizations share a common name and work jointly to
promote their purpose. Individuals or families pay annual dues of $40 to the local organizations,
entitling them to membership in the national and state organizations. The local organizations
remit a portion of the dues to the state and national organizations. These remittances by the local
organizations exceed $50. The total amount received by all local organizations is $950x. In
addition, corporations pay dues of $500 to and become members of the national organization.
The total amount received from these members is $50x. Since the $950x exceeds 90 percent of
the $1000x received from all members, all of the national, state, and local organizations meet the
requirements of IRC 6033(e)(3). The transfers from the local organization are not considered in
this determination.
67 If organizations within the affiliated structure are on different taxable years, the organizations may base their
calculations of annual dues received on any single reasonable taxable year.
346
Lobbying Issues
(2)
Definitional Issues Regarding Lobbying
IRC 162(e)(4)(A)
defines
influencing
1.
What
is
the
meaning
of
influencing legislation?”
legislation” as
any attempt to influence any
legislation
through
communication
with
any
member or employee of a legislative body, or
with any government official or employee who
may participate in the formulation of legislation.”
This definition is essentially identical (as it relates to direct, as opposed to grass roots, lobbying)
to IRC 4911, as discussed above in Part 3.
Reg. 1.162-29(b)(1) provides that
influencing legislation” involves the following
activities:
(A)
Any
attempt
to
influence
any
legislation
through
a
lobbying
communication; and
(B)
All activities, such as research, preparation, planning and coordination,
including deciding whether to make a lobbying communication, engaged
in for a purpose of making or supporting a lobbying communication.
Reg. 1.162-29(b)(2) provides that an
attempt to influence any legislation through a
lobbying communication” is the act of making the lobbying communication, regardless of
whether the attempt is successful.
Pursuant
to
Reg. 1.162-29(b)(3),
a
2.
What
is
a
lobbying
communication?”
lobbying communication” is a communication
(other than any communication compelled by
subpoena, or otherwise compelled by federal or
state law)68 with any member or employee of a
legislative body or any other government official
or employee who may participate in the formulation of the legislation that does either of the
following:
(A)
The communication refers to specific legislation and reflects a view on that
legislation; or
(B)
The communication clarifies, amplifies, modifies, or provides support for
views reflected in a prior lobbying communication.
68 The subpoena exception” follows the Conference Report (H.R. Rep. No. 103-213, 103d Cong., 1st Sess.
607 (1993), reprinted in 1993-3 C.B. 485), which states that
any communication compelled by subpoena, or
otherwise compelled by Federal or State law, does not constitute an attempt to influence' legislation or an official’s
action and, therefore, is not subject to the general disallowance rule.”
347
Lobbying Issues
The phrase reflects a view” is of critical importance. After it appeared in the proposed
regulations, several commentators suggested it should be defined to mean an explicit statement
of support or opposition to the legislation. Some commentators also suggested that presenting
a balanced analysis of the merits and defects of specific legislation should not constitute
reflecting a view on legislation.
However, neither recommendation was adopted in the final
regulations. T.D. 8602, 60 FR 37568 (July 21, 1995).
Therefore, an organization can reflect a view on legislation without specifically stating
it supports or opposes that legislation.
Reg. 1.162-29(b)(7), Example 8, illustrates this with
regard to an organization that writes a letter to a United States Senator discussing how a certain
pesticide has benefited citrus fruit growers and disputing problems linked to its use. The letter
discusses a bill pending in Congress and states in part:
This bill would prohibit the use of pesticide O. If citrus growers
are unable to use this pesticide, their crop yields will be severely
reduced, leading to higher prices for consumers and lower profits,
even bankruptcy, for growers.
Despite the fact that the organization does not explicitly state that it opposes the bill, its views
on the bill are reflected in the statement. Thus, the communication is a lobbying communication,
and the organization is attempting to influence legislation.
No. A significant difference between the
3.
Do
the
exceptions
under
IRC 4911(d)(2)
apply
for
purposes of IRC 162(e)?
two statutes is that while IRC 4911(d) contains
specific exceptions to the term
influencing
legislation,” IRC 162(e) does not. An example of
this difference is the
self defense” exception
under IRC 4911(d)(2)(C).
IRC 162(e) contains
no counterpart, and the legislative history strongly
suggests that no exception is to be inferred. Statements in footnote 49 of the Conference Report
(H.R. Rep. No. 103-213, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. 597 (1993), reprinted in 1993-3 C.B. 475), H.R.
Rep. No. 1447 (87th Cong., 2d Sess. 16-18 (1962), reprinted in 1962-3 C.B. 405, 420-422) and
S. Rep. No. 1881 (87th Cong., 2d Sess. 21-24 (1962), reprinted in 1962-3 C.B. 707, 727-730)
indicate that the holding of Cammarano v. United States, 358 U.S. 498 (1959) (upholding the
validity of regulations denying a deduction for lobbying even when the expenses related to
proposed legislation that affected the survival of the taxpayer’s business) remains good law unless
specifically contradicted by statute.
Similarly, IRC 162(e) draws no distinction between
influencing legislation and educating legislators, unlike the IRC 4911(d)(2) exceptions for making
available the results of nonpartisan analysis, study, or research and for providing technical advice
or assistance to a governmental body. See also, H.R. Rep. No. 103-213, 103d Cong., 1st Sess.
607 (1993), reprinted in 1993-3 C.B. 485, where the Conference Report notes that exceptions
contained in previous versions of the bill were not included in conference agreement. Therefore,
IRC 162(e) disallows a deduction for some activities that would not be considered
direct
lobbying” under IRC 4911. Accordingly, Reg. 1.162-29(a) specifically provides that the rules
enunciated in the regulation have no bearing on IRC 4911 or IRC 4945.
348
Lobbying Issues
IRC 162(e) disallows the deduction for
4.
What is legislation?”
amounts
spent
or
incurred
to
influence
legislation” considered by a legislative body.”
IRC 162(e)(4)(B) provides that, for this purpose,
legislation” has the same meaning as under
IRC 4911(e)(2) (discussed in Part 2).
Consequently, Reg. 1.162-29(b)(4) provides that
legislation” includes any action on Acts, bills, resolutions and similar items by a legislative
body.”
Legislation” includes a proposed treaty required to be submitted by the President to the
Senate for and consent from the time the President’s representative begins to negotiate a position
with the prospective parties to the treaty.
Under
Reg. 1.162-29(b)(5),
the
term
5.
What is specific legislation?”
specific legislation” is not limited to acts, bills,
etc., that have been formally introduced before a
legislative body.
Therefore, specific legislative
proposals are included as
specific legislation”
even if never introduced. Accordingly, reference to a bill enacted in another state constitutes
reference to specific legislation” despite the fact that a similar bill has not been proposed in the
state in question. Reg. 1.162-29(b)(7), Example 7. However, merely identifying a problem and
indicating that a legislative body should do something about the problem without specifying what
the legislative body should do will not constitute a specific legislative proposal. For example,
an organization provides to legislators a paper that it has prepared stating that the lack of new
capital is hurting the economy. If the organization merely indicates that increased savings and
local investment will assist the economy and includes a cover letter stating,
You must take
action to improve the availability of new capital,” the organization has not referred to a specific
legislative proposal. Reg. 1.162-29(b)(7), Example 5. However, if the organization indicates that
lowering the capital gains rate would increase the availability of new capital and includes a cover
letter stating, I urge you to support a reduction in the capital gains tax rate,” then it has referred
to a specific legislative proposal. Reg. 1.162-29(b)(7), Example 6.
The term legislative bodies” is defined in
6.
What are legislative bodies?”
Reg. 1.162-29(b)(6). The term includes Congress,
state legislatures, and other similar governing
bodies.
However, local councils and similar
governing bodies are not legislative bodies” for
purposes of IRC 162(e). Executive, judicial, and administrative bodies are also not included.
Administrative bodies includes school boards, housing authorities, sewer and water districts,
zoning boards, and other similar federal, state, or local special purpose bodies, whether elective
or appointive.
Thus, communications with the administrative agency charged with writing regulations
implementing a statute regarding recommendations concerning those regulations are not
considered lobbying communications because the regulations are not legislation considered by
a legislative body.” Reg. 1.162-29(b)(7), Example 3. Furthermore, testifying at a congressional
oversight hearing concerning proposed regulations to implement a particular statutory enactment
will not constitute a lobbying communication since the issue is the administrative action and not
349
Lobbying Issues
specific legislation considered by a legislative body,” even though the hearings are before a
legislative body.” Reg. 1.162-29(b)(7), Example 2.
As noted above, IRC 162(e)(2) provides
7.
What is the exception for local
councils and similar bodies?
an exception to the general disallowance rule for
certain lobbying expenditures related to local
councils
and
similar
governing
bodies.
IRC 162(e)(2) provides that two types of lobbying
expenses are deductible. One is the ordinary and
necessary expenses (including travel and preparation of testimony) in connection with
appearances before, making statements to, or sending communications to the committees or
individual members of a local council. The other is the expenses of communication with an
organization of which the taxpayer is a member about local legislation or proposed legislation
of direct interest to the taxpayer or the organization. The portion of the dues that are paid to an
organization that are attributable to either of these activities is also not subject to the
disallowance rule. However, grass roots lobbying on local government legislative actions is not
covered by the exception.
The legislative history indicates that the term
local councils or
similar governing bodies” includes any legislative body of a political subdivision of a state, such
as a county or city council. H.R. Rep. No. 103-213, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. 605 (1993), reprinted
in 1993-3 C.B. 483. For purposes of the IRC 162 lobbying rules, Indian tribal governments are
treated as local councils or similar governing bodies.” IRC 162(e)(7).
IRC 162(e)(1)(D) disallows a deduction
8.
What is a
covered executive
branch official?”
for expenditures for any
direct communication
with a covered executive branch official in an
attempt to influence the official actions or
positions
of
[the]
official.”
Pursuant
to
IRC 162(e)(6),
a
covered
executive
branch
employee” includes the President, the Vice President, any person serving in level I of the
Executive Schedule (e.g., a Cabinet Officer) or any other person designated by the President as
having Cabinet-level status and their immediate deputies, the two most senior-level officers of
each agency within the Executive Office of the President, and any other official or employee of
the White House Office of the Executive Office of the President. The legislative history indicates
that all written or oral communication with covered executive branch officials are included. H.R.
Rep. No. 103-213, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. 605 n. 57 (1993), reprinted in 1993-3 C.B. 483. A
communication with the covered executive branch official will be considered with that official
if the official is intended as the primary recipient.
IRC 162(e)(5)(B)(ii)
excepts
from
the
9.
What is the exception for de
minimis in-house lobbying?
general disallowance rule organizations that are
involved in a minimal amount of in-house
lobbying. When an organization’s total amount
of in-house lobbying expenses does not exceed
$2,000 (computed without taking into account
general overhead costs otherwise allocable to lobbying), this exception applies. For purposes of
this rule, in-house expenses include labor and material costs.
350
Lobbying Issues
Payments made to a third-party lobbyist and dues payments allocable to lobbying are
subject to the disallowance rules, regardless of whether or not the organization’s in-house
expenses are exempted. In addition, the de minimis in-house rule does not apply to expenses
incurred for political activity, grass roots lobbying or foreign lobbying which continue to be
disallowed under current law rules.
(3).
Lobbying Purpose
As
noted
above,
Reg. 1.162-29(b)(1)
1.
When is an activity engaged in
for the purpose of making a
lobbying communication?
provides that an attempt to influence legislation”
includes not only a lobbying communication but
also all research and other preparatory activities
engaged in for a purpose of making or supporting
a lobbying communication. Reg. 1.162-29(c) sets
forth a purpose test, which considers the original
intent for engaging in a particular activity in order determine whether a lobbying activity, in
whole or in part, has occurred. The general rule, set forth in Reg. 1.162-29(c)(1), provides that
the purpose or purposes for engaging in an activity are determined on the basis of all the facts
and circumstances, including (but not limited to) the following factors:
(A)
Whether the activity and the lobbying communication are proximate in
time;
(B)
Whether the activity and the lobbying communication relate to similar
subject matter;
(C)
Whether the activity is performed at the request of, under the direction of,
or on behalf of a person making the lobbying communication;
(D)
Whether the results of the activity are also used for a nonlobbying
purpose; and
(E)
Whether, at the time the organization engages in the activity, there is
specific legislation to which the activity relates.69
69 The proposed regulations provided two presumptions concerning the purpose for engaging in an activity that
is related to a lobbying communication. Specifically, Prop. Reg. 1.162-29(c)(3) provided that if an activity relating
to a lobbying communication is engaged in for a non-lobbying purpose prior to the first taxable year preceding the
taxable year in which the communication was made, the activity is presumed to be engaged in solely for that
non-lobbying purpose. The Commissioner could rebut this presumption in part by establishing that the activity was
also engaged in for a purpose other than the non-lobbying purpose. Conversely, Prop. Reg. 1.162-(c)(4) provided
that if an activity relating to a lobbying communication is engaged in during the same taxable year as the
communication is made or the immediately preceding taxable year, and is not within the preceding presumption, the
activity is presumed to be engaged in for the sole purpose of making or supporting a lobbying communication. An
organization could rebut the presumption by establishing that the activity was engaged in for a non-lobbying purpose.
59 FR 24992, 24996 (May 13, 1994).
351
Lobbying Issues
The regulations provide several examples of how the facts and circumstances test is
applied. One example involves an organization that conducts a study and provides information
to an administrative agency regarding the impact of proposed regulations on its business at a time
when no specific legislative proposal on a similar topic is pending. The next year, in response
to proposed legislation on the same subject, the organization sends a letter opposing the
legislation to a legislator along with a copy of the study. Although the communication with the
legislator is a lobbying communication, the organization conducted the study and submitted
comments to the administrative agency at a time when no similar legislative proposal was
pending. Therefore, it engaged in the study for a nonlobbying purpose. Reg. 1.162-29(c)(4),
Example 1. Similarly, an organization that has entered into a contract with a government agency
conducts tests regarding the project, submits the test results to the government agency and revises
the project specifications in compliance with the contract. It subsequently prepares a summary
of the test results and revised specifications which it submits to legislators to encourage them to
support appropriations for the contract. The summary was prepared specifically for, and close
in time to, the lobbying communication and so was for a lobbying purpose. However, the tests
were conducted and the specifications revised pursuant to contract requirements and, thus, were
solely for a nonlobbying purpose.
Reg. 1.162-29(c)(4), Example 4.
On the other hand, an
organization that conducts a study at the request of its legislative affairs staff concerning the
impact of proposed legislation on its business does so solely for a lobbying purpose, despite the
fact that the organization subsequently used the study for labor negotiations with its employees.
Reg. 1.162-29(c)(4), Example 2.
Pursuant to Reg. 1.162-29(c)(2), if an
2.
What if an activity is engaged
in for multiple purposes?
organization engages in an activity both for a
lobbying purpose and for some nonlobbying
purpose, it must treat the activity as engaged in
partially for the lobbying purpose and partially for
the nonlobbying purpose.
This division of the
activity must result in a reasonable allocation of costs between nondeductible lobbying costs and
other costs.
(The allocation rules set forth in Reg. 1.162-28 are discussed below.)
Reg. 1.162-29(c)(4), Example (5), illustrates this with regard to a person who travels to the state
capital to attend a two-day conference. While there, he spends a third day meeting with state
legislators to explain why his corporation opposes a pending bill unrelated to the subject of the
conference.
Although his trip is partially for a nonlobbying purpose, it also has a lobbying
purpose since he refers to and reflects a view on the pending bill. Thus, his corporation must
reasonably allocate his traveling expenses between these two purposes.
Reg. 1.162-29(c)(3) provides that certain activities are not engaged in for the purpose of
making or supporting lobbying communications.
These activities consist of those activities
undertaken to comply with the requirements of any law (for example, satisfying state or federal
securities law filing requirements), reading any publications available to the general public or
Commentators contended that these presumptions undermined and complicated the purpose test. The final
regulations eliminate the presumptions, replacing them with the list of facts and circumstances set forth in
Reg. 1.162-29(c)(1). T.D. 8602, 60 FR 37568 (July 21, 1995).
352
Lobbying Issues
viewing
or
listening
to
other
mass
media
3.
May
certain
activities
be
treated as having no purpose
to influence legislation?
communications, and merely attending a widely
attended
speech.
In
addition,
if,
prior
to
evidencing a purpose to influence particular
legislation (or similar legislation), an organization
determines the existence or procedural status of
that legislation, determines the time, place, and
subject of any hearing to be held by a legislative body with respect to that legislation, or prepares
or reviews routine, brief summaries of the provisions of that legislation, the organization is
treated as engaging in that activity with no purpose of making or supporting a lobbying
communication.
This provision is illustrated by Reg. 1.162-29(c)(4), Example 6, which discusses an
organization whose legislative affairs staff prepares a summary of legislation that would affect
the organization’s business at the time it is proposed and continues to confirm the procedural
status of the bill periodically. Two months after the bill was introduced, the organization assigns
one of its employees to prepare a position letter on the bill to be delivered to legislators. The
preparation of the original summary and the procedural status checks on the bill for the first two
months are not considered to be for a lobbying purpose. However, once the organization made
the determination to make a lobbying communication, the procedural status checks on the bill
after that time were for a lobbying purpose.
Reg. 1.162-29(d) provides that when an
4.
What
if
activities
support
lobbying communications by
another organization?
organization engages in activities for a purpose of
supporting a lobbying communication to be made
by another person, the organization’s activities are
treated as influencing legislation. For example, if
an organization or its employee (as a volunteer or
otherwise) engages in an activity to assist a trade
association in preparing its lobbying communication, the organization’s activities are influencing
legislation even though the lobbying communication is made by the trade association. However,
the personal activities an organization’s employee outside the scope of employment will not be
attributed to the organization.
In some instances, organizations engage in
5.
What happens if a lobbying
communication is not made?
activity to support lobbying communications that
they never make. Under Reg. 1.162-29(e), if the
organization determines before the filing date of
its return that it does not expect, under any
reasonably foreseeable circumstances, to make a
lobbying communication, the activity is treated as if it had not been engaged in for a lobbying
purpose and the organization need not treat any amount allocated to that activity for that year as
353
Lobbying Issues
an amount to which IRC 162(e)(1)(A) applies.70 On the other hand, if the organization reaches
the conclusion at any time after the filing date, then any amount previously disallowed with
respect to that activity is treated as an amount that is paid at that time that is not subject to
IRC 162(e)(1)(A). Thus, the organization is effectively treated as if it incurred the costs relating
to the activity in the later year in connection with a nonlobbying activity. Exempt organizations
to which IRC 6033(e) applies may treat such amounts as reducing (but not below zero) their
lobbying costs. The organization may carry forward any amount not used to reduce lobbying
costs to subsequent years.
Yes, Reg. 1.162-29(f) provides that if an
6.
Is
there
an
anti-avoidance
rule?
organization, alone or with others, structures its
activities with a principal purpose of achieving
results that are unreasonable in light of the
purposes of IRC 162(e) and IRC 6033(e), the
Commissioner
can
recast
the
organization’s
activities for federal tax purposes to achieve tax results that are consistent with the intent of these
provisions and the pertinent facts and circumstances.
(4).
Cost Allocations
As noted above, when an organization
1.
How must costs be allocated?
engages in an activity that has both a lobbying
and a nonlobbying purpose, it must allocate the
cost of the activity between the two using a
reasonable method.
Reg. 1.162-29(c)(2) and
Reg. 1.162-28(b)(1). Reg. 1.162-28 describes costs that must be allocated to lobbying activities
and methods that may be used to allocate those costs. Reg. 1.162-28 does not apply, however,
to organizations that are engaged in the trade or business of conducting lobbying activities on
behalf of another person.71
Furthermore, the regulation is not intended to be applied for
purposes of IRC 4911 and 4945 and the regulations thereunder. The organization must maintain
records in accordance with IRC 6001 and its regulations.
Reg. 1.162-28(b) permits organizations to
2.
What is a reasonable method
of allocation?
use any reasonable method to allocate costs
between lobbying and nonlobbying activities. A
method is considered reasonable if it is applied
consistently, allocates a proper amount of costs to
lobbying
activities
(including
labor
and
administrative costs), and is consistent with the special rules regarding labor hours outlined in
70 The filing date for this purpose is the earlier of the time the organization files its timely return for the year
or the due date of the timely return.
71 IRC 162(e)(5)(A) provides that organizations that are engaged in the trade or business of conducting lobbying
activities on behalf of another person are not subject to the general disallowance rules. However, the rules do apply
to payments by such other person to the organization for conducting the lobbying activities.
354
Lobbying Issues
Reg. 1.162-28(2)(g).
Reg. 1.162-28 describes three different allocation methods that are
considered reasonable: a ratio method, a gross-up method, and an allocation method that applies
IRC 263A principles. Whether any other allocation method is reasonable depends on the facts
and circumstances of a particular case. The three specified methods, alone or in combination,
do not establish a baseline allocation against which to compare other methods.
Therefore,
another cost allocation method is not unreasonable simply because it allocates a lower amount
of costs to lobbying activities than any of the three specified methods.72
However,
Reg. 1.162-29(c)(2) provides that an organization’s treatment of multiple purpose activities will
not result in a reasonable allocation if it allocated to influencing legislation (1) only the
incremental amount of costs that would not have been incurred but for the lobbying purpose or
(2) an amount based on the number of purposes for engaging in that activity without regard to
the relative importance of those activities.
Reg. 1.162-28(c) provides that the costs
3.
What costs are allocable to
lobbying activities?
properly allocable to lobbying activities include
labor costs and general and administrative costs.
Labor costs include costs attributable to full-time,
part-time, and contract employees. This includes
all elements of compensation, including overtime
pay, vacation pay, holiday pay, sick leave pay, payroll taxes, pension costs, employee benefits,
and payments to a supplemental unemployment benefit plan. General and administrative costs
include depreciation, rent, utilities, insurance, maintenance costs, security costs, and other
administrative department costs (for example, payroll, personnel, and accounting.)
Under the ratio method set forth in
4.
What is the ratio method?”
Reg. 1.162-28(d), an organization multiplies its
total costs of operations (excluding third-party
costs) by a fraction.
The numerator of the
fraction is the organization’s lobbying labor hours
and the denominator is the organization’s total labor hours. The formula is expressed as follows:
Lobbying labor hours
---------------------------
X Total costs of operations
Total labor hours
The product of this calculation is added to the organization’s third-party lobbying costs, as
defined in Reg. 1.162-28(d)(5).73
Third-party lobbying costs are amounts paid or incurred in
whole or in part for lobbying activities conducted by third parties and amounts paid or incurred
for travel (including meals or lodging while away from home) and entertainment relating in
whole or in part to lobbying activities.) Thus, third-party costs include amounts paid to lobbying
organizations and dues or other similar amounts allocable to lobbying paid to exempt
organizations.
72 Because some commentators interpreted the proposed regulations as treating only the three specified methods
as reasonable, the final regulations clarify that organizations may use any reasonable method.
73 Payments to independent contractors for lobbying purposes would not fall under labor costs. They would,
however, be included in third-party lobbying costs.
355
Lobbying Issues
Reg. 1.162-28(d)(2) provides that an organization may use any reasonable method to
determine the number of labor hours spent on lobbying activities and may use the de minimis
rule of Reg. 1.162-28(g)(1).74
It further provides that an organization may treat as zero the
hours spent by personnel engaged in secretarial, clerical, support, and other administrative
activities as opposed to activities involving significant judgment with respect to lobbying
activities.75 Reg. 1.162-28(d)(3) defines total labor hours as the total number of hours of labor
that an organization’s personnel spend on the organization’s trade or business during the year and
provides that an organization may make reasonable assumptions concerning total hours spent by
personnel on its trade or business.
However, Reg. 1.162-28(d)(3) also provides that if the
organization treats as zero the lobbying labor hours spent by personnel engaged in secretarial,
maintenance, and other similar activities, it must also treat as zero the total labor hours of all
personnel engaged in those activities.
Reg. 1.162-28(d)(6) illustrates the operation of the ratio method.
In the example, three
employees of an organization engage in both lobbying and nonlobbying activities. One spends
300 hours, another spends 1,700 hours, and the third spends 1,000 hours on lobbying activities,
for a total of 3,000 hours for the year. The organization reasonably estimates that each of its
three employees spends 2,000 hours a year working for the organization. The organization’s total
costs of operations are $300,000 and it has no third-party costs. Under the ratio method, the
organization allocates $150,000 to its lobbying activities for the year, calculated as follows:
Lobbying labor hours
Total
Allocable
Costs
--------------------------
X
costs of
+
third-party
=
allocable to
Total labor hours
operations
costs
lobbying
activities
[
(300 + 1,700 + 1,000)
[-----------------------------
X $300,000] + [0] = $150,000
[
6,000
74 Reg. 1.162-28(g)(1) provides that an organization may treat time spent by an individual on lobbying activities
as zero if less than five percent of the person’s time is spent on lobbying activities. Reasonable methods may be used
to determine if that time is less than five percent. However, pursuant to Reg. 1.162-28(g)(2), any time spent by an
employee on direct contact lobbying” (including the hours spent by that employee in connection with direct contact
lobbying, such as allocable travel time relating to direct contact lobbying) may not be excluded under the rule of
Reg. 1.162-28(g)(1).
Direct contact lobbying” is defined as a meeting, telephone conversation, letter, or other
similar means of communication with a federal or state legislator or covered federal executive branch official that
otherwise qualifies as a lobbying activity. Reg. 1.162-28(g)(2) specifically provides that a person who engages in
research, preparation, and other background activities related to direct contact lobbying but who does not make direct
contact with a legislator or covered executive branch official is not engaged in direct contact lobbying.
75
Therefore, as Reg. 1.162-28(d)(2) explicitly provides, the hours spent on lobbying activities by
para-professionals and analysts may not be treated as zero.
356
Lobbying Issues
Under the general gross-up method, which
5.
What
is
the
gross-up
method?”
is
described
in
Reg. 1.162-28(e)(1),
an
organization multiplies its basic labor costs for
lobbying labor hours by 175 percent. Pursuant to
Reg. 1.162-28(e)(3), basic labor costs are limited
to
wages
or
other
similar
costs,
such
as
guaranteed payments for services.
Costs attributable to pensions, profit-sharing, employee
benefits, supplemental unemployment compensation plans, or similar items, are not included in
basic labor costs. Third-party lobbying costs are then added to the result of the calculation to
arrive at total lobbying costs.
Reg. 1.162-28(e)(2) provides an alternative gross-up method. Under this alternative, an
organization may treat as zero the lobbying labor hours of personnel who engage in secretarial,
clerical, support, or other administrative activities that do not involve significant judgment with
respect to lobbying. However, if an organization uses this alternative method, it must multiply
costs for lobbying labor hours by 225 percent.
Reg. 1.162-28(b)(2) provides that an organization (other than one subject to IRC 6033(e))
that does not pay or incur reasonable labor costs for persons engaged in lobbying activities may
not use the gross-up method.
Such organizations would include a partnership or sole
proprietorship in which the lobbying activities are performed by the owners who do not receive
a salary or guaranteed payment for services. This provision is significantly different from its
predecessor in the proposed regulations. Under the proposed regulations, any organization that
did not pay reasonable labor costs for people engaged in lobbying activities could use neither the
ratio or gross up method.
58 FR 68330, 68332 (Dec. 27, 1993)
Tax-exempt organizations
contended that they would be prevented from using either or these methods if they used
volunteers in their lobbying activities (since no labor costs were incurred).
Under the final
regulations, tax-exempt organizations can use either the ratio or gross-up methods even if their
lobbying activities are conducted by volunteers.
Because volunteers are not organizations’
personnel, time spent by volunteers is excluded from the organization’s lobbying labor hours and
total labor hours (although the hours may be included in their own employer’s lobbying labor
hours or total labor hours).
Reg. 1.162-28(e)(4) illustrates the operation of the gross-up method to the same facts
discussed above with regard to the ratio method. In this instance, the organization determines
that its basic labor costs are $20 per hour for the first employee, $30 per hour for the second
employee and $25 per hour for the third employee.
Thus, its basic lobbying labor costs are
$82,000 (($20 x 300) + ($30 x 1,700) + ($25 x 1,000)).
Under the gross-up method, the
organization allocates $143,500 to its lobbying activities for the year, calculated as follows:
Basic lobbying
Allocable
Costs allocable
175%
X
labor costs of
+
third-party
=
to lobbying
all personnel
costs
activities
[175% X $82,000] + [0] = $143,500
Many organizations engaged in lobbying activities are subject to the uniform capitalization
rules of IRC 263A, therefore, the regulations permit organizations to use the principles of that
section and the regulations thereunder to determine costs properly allocable to lobbying activities.
357
Lobbying Issues
Specifically,
under
IRC 263A,
lobbying
is
6.
What
is
the
IRC 263A
method?”
considered a service department or function.
Therefore, an organization may use its IRC 263A
methodology to determine the amount of costs
allocable to its lobbying department or function
for purposes of complying with the regulations.
Organizations not subject to IRC 263A may also use the principles of that section and the
regulations thereunder to determine the amount of costs allocable to lobbying activities.
(5)
Exempt Organization Requirements
As discussed above, organizations may not
1.
How are exempt organizations
taxed under IRC 6033(e)?
avoid the disallowance of the deduction for
lobbying by deducting dues paid to tax-exempt
organizations that engage in lobbying. Thus, to
prevent this avoidance, IRC 6033(e) provides that
organizations subject to its provisions are required
to provide a notice to its members indicating the nondeductible portion of dues paid due to
lobbying activities.
If the exempt organization does not provide the notice or if its actual
lobbying expenditures exceed the amount disclosed in the notice, the organization will be subject
to a proxy tax on the amount that should have been included in the notice but was not. The
proxy tax is equal to this amount multiplied by the highest corporate rate imposed by IRC 11.
IRC 6033(e)(2). Thus, the organization has the option of providing a notice to its members of
the amount of dues that is not deductible due to lobbying or paying the proxy tax.
An organization subject to IRC 6033(e) is
2.
What
notices
must
be
provided to members?
required to provide notice to each person paying
dues of the portion of dues that the organization
reasonably estimates will be allocable to the
organization’s lobbying expenditures during the
year and, thus, is not deductible by the member.
This estimate must be provided at the time of assessment or payment of the dues and must be
reasonably calculated to provide the organization’s members with adequate notice of the
nondeductible amount. IRC 6033(e)(1)(A)(ii). The legislative history indicates that the notice
should be provided in a conspicuous and easily recognizable format, referring to IRC 6113 and
the regulations thereunder for guidance regarding the appropriate format of the disclosure
statement.76
IRC 501(c)(4), IRC 501(c)(5), and IRC 501(c)(6) organizations are required to disclose
information regarding their lobbying activities on Form 990, Return of Organization Exempt from
Income Tax. If an organization is excepted from the IRC 6033(e) requirements either because
substantially all of its dues were not deductible by its members or because its lobbying
76 For guidance regarding IRC 6113, see Notice 88-120, 1988-2 C.B. 454. However, unlike IRC 6113, there
is no penalty associated with failure to provide the disclosure notice in this format.
358
Lobbying Issues
expenditures
consisted
solely
of
in-house
3.
What information
must be
disclosed on the Form 990?
expenditures that did not exceed $2,000, it must
disclose this information on the Form 990. If the
organization
does not
meet either
of these
exceptions, it must disclose the information
necessary to determine if it is subject to the proxy
tax.
This information consists of the total dues received from members, the amount of its
IRC 162(e) lobbying expenditures, and the amount it disclosed to its members as the
nondeductible portion of dues. IRC 6033(e)(1)(A)(i).
The amount disclosed begins with the
4.
What amount is disclosed on
the Form 990 as IRC 162(e)
lobbying expenditures?
organization’s lobbying expenses determined in
accordance
with
IRC 162(e).
Thus,
direct
lobbying of local councils or similar governing
bodies with respect to legislation of direct interest
to the organization or its members and in-house
direct lobbying expenses if the total of such
expenditures is $2,000 or less (excluding allocable overhead expenses) should be excluded from
the amount disclosed. IRC 162(e)(2) and IRC 162(e)(5)(B). Amounts carried over from prior
years, either because the lobbying expenditures exceeded the dues received in those years or
because the organization received a waiver of the proxy tax imposed on that amount must be
included. IRC 6033(e)(1)(C) and IRC 6033(e)(2)(B). The current year’s lobbying expenditures
should be reduced, but not below zero, by costs allocated in a prior year to lobbying activities
that were cancelled after a return reporting these costs was filed in accordance with
Reg. 1.162-29(e)(2).
If the organization notified its members in
5.
What amount is disclosed for
nondeductible dues notices?
accordance with IRC 6033(e)(1)(A)(ii) of its
estimate of the portion of dues that would not be
deductible under IRC 162(e), it must disclose on
Form 990 the total amount of dues that its
members were notified were nondeductible. For
example, if the organization timely notified its members that 25 percent of their dues would be
nondeductible and the members paid a total of $100,000 of dues allocable to the year, the amount
reported on Form 990 would be $25,000.
If the actual lobbying expenditures of an
6.
What if lobbying expenditures
exceed the estimated amount?
organization subject to IRC 6033(e) exceed the
amount that it notified its members was not
deductible (either because the expenses were
higher than anticipated or the dues receipts were
lower), the organization is liable for a proxy tax
359
Lobbying Issues
on the excess amount. IRC 6033(e)(2)(A). The organization may seek a waiver of the proxy
tax.77
A waiver of the proxy tax is requested on
7.
How
does
an
organization
request a waiver?
Form 990.
The organization checks a box
agreeing to add the amount it entered as its
taxable amount of lobbying expenditures to its
dues estimate for the following year and enter the
amount on the next year’s Form 990.
An
organization may use this waiver procedure only if it sent dues notices at the time of assessment
or payment of dues that reasonably estimated the dues allocable to nondeductible lobbying
expenditures.
As noted above, an organization subject to
8.
How is the IRC 6033(e) proxy
tax determined?
IRC 6033(e) must report on the Form 990 the
total dues it received from members, the amount
of its IRC 162(e) lobbying expenditures for the
year, and the amount it disclosed to its members
as the nondeductible portion of dues.
The
amount subject to the IRC 6033(e)(2) proxy tax is its IRC 162 expenditures less the amount
disclosed to the members as nondeductible. However, if this amount is more than the amount
by which the total dues received exceeds the amount disclosed to the members as nondeductible,
then the tax is imposed on the lesser amount and the excess is carried over to the next year. For
example, an organization reports on the Form 990 that its IRC 162(e) expenditures for the taxable
year were $600x and the aggregate amount of nondeductible dues notices is $100x. If the total
amount of dues received was $800x, then the taxable amount would be $500x ($600x - $100x).
However, if the total amount of dues received was $400x, the taxable amount would be limited
to $300x ($400x - $100x) and the excess $200x ($500x - $300x) would be carried over and
included in the next year’s IRC 162 expenditures.
The taxable amount is multiplied by the highest rate specified in IRC 11 to determine the
IRC 6033(e) proxy tax. If the organization elects to pay the tax, it is reported on Form 990-T,
Exempt Organization Business Income Tax Return (and proxy tax under section 6033(e)). When
an organization elects to pay the proxy tax rather than to provide its members with an estimate
of dues allocable to IRC 162(e) expenditures, all of the members’ dues remain eligible for
deduction to the extent otherwise deductible. The organization may also request a waiver of this
tax if it made a reasonable estimate and agrees to adjust its notice of IRC 162(e) expenditures
to members in the following year.
Thus, in the second example above, if the organization
requested a waiver, both the excess amount and the taxable amount would be carried over and
included in the next year’s IRC 162 expenditures.
77
It is also possible that an organization could overstate the portion of the dues that are not deductible in the
notice of disallowance. It could do so by overestimating the amount of the disallowed expenses or underestimating
dues income. The Conference Report indicates that guidance should be issued to cover this eventuality. H.R. Rep.
No. 103-213, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. 608 n. 66 (1993), reprinted in 1993-3 C.B. 486. The matter is under study.
360
Lobbying Issues
No, organizations that are subject to
9.
Must estimated tax on the
proxy tax be paid?
IRC 6033(e) are not required to pay estimated tax
on the IRC 6033(e) proxy tax, even if they do not
provide
notices
to
their
members.
The
instructions for Form 990-T indicate that the
proxy tax is not to be included when calculating
estimated tax liability.
Under-reported lobbying expenditures are
10.
What if lobbying expenditures
are under-reported?
subject to the IRC 6033(e) proxy tax for the year
at issue only to the extent that the same
expenditures (if actually reported) would have
resulted in a proxy tax liability for that year. A
waiver of the proxy tax for the taxable year only
applies to reported expenditures. Under-reporting lobbying expenditures may also subject the
organization to a $10 per day penalty under IRC 6652 for filing an incomplete or inaccurate
return.
(6)
Miscellaneous Rules
As
stated
above,
IRC 501(c)(3)
1.
May
payments
to
charities
that lobby be deducted?
organizations are not subject to the IRC 6033(e)
disclosure requirements.
However, § 13222 of
OBRA 1993 also added IRC 170(f)(9) which
provides that contributors to charities that engage
in lobbying activities cannot take an IRC 170 or
IRC 162 deduction for the contribution if (a) the charities’ lobbying activities are on matters of
direct financial interest to the contributors’ trade or business and (b) a principal purpose of the
contribution is to avoid the general disallowance rule that would apply if the contributor
conducted such lobbying activities directly.
IRC 162(e)(5)(A) provides that in the case
2.
What is the
anti-cascading”
rule?
of an organization engaged in the trade or
business of lobbying activities or an employee
who
receives
reimbursements
for
lobbying
expenses, the disallowance rule does not apply to
expenditures of the organization or person in
conducting such activities directly on behalf of a client or employer. Instead, the payments made
by the client or employer to the lobbyist or employee are nondeductible as lobbying expenditures.
The purpose of this rule is to insure that, when multiple parties are involved, the general
disallowance rule results in the denial of the deduction at only one level. The rule only applies
where the parties have a direct, one-on-one relationship and does not have any relevance to
payments to membership organizations that further the interests of all members, rather than one
particular member.
H.R. Rep. No. 103-213, 103d Cong., 1st Sess. 610 (1993), reprinted in
1993-3 C.B. 488.
361
Lobbying Issues
Subject Directory
1.
Introduction
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 261
2.
Lobbying Activities of IRC 501(c)(3) Nonelecting Public Charities . . . . . . . . . . . 262
A.
Legislative and Regulatory History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262
(1)
The Pre-Statutory Era . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 262
(2)
The Lobbying Restriction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 264
(3)
Subsequent Statutory Developments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 267
(4)
The Constitutional Issue . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 268
B.
Specific Issues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
(1)
The Meaning of Legislation” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
1. General Meaning of Legislation” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
2. Meaning of Action by the Congress”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 270
3. Meaning of Resolutions or Similar Matters”
. . . . . . . . 271
4. Votes on Executive Branch Nominees
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
5. Actions by Administrative Bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
6. Zoning Matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
7. Foreign Governments, Indian Tribes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
8.
Good” vs. Bad” Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 272
(2)
Attempts to Influence Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
1. Meaning of Attempts to Influence Legislation”
. . . . . . 273
2. Meaning of Action Organization” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 273
3. Nonpartisan Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 274
4. Appearances Before Legislative Committees . . . . . . . . . 276
5. Requests to Executive Bodies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 277
6. Attribution of Individuals’ Actions to Organization . . . . 277
(3)
Limits on Attempts to Influence Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 279
1. Meaning of Substantial”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 279
2. Supporting Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 280
3.
Lobbying Activities of IRC 501(c)(3) Electing Public Charities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 280
A.
Legislative and Regulatory History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 280
(1)
Enactment of the Statutes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 280
(2)
Overview of the Statutes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 282
(3)
History of the Regulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 283
B.
Specific Issues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 284
(1)
The IRC 501(h) Election . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 284
1. Organizations That May Make the Election . . . . . . . . . . 284
2. Organizations That May Not Make the Election
. . . . . . 285
3. Exclusion of Churches . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 286
4. How the Election Is Made
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 286
5. When the Election Is Effective
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 286
6. Newly Created Organizations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
7. Voluntary Revocation of Election
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
8. Re-election . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 287
362
Lobbying Issues
9. Involuntary Revocation of Election
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 288
(2)
Limits on Lobbying Expenditures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 288
1.
Excess Lobbying Expenditures” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 288
2. Nontaxable Amount . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
3. Ceiling Amounts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 289
4. Application of Rules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 290
(3)
Exempt Purpose Expenditures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 292
1. What Are Exempt Purpose Expenditures” . . . . . . . . . . 292
2. What Are Not Exempt Purpose Expenditures” . . . . . . . 292
3. Treatment of Transfers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 293
4. Determination of Exempt Purpose Expenditures” . . . . . 294
(4)
Direct Lobbying and Grass Roots Lobbying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 295
1. Meaning of Lobbying Expenditures” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 295
2. Distinction Between Direct and Grass Roots Lobbying . . 295
3. Meaning of Legislation” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296
4. Meaning of Specific Legislation” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 296
5. Direct Lobbying Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297
6. Expenses Associated with a Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297
7. News Media Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297
8. Indirect Communications with Legislator
. . . . . . . . . . . 298
9. Grass Roots Lobbying Communication . . . . . . . . . . . . . 298
10. Communications with General Public
. . . . . . . . . . . . . 299
11. Call to Action” Requirement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 300
12. Volunteer Activity Costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301
(5)
Exceptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
i.
Nonpartisan Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
1. Nonpartisan Analysis Exception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
2. Meaning of Nonpartisan Analysis” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
3.
Call to Action” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 302
4. How Results May Be Distributed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
5. Distribution in a Series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 303
6. Subsequent Use Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 304
7. Meaning of Advocacy Communications” . . . . . . . . . . . 304
8. When Advocacy Communications Become Grass
Roots Lobbying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305
9. Primary Purpose
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 305
10. Time Limit on Subsequent Use Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306
ii.
Other Exceptions
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 306
1. Examinations of Broad Social Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . 306
2. Requests for Technical Advice
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307
3.
Self-defense” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 307
(6)
Special Rules for Mass Media Advertising . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308
1. Mass Media Advertising Rules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 308
2. Meaning of Mass Media”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
3. Meaning of Highly Publicized”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 309
363
Lobbying Issues
(7)
Earmarking
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310
1. Rules Relating to Transfers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 310
2. When Transfer Is Earmarked for a Special Purpose . . . . 311
(8)
Allocation Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
1. Principles of Allocation Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 311
2. Nonmember Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 312
3.
Same Specific Subject” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 312
4. Member Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 313
5. Mixed Lobbying Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 313
(9)
Special Rules for Membership Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 314
1. Rules Concerning Membership Communications . . . . . . 314
2. Meaning of Member” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 314
3. Membership Communication Exception . . . . . . . . . . . . 314
4. Encouraging Direct Lobbying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315
5. Encouraging Grass Roots Lobbying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 315
6.
Self-defense” Exception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 316
7. Written Communications Not Solely for Members . . . . . 316
8. Allocation for Direct Lobbying Communications . . . . . . 317
9. Allocation for Grass Roots Lobbying Communications . . 317
(10)
Affiliated Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 318
i.
Affiliation Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 318
1. Affiliation Rules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 318
2. When Organizations are Affiliated . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 318
3. Meaning of Action on Legislative Issues” . . . . . . . . . . 319
4. Interlocking Governing Boards
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 319
5. Board Members As Representatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 320
6. Governing Instruments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 320
7. Whether Board Actions Establish Affiliation . . . . . . . . . 321
8. Organizations Filing a Group Return . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321
9. Indirect Affiliation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 321
10. Non-IRC 501(c)(3) Controlling Organization
. . . . . . . . 322
ii.
The Affiliated Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 322
1. Meaning of Affiliated Group of Organizations” . . . . . . 322
2. Member of More Than One Affiliated Group . . . . . . . . 323
3. Meaning of Electing Member Organization”
. . . . . . . . 323
4. Taxable Year of Affiliated Group
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323
5.
Self-defense” Exception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 323
6. Membership Communication Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 324
iii.
Excess Lobbying Expenditures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 324
1. Treatment of Affiliated Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 324
2. Imposition of Tax
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 324
3. Tax Liability of Electing Member . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 324
4. When Organization is Liable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
5. Member of More Than One Group
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 325
6. Organization Ceases to Be Member of Group . . . . . . . . 325
364
Lobbying Issues
iv.
Application of IRC 501(h) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
1. Loss of IRC 501(c)(3) Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
2. Nonelecting Member . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
3. Filing Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 326
4. Application of Rules
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 327
v.
Limited Affiliated Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 328
1.
Limited Affiliated Group of Organizations” . . . . . . . . . 328
2. Meaning of National Legislative Issue” . . . . . . . . . . . . 328
3. Meaning of Controlling Member Organization” . . . . . . 329
4. Determination of Expenditures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 329
5. Information Reported . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 330
6.
Self-defense” Exception . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 330
7. Membership Communication Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 330
4.
Lobbying Activities of IRC 501(c)(3) Private Foundations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 331
A.
Legislative and Regulatory History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 331
B.
Specific Issues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 332
1. Tax on Lobbying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 332
2. Meaning of Attempt to Influence Legislation” . . . . . . . 332
3. Membership Communication Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 332
4. Jointly Funded Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 333
5. Lobbying by Recipient of Program Related Investment . . 333
6. General Support Grants
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
7. Specific Project Grants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 334
8. Multi-year Specific Project Grants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335
9. Loss of Exemption by Grantee Public Charity . . . . . . . . 336
5.
Lobbying and Tax-Exempt Organizations Not Described in IRC 501(c)(3) . . . . . . 336
1. Restrictions on Lobbying
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 336
2. Lobbying Related to Exempt Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337
3. IRC 501(c)(3) Organizations with Related
IRC 501(c)(4) Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337
4. IRC 501(c)(3) Organizations that Lose Exempt Status
Due to Lobbying
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 338
5. Conversion of IRC 501(c)(3) Organization to
IRC 501(c)(4) Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 338
6. Exception to Transfer Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 339
7. Ballot Measure Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 340
6.
Lobbying and IRC 162(e) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
A.
Legislative and Regulatory History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
(1)
The Pre-Statutory Era . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
(2)
Allowance of the Lobbying Deduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 341
(3)
Disallowance of the Lobbying Deduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 342
(4)
History of Regulations and Administrative Pronouncements . . . . . . 344
365
Lobbying Issues
B.
Specific Issues
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 344
(1)
Organizations Excepted from the Reporting and Notice
Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 344
1. Organizations Excepted from IRC 6033(e) . . . . . . . . . . 344
2. IRC 501(c)(4) and IRC 501(c)(5) Organizations
. . . . . . 345
3. IRC 501(c)(6) Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 345
4.
Annual Dues” and Similar Amounts” . . . . . . . . . . . . . 346
5. Affiliated Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 346
(2)
Definitional Issues Regarding Lobbying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 347
1. Meaning of Influencing Legislation” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 347
2.
Lobbying Communication”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 347
3. Application of IRC 4911(d)(2) Exceptions
. . . . . . . . . . 348
4.
Legislation” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 349
5.
Specific Legislation” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 349
6.
Legislative Bodies” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 349
7. Local Councils and Similar Bodies
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 350
8.
Covered Executive Branch Official” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 350
9. De Minimis In-House Lobbying
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 350
(3).
Lobbying Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 351
1. Activity Engaged in for Lobbying Purpose . . . . . . . . . . 351
2. Activity Engaged in for Multiple Purposes . . . . . . . . . . 352
3. Activities Having No Lobbying Purpose . . . . . . . . . . . . 353
4. Supporting Lobbying of Another Organization . . . . . . . . 353
5. No Lobbying Communication Made . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 353
6. Anti-Avoidance Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 354
(4).
Cost Allocations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 354
1. Allocation of Costs
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 354
2. Reasonable Method of Allocation
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 354
3. Costs Allocable to Lobbying . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 355
4.
Ratio Method” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 355
5.
Gross-Up Method” . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 357
6.
IRC 263A Method”
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 358
(5)
Exempt Organization Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 358
1. Taxation under IRC 6033(e) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 358
2. Notices to Members . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 358
3. Information Disclosed on Form 990 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 359
4. Amount of IRC 162(e) Lobbying Expenditures . . . . . . . 359
5. Amount for Nondeductible Dues Notices
. . . . . . . . . . . 359
6. Lobbying Expenditures Exceed Estimated Amount . . . . . 359
7. Waiver Request . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 360
8. Determination of IRC 6033(e) Proxy Tax . . . . . . . . . . . 360
9. Estimated Tax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 361
10. Under-reported Lobbying Expenditures
. . . . . . . . . . . . 361
(6)
Miscellaneous Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 361
Contributions to Charities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 361
Anti-Cascading Rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 361
366
