Clammyweed 
Year 2005 
Progress Report of Activities 
 
Issued February 2006 
         E. “Kika” de la Garza Plant Materials Center 
3409 N. FM 1355, Kingsville, Texas 78363,  Tel: 361-595-1313 
 
The Kika de la Garza Plant Materials Center (PMC) is a 
91-acre facility established to provide cost-effective 
vegetative solutions for soil and water conservation 
problems.  This means identifying plants and developing 
techniques for successful conservation use.  It also means 
assisting in the commercial development of these plants 
and promoting their use in natural resource conservation 
and other environmental programs.    
 
The PMC was established in 1981.  It is one of 27 centers 
located throughout the United States.  The PMC is 
operated by the United States Department of Agriculture 
(USDA), Natural Resources Conservation Service 
(NRCS), in cooperation with an Advisory Board from 
Texas A&M University-Kingsville, the Caesar Kleberg 
Wildlife Research Institute (CKWRI), South Texas 
Association of Soil & Water Conservation Districts, and 
the Gulf Coast Association of Soil & Water Conservation 
Districts.  The Kika de la Garza PMC serves 
approximately 27 million acres of the southern portion of 
Texas. 
 
Program Emphasis 
 
The mission of the Kika de la Garza PMC is to develop 
and transfer plant science technology to solve natural 
resource problems in the South Texas area.  Plant testing 
and plant selection as well as the development of new 
plant science technologies are the primary products of our 
program.  The PMC conducts plantings and studies at the 
Center and off-Center with cooperating partners.  The 
PMC works with NRCS Field Offices and Resource 
Conservation and Development (RC&D) groups, 
Conservation Districts, federal and state agencies, and 
private landowners. 
 
Our current program emphasis at the PMC is in the 
following areas: 
 
• 
Rangeland Habitat Restoration and Enhancement 
• 
Coastal Shoreline Stabilization 
• 
Coastal Habitat Restoration and Enhancement 
• 
Erosion Control/Water Quality Improvement on 
Agricultural Land 
 
Following are highlights of some of the activities of the 
PMC for 2005.  Please contact the PMC for more detailed 
information.  
Rangeland Habitat Restoration and 
Enhancement 
 
South Texas Natives 
Project: 
 
The goal of the South 
Texas Natives Project 
(STN) is to  
provide economically 
viable sources of 
native plants and seeds 
and to develop 
effective planting 
strategies for the 
restoration of South 
Texas plant 
communities.  As a partner in this initiative, the Kika de la 
Garza Plant Materials Center has established a nursery of 
South Texas ecotypes of a variety of grasses, forbs, and 
legumes.  Ecotypes are developed for 3 basic regions: the 
Gulf Coast Prairie, the South Texas Plain and the Coastal 
Sand Plain.  The ecotype regions were established to be 
large enough to support a commercial seed market, but 
small enough to retain regional integrity and genetic 
adaptability.  The nurseries consist of approximately 20 
collections of each species per ecoregion.  Transplants are 
established in isolated areas as necessary to maintain 
species integrity and diversity.  The nurseries are hand 
harvested to ensure a complete spectrum of seed is 
harvested from each species.  Ecotypic seed is then planted 
in production fields where it is harvested and bulked per 
species for each ecoregion.  The ecoregion seed is then 
made available to commercial seed growers.   
 
In 2005, we received 2 collections from the STN Project 
representing 2 species.  These 2 collections overlap in 
representing the South Texas Plain Ecoregion and the 
Coastal Sand Plain Ecoregion. 
 
Since 2001, we have received 1,557 collections for the 
South Texas Plain Ecoregion and 218 collections 
representing the Coastal Sand Plain Ecoregion.   
The seed nursery was expanded in 2005 to include 679 
accessions in 2004, representing 35 species. 
 
STN Slender Grama Plot at Rancho Blanco 
In December 2005, we seeded trays to add to the seed 
nursery.  This included 133 collections representing 17 
species for the South Texas Plain and Coastal Sand Plain 
Ecoregions, and 53 collections representing 9 species for 
the Gulf Coast Prairie Ecoregion.  These seedlings will be 
planted both on and off-site for evaluation and seed 
production.  
 
Over the past two years the 
focus of South Texas 
Natives has shifted from 
collecting to evaluation.  
They now have six 
evaluations sites across 
South Texas.  They have 
267 accessions representing 
15 species at Rio Farms, 
195 accessions representing 
8 species at  the Texas 
Agricultural Experiment Station Uvalde, 210 accessions 
representing 8 species at Rancho Blanco, 16 accessions 
representing 4 species at the CKWRI Wildlife Complex,  
63 accessions representing 6 species at Bladerunner Farms 
and 40 accessions representing 7 species at Texas 
Agricultural Experiment Station Beeville.   
 
Upcoming Plant Releases 
 
Pending approval the PMC, STN, and TAES Beeville have 
10 cooperative releases anticipated for September 2006.   
The PMC is the lead on the following 6 releases: 
1) Welder Germplasm shortspike windmillgrass       
Chloris subdolichostachya                                   
Anticipated Select Release Accession # 9085260      
2) Mariah Germplasm hooded windmillgrass           
Chloris cucullata                                                    
Anticipated Select Release Accession # 9085313      
 3) Kika648 Germplasm plains bristlegrass               
Setaria vulpiseta                                                         
Anticipated Select Release Accession # 9029648      
 4) Kika677 Germplasm streambed bristlegrass        
Setaria leucopila                                                       
Anticipated Select Release Accession # 9029677      
5) Kika819 Germplasm streambed bristlegrass         
Setaria leucopila                                                        
Anticipated Select Release Accession  # 9038819        
6) Kika820 Germplasm streambed bristlegrass         
Setaria leucopila                                                 
Anticipated Select Release Accession  #  9038820       
 The four bristlegrass releases will be combined prior to 
sale and sold under the name Catarina Germplasm 
bristlegrass.   
                                                                                        
STN is the lead on the following 4 
releases: 
 7) Dilley Germplasm slender grama                    
Bouteloua repens  4 combined accessions          
8) Chaparral Germplasm hairy grama                   
Bouteloua hirsuta  4 combined accessions            
 9) Atascosa Germplasm Texas grama                          
Bouteloua rigidiseta 4 combined accessions               
10) La Salle Germplasm Arizona cottontop            
Digitaria californica 12 combined accessions         
 
 
The Gulf Coast Ecotype Project: 
 
In 2001, an initiative was begun between the US Fish and 
Wildlife Service, CKWRI, the Gulf Coast Association of 
Soil and Water Conservation Districts, the STN Project, 
and the Kika de la Garza PMC to produce native, eco-typic 
plant material to displace invasive species on pastures and 
agricultural fields, along the Texas Gulf Coast.  Thirteen 
species including 4 forbs, 1 cool season grass, and 8 warm 
season grasses were selected for initial collecting and 
evaluation.  Ten to twenty-five collections of each species 
Hairy Grama
Big Bluestem in Fall Color 
are being made by the partners of this project, as well as a 
few other groups, from the 30 counties along the Texas 
Gulf Coast.   
 
A nursery has been established at the PMC.  Transplants 
have been planted in irrigated field plots where seed is 
hand harvested and evaluated for production, germination, 
and establishment.  Successful collections will eventually 
be released for commercial production. 
 
Since 2001, 103 collections have been received, 
representing all thirteen species.  The field nursery now 
consists of 70 accessions representing 11 of the 13 species.  
In 2005, 10 new collections were received.  In December 
2005, these collections were seeded in the greenhouse.  
Those exhibiting good germination will be transplanted 
into the field beginning in the spring. 
Erosion Control/Water Quality 
Improvement on Agricultural Land 
 
Saline Site Revegetation Trials 
 
There is an estimated 600 thousand acres in South Texas 
that are affected by saline and alkaline conditions.  Many 
of these acres are damaged by past oil field activity.  These 
sites are characterized by soils with high salinity, little soil 
structure, lack of vegetation and excessive erosion.  
Roadways, especially those associated with oil field 
activity, have created many critical and highly erodible 
sites.  These sites generally have exposed subsoil, are low 
in soil fertility, have poor water holding capacity with a 
lack of adequate vegetative cover.  Furthermore, 
degradation of water quality has occurred through 
contaminants and excessive soil erosion from saline, 
alkaline and other mineralized soils. 
 
In order to solve erosion problems and increase the 
productivity on saline impacted range sites in the South 
Texas region, it is critical to know the tolerance of plant 
species to varying levels of salt.  This assessment is 
necessary for seed germination and at the young seedling 
stage.  It is also important to know how the salt levels will 
change with the temperature and rainfall of the different 
seasons.  Given this information, NRCS and SWCD field 
personnel will become knowledgeable about adapted plant 
varieties and tested technology which will improve their 
recommendations for site improvements in the South 
Texas region. 
 
Seeds germinating in salt-affected soils may be responding 
to dissolved salt concentration as well as to particular salts 
such as sodium ions.  Temperature and soil moisture may 
interact with salinity producing a significant but highly 
variable environmental window for seed germination and 
seedling establishment.  Therefore, both seed germination 
and young seedling responses to varying salinity levels 
needs to be determined. 
 
Starting in June of 2005, LeeRoy Rock, a student at Texas 
A&M Kingsville, began seed germination trials at the 
PMC.  He ran tests on 21 plant species.  The first trial was 
run at 5 salinity levels; 0, EC-5, EC-10, EC-20, EC-30 at a 
constant temperature of 68 F with 12 hours of light and 12 
hours of dark.  The second trial was run at the same 5 
salinity levels as the preceding experiment but at a 
constant temperature of 86 F.   
Most of the species germinated better under the higher 
temperatures even when the salinity levels were high.  Six 
plant species responded better than the other tested species 
at salt levels with an EC of 20 or greater.  These were 
bundleflower (Desmanthus virgatus), orange zexmenia 
(Zexmenia hispida) and sorghum with greater than 30 % 
germination at temperatures at 86 F and two-flowered 
trichloris (Chloris crinita), Arizona cottontop (Digiteria 
californica) and Bermudagrass with greater than 20 % 
germination at temperatures at 86 F. 
LeeRoy is now getting ready to initiate the seedling trials.  
He has set-up 3 ebb-flow tables to handle watering at an 
EC of 0, EC-10 and an EC-20.  He has seeded  8 species 
and once the plants reach the 3-leaf stage these plants will 
be subjected 
to the 
salinity 
treatments. 
 
It is also 
important to 
know how 
the salt 
levels will 
change in 
the soil with 
Shortspike Seedlings Growing at Bomer
the varying temperature and rainfall of the different 
seasons.  Therefore, LeeRoy plans to install Decagon 
Devices data logging equipment for soil moisture and soil 
electrical conductivity to monitor field site conditions in 
Zapata County in June 2006.     
 
Native Plant Restoration & Diversity Methods 
 
A field emergence study of shortspike windmillgrass 
(Chloris subdolichostachya) was established in May 2004 
on a Victoria clay soil at the PMC.  Ten by twenty foot flat 
plots were seeded at a rate of 20 PLS/ft2 and replicated 
three times for accessions 9085260 and 9085283 and 
9085313.  These plots were not irrigated.  Evaluation of 
these plots in November of 2004 indicated that accession 
9085260 had the densest cover and foliage production 
based on ocular estimates with an average 60% cover.   
  
A second field emergence study was established in March 
2005 into a treated buffelgrass pasture at the Bomer 
Wildlife Area in Duval County, Texas.  Aaron Tjelmeland, 
a graduate student at TAMUK, and the PMC are 
attempting to diversify dense stands of buffelgrass 
(Pennisetum ciliare (L.) Link) by interseeding native 
grasses.  Ten meter by ten meter plots were divided in half 
and random halves were sprayed with 64 ounces per acre 
of imazapyr in November, 2004.  In March 2005, both the 
sprayed and the unsprayed plots were seeded with a seed 
mix of shortspike windmillgrass (Accession 9085260), 
switchgrass (Panicum virgatum), and 4-flower trichloris 
(Trichloris pluriflora) at a rate of 10 PLS/ft2 per species, 
replicated three times.  These plots on a sandy loam soil 
were not irrigated.  Evaluation of these plots in November 
of 2005 (Table 1) indicated that shortspike windmillgrass 
was the only seeded species that became established.  
 
Table 1.  Species Evaluation of Imazapyr Treated Plots in 
November 2005 at the Bomer Wildlife Area. 
Rep 
Species 
% Cover on 
Sprayed Plots 
 % Cover on 
Unsprayed Plots 
Buffelgrass 
91 
100 
Shortspike 
41 
0 
1 
 
 
 
Annual 
forbs 
0.3 
0 
Buffelgrass 
90 
97 
Shortspike 
24 
0 
2 
Annual 
forbs 
19 
31 
Buffelgrass 
71 
99 
Shortspike 
27 
2 
3 
Annual 
forbs 
18 
11 
 
Coastal Shoreline Stabilization 
 
Sand Dune Vegetation - Rematch 
 
In January 2005, the PMC coordinated with The Nature 
Conservancy (TNC), the South Padre Island Parks 
Department (SPIPD), and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service to form 300 feet of encapsulated soil in order to 
construct and vegetate a 4 foot high by 40 foot wide sand 
dune.   
  
However, Hurricanes Emily and Rita in 2005 destroyed 
most of this dune.  The fortunate aspect of the destruction 
of the dune is that it will allow for evaluation of some new 
construction methods.  The PMC will reconstruct a dune 
220 feet long on the same site in March of 2006.  The new 
dune will include the use of coconut fiber bales, coconut 
fiber blocks with matting, and also “concertainers,“ metal 
cases filled with sand 
and covered with 
coconut fiber.  The dune 
will also be used to 
compare the success of 
plant material from a 
population near Corpus 
Christi and from a 
population near the 
dune.  The effect of 
irrigation and hydrogel 
techniques on plant 
survival will also be 
evaluated.   
 
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, age, disability, and where applicable, sex, marital status, familial status, parental status, religion, sexual 
orientation, genetic information, political beliefs, reprisal, or because all or a part of an individual's income is derived from any public assistance program. (Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.) Persons with disabilities who require alternative 
means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDA's TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD). To file a complaint of discrimination write to USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, 
1400 Independence Avenue, S.W., Washington, D.C. 20250-9410 or call (800) 795-3272 (voice) or (202) 720-6382 (TDD). USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer. 
