Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
D.4.14 
Glossary 
Most of the coastal engineering terms in this glossary are from the Shore Protection Manual 
(USACE, 1984) and Coastal Engineering Manual (USACE, 2002) and are supplemented with 
additional terms relevant to hazard mapping. FEMA has an extensive glossary posted on the 
FEMA website at <http://www.fema.gov/fhm/dl_cgs.shtm> Glossary. 
 
 
---------- A ---------- 
 
 
ACCRETION  May be either natural or artificial.  Natural accretion is the buildup of land, solely 
by the action of the forces of nature, on a beach by deposition of water- or airborne 
material.  Artificial accretion is a similar buildup of land by reason of an act of man, such 
as the accretion formed by a GROIN, BREAKWATER, or beach fill deposited by 
mechanical means.  Also AGGRADATION. 
ADJUSTABLE GROIN  A GROIN whose permeability can be changed, usually with gates or 
removable sections. 
ADVANCE (of a beach)  (1) A continuing seaward movement of the shoreline.  (2) A net 
seaward movement of the shoreline over a specified time.  Also PROGRESSION. 
AEOLIAN  See EOLIAN. 
ALIGNMENT  The course along which the center line of a channel, canal or drain is located. 
ALLUVIAL DEPOSITS  Detrital material which is transported by a river and deposited B 
usually temporarily B at points along the flood plain of a river.  Commonly composed of 
sands and gravels. 
ALLUVIAL PLANE  A plain bordering a river, formed by the deposition of material eroded 
from areas of higher elevation. 
ALLUVIUM  Soil (sand, mud, or similar detritial material) deposited by streams, or the deposits 
formed. 
ALONGSHORE  Parallel to and near the shoreline;  LONGSHORE. 
AMPLITUDE, WAVE  (1) The magnitude of the displacement of a wave from a mean value.  
An ocean wave has an amplitude equal to the vertical distance from still-water level to 
wave crest.  For a sinusoidal wave, the amplitude is one-half the wave height.  (2) The 
semirange of a constituent tide. 
ANGLE OF REPOSE  The maximum slope (measured from the horizontal) at which soils and 
loose materials on the banks of canals, rivers or embankments will stay stable. 
ANISOTROPIC  Having properties that change with changing directions. 
ANOXIC  Refers to an environment that contain little or no dissolved oxygen and hence little or 
no benthic marine life. These conditions arise in some basins or fjords where physical 
circulation of seawater is limited. 
ANTIDUNES  BED FORMS that occur in trains and are in phase with, and strongly interact 
with, gravity water-surface waves. 
APRON  Layer of stone, concrete or other material to protect the toe of a structure. 
AQUIFER  A geologic formation that is water-bearing, and which transmits water from one 
point in the formation to another. 
 
D.4.14-1 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
ARCHIPELAGO  A sea that contains numerous islands;  also the island group itself. 
ARMOR LAYER  Protective layer on a BREAKWATER or SEAWALL composed of armor 
units. 
ARMOR UNIT  A relatively large quarrystone or concrete shape that is selected to fit specified 
geometric characteristics and density.  It is usually of nearly uniform size and usually 
large enough to require individual placement.  In normal cases it is used as primary wave 
protection and is placed in thicknesses of at least two units. 
ARTIFICIAL NOURISHMENT  The process of replenishing a beach with material (usually 
sand) obtained from another location. 
ASTRONOMICAL TIDE  The tidal levels and character which would result from gravitational 
effects, e.g. of the Earth, Sun and Moon, without any atmospheric influences. 
ATTENUATION  (1) A lessening of the amplitude of a wave with distance from the origin.  (2) 
The decrease of water-particle motion with increasing depth.  Particle motion resulting 
from surface oscillatory waves attenuates rapidly with depth, and practically disappears at 
a depth equal to a surface wavelength. 
 
 
---------- B ---------- 
 
 
BACKRUSH  The seaward return of the water following the uprush of the waves.  For any given 
tide stage the point of farthest return seaward of the backrush is known as the Limit of 
backrush or limit backwash. 
BACKSHORE  That zone of the shore or beach lying behind the upper swash zone. 
BACKWASH RIPPLES  Low amplitude ripple marks formed on fine sand beaches by the 
Backwash of the waves. 
BANK  (1) The rising ground bordering a lake, river, or sea; or of a river or channel, for which it 
is designated as right or left as the observer is facing downstream.  (2) An elevation of the 
sea floor or large area, located on a continental (or island) shelf and over which the depth 
is relatively shallow but sufficient for safe surface navigation (e.g., Georges Bank);  a 
group of shoals.  (3) In its secondary sense, used only with a qualifying word such as 
"sand bank" or "gravel bank," a shallow area consisting of shifting forms of silt, sand, 
mud, and gravel. 
BAR  A submerged or emerged embankment of sand, gravel, or other unconsolidated material 
built on the sea floor in shallow water by waves and currents.  
BARRIER SPIT  Similar to a barrier island, but connected to the mainland. 
BASIN  A depressed area with no surface outlet, such as a lake basin or an enclosed sea. 
BASIN, BOAT  A naturally or artificially enclosed or nearly enclosed harbor area for small 
craft. 
BATHMETRIC CHART  A topographic map of the bed of the ocean, with depths indicated by 
contours (isobaths) drawn at regular intervals. 
BATHYMETRY  The measurement of depths of water in oceans, seas, and lakes; also 
information derived from such measurements. 
BAY  A recess in the shore or an inlet of a sea between two capes or headlands, not as large as a 
gulf but larger than a cove.  
BAYMOUTH BAR  A bar extending partly or entirely across the mouth of a bay. 
 
D.4.14-2 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
BEACH  The zone of unconsolidated material that extends landward from the low water line to 
the place where there is marked change in material or physiographic form, or to the line 
of permanent vegetation (usually the effective limit of storm waves).  The seaward limit 
of a beach--unless otherwise specified--is the mean low water line.  A beach includes 
foreshore and backshore.  See also SHORE, SUSTAINABLE BEACH, AND SELF-
SUSTAINING BEACH. 
BEACH BERM  A nearly horizontal part of the beach or backshore formed by the deposit of 
material by wave action.  Some beaches have no berms, others have one or several. 
BEACH CREST  The point representing the limit of normal high tide wave run-up (see BERM 
CREST). 
 BEACH EROSION  The carrying away of beach materials by wave action, tidal currents, 
littoral currents, or wind. 
 BEACH FACE  The section of the beach normally exposed to the action of the wave uprush.  
The FORESHORE of a BEACH.  (Not synonymous with SHOREFACE.) 
 BEACH FILL  Material placed on a beach to renourish eroding shores. 
 BEACH HEAD  The cliff, dune or sea wall looming above the land ward limit of the active 
beach. 
 BEACH MATERIAL  Granular sediments, usually sand or shingle moved by the sea. 
 BEACH PLAN SHAPE  The shape of the beach in plan;  usually shown as a contour line, 
combination of contour lines or recognizable  features such as beach crest and/or the still 
water line. 
 BEACH PROFILE  A cross-section taken perpendicular to a given beach contour; the profile 
may include the face of a dune or sea wall, extend over the backshore, across the 
foreshore, and seaward underwater into the nearshore zone. 
 BEACH RIDGE  See RIDGE, BEACH. 
 BEACH SCARP  See SCARP, BEACH. 
 BEACH WIDTH  The horizontal dimension of the beach measured normal to the shoreline and 
landward of the higher-high tide line (on oceanic coasts) or from the still water level (on 
lake coasts). 
 BED  The bottom of a watercourse, or any body of water. 
 BED FORMS  Any deviation from a flat bed that is readily detectable by eye and higher than 
the largest sediment size present in the parent bed material;  generated on the bed of an 
alluvial channel by the flow. 
 BED LOAD  Sediment transport mode in which individual particles either roll or slide along the 
bed as a shallow, mobile layer a few particle diameters deep, the part of the load that is 
not continuously in suspension. 
 BED PROTECTION  A (rock) structure on the bed in order to protect the underlying bed 
against erosion due to current and/or wave action. 
 BED SHEAR STRESS  The way in which waves (or currents) transfer energy to the sea bed. 
 BEDDING PLANE  A surface parallel to the surface of deposition, which may or may not have 
a physical expression. The original attitude of a bedding plane should not be assumed to 
have been horizontal. 
 BEDROCK  The solid rock that underlies gravel, soil, and other superficial material.  Bedrock 
may be exposed at the surface (an outcrop) or it may be buried under a few centimeters to 
thousands of meters of unconsolidated material. 
 
D.4.14-3 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 BENCH  (1) A level or gently sloping erosion plane inclined seaward.  (2) A nearly horizontal 
area at about the level of maximum high water on the sea side of a dike. 
 BENCH MARK, TIDAL  A bench mark whose elevation has been determined with respect to 
mean sea level at a nearby tide gauge; the tidal bench mark is used as reference for that 
tide gauge. 
 BENCH MARK  A permanently fixed point of known elevation.  A primary bench mark is one 
close to a tide station to which the tide staff and tidal datum originally are referenced. 
 BENEFITS  The asset value of a scheme, usually measured in terms of the cost of damages 
avoided by the scheme, or the valuation of perceived amenity or environmental 
improvements  
 BENTHIC  Pertaining to the sub-aquatic bottom. 
 BENTHOS  Those animals who live on the sediments of the sea floor, including both mobile 
and non-mobile forms. 
 BERM  (1) On a beach: a nearly horizontal plateau on the beach face or backshore, formed by 
the deposition of beach material by wave action or by means of a mechanical plant as part 
of a beach renourishment scheme.  Some natural beaches have no berm, others have 
several.  (2) On a structure: a nearly horizontal area, often built to support or key-in an 
armor layer. 
 BERM, BEACH  See BEACH BERM. 
 BERM BREAKWATER  Rubble mound structure with horizontal berm of armor stones at about 
sea level, which is allowed to be (re)shaped by the waves. 
 BERM CREST  The seaward limit of a BERM.  Also called BERM EDGE. 
 BIFURCATION  Location where a river separates in two or more reaches or branches (the 
opposite of a confluence). 
 BIGHT  A bend in a coastline forming an open bay.  A bay formed by such a bend. 
 BIOTURBATION  The disturbance of sediment bedding by the activities of burrowing 
organisms. 
 BIRDFOOT DELTA  A river delta formed by many levee-bordered distributaries extending 
seaward and resembling in plan the outstretched claws of a bird.  Example:  Mississippi 
River delta. 
 BLANKET (FOUNDATION or BEDDING)  A layer or layers of graded fine stones underlying 
a BREAKWATER, GROIN or rock embankment to prevent the natural bed material 
from being washed away. 
 BLOWOUT  A depression on the land surface caused by wind erosion. 
 BLUFF A high, steep bank or cliff. 
 BOG  A wet, spongy, poorly drained area which is usually rich in very specialized plants, 
contains a high percentage of organic remnants and residues and frequently is associated 
with a spring, seepage area, or other subsurface water source.  A bog sometimes 
represents the final stage of the natural processes of eutrophication by which lakes and 
other bodies of water are very slowly transformed into land areas. 
 BOIL  An upward flow of water in a sandy formation due to an unbalanced hydrostatic pressure 
resulting from a rise in a nearby stream, or from removing the overburden in making 
excavations. 
 BOLD COAST  A prominent landmass that rises steeply from the sea. 
 BORE  A very rapid rise of the tide in which the advancing water presents an abrupt front of 
considerable height.  In shallow estuaries where the range of tide is large, the high water 
 
D.4.14-4 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
is propagated inward faster than the low water because of the greater depth at high water.  
If the high water overtakes the low water, an abrupt front is presented, with the high-
water crest finally falling forward as the tide continues to advance.  Also EAGER. 
 BOTTOM (nature of)  The composition or character of the bed of an ocean or other body of 
water (e.g., clay, coral, gravel, mud, ooze, pebbles, rock, shell, shingle, hard, or soft). 
BOTTOM BOUNDARY LAYER  The lower portion of the water flow that experiences 
frictional retardation based on its proximity to the bed. 
 BOTTOMSET  One of the horizontal or gently inclined sediment layers deposited in front of the 
advancing forest beds of a delta. 
 BOULDER  A rounded rock more than 256 mm (10 inch) in diameter; larger than a 
cobblestone.  See SOIL CLASSIFICATION. 
 BOUNDARY CONDITIONS  Environmental conditions, e.g. waves, currents, drifts, etc. used 
as boundary input to physical or numerical models. 
 BRAIDED RIVER  A river type with multiple channels separated by shoals, bars and islands. 
 BREACHING  Failure of the beach head or a dike allowing flooding by tidal action. 
 BREAKER  A wave breaking on a shore, over a REEF, etc.  Breakers may be classified into 
four types: COLLAPSING--breaking occurs over lower half of wave, with minimal air 
pocket and usually no splash-up.  Bubbles and foam present. PLUNGING--crest curls 
over air pocket; breaking is usually with a crash.  Smooth splash-up usually follows. 
SPILLING--bubbles and turbulent water spill down front face of wave.  The upper 25 
percent of the front face may become vertical before breaking.  Breaking generally occurs 
over quite a distance. SURGING--wave peaks up, but bottom rushes forward from under 
wave, and wave slides up beach face with little or no bubble production.  Water surface 
remains almost plane except where ripples may be produced on the beachface during 
runback. 
 BREAKER DEPTH  The still-water depth at the point where a wave breaks.  Also called 
BREAKING DEPTH. 
 BREAKER INDEX  Ratio of breaking wave height to deepwater wave height. 
 BREAKER ZONE  The zone within which waves approaching the coastline commence 
breaking, typically in water depths of between 5 and 10 meters. 
 BREAKING  Reduction in wave energy and height in the surf zone due to limited water depth. 
 BREAKWATER  A structure protecting a shore area, harbor, anchorage, or basin from waves. 
 BUFFER AREA  A parcel or strip of land that is designed and designated to permanently 
remain vegetated in an undisturbed and natural condition to protect an adjacent aquatic or 
wetland site from upland impacts, to provide habitat for wildlife and to afford limited 
public access. 
 BULKHEAD  A structure or partition to retain or prevent sliding of the land.  A secondary 
purpose is to protect the upland against damage from wave action. 
 BUOY A float;  especially a floating object moored to the bottom, to mark a channel, anchor, 
shoal rock, etc.  Some common types include:  a nun or nut buoy is conical in shape;  a 
can buoy is squat and cylindrical above water and conical below water;  a spar buoy is a 
vertical, slender spar anchored at one end;  a bell buoy, bearing a bell, runs mechanically 
or by the action of waves, usually marks shoals or rocks;  a whistling buoy, similarly 
operated, marks shoals or channel entrances;  a dan buoy carries a pole with a flag or 
light on it. 
 
D.4.14-5 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 BUOYANCY  The resultant of upward forces, exerted by the water on a submerged or floating 
body, equal to the weight of the water displaced by this body. 
 BYPASSING, SAND  Hydraulic or mechanical movement of sand from the accreting updrift 
side to the eroding downdrift side of an inlet or harbor entrance.  The hydraulic 
movement may include natural movement as well as movement caused by man. 
 
 
---------- C ---------- 
 
 
 CAISSON  Concrete box-type structure. 
 CALIFORNIA CURRENT  A deep-ocean boundary current that flows south-southeasterly 
along the U.S. west coast. The current is shallow, broad and slow moving carrying cold, 
nutrient poor waters toward the equator. 
 CALCAREOUS  Containing calcium carbonate (CaCO3), chiefly as the minerals calcite and 
aragonite.  When applied to rock, it implies that as much as 50 percent of the rock is 
carbonate (e.g., calcareous sand). 
 CALM  The condition of the water surface when there is no wind waves or swell. 
 CANAL  An artificial watercourse cut through a land area for such uses as navigation and 
irrigation. 
 CANYON  A relatively narrow, deep depression with steep slopes, the bottom of which grades 
continuously downward.  May be underwater (submarine) or on land (SUBAERIAL). 
 CAPE  A land area jutting seaward from a continent or large island which prominently marks a 
change in, or interrupts notably, the coastal trend;  a prominent feature.  Examples: Cape 
Cod, Massachusetts; Cape Hatteras, North Carolina. 
 CAPILLARY WAVE  A wave whose velocity of propagation is controlled primarily by the 
surface tension of the liquid in which the wave is traveling.  Water waves of length less 
than about 1 inch are considered capillary waves.  Waves longer than 1 inch and shorter 
than 2 inches are in an indeterminate zone between capillary and gravity waves. 
 CARTOGRAPHY  The science and art of making maps. 
 CATCHMENT AREA  The area which drains naturally to a particular point on a river, thus 
contributing to its natural discharge. 
 CAUSEWAY  A raised road across wet or marshy ground, or across water. 
 CAUSTIC  In refraction of waves, the name given to the curve to which adjacent orthogonals of 
waves refracted by a bottom whose contour lines are curved, are tangents.  The 
occurrence of a caustic always marks a region of crossed orthogonals and high wave 
convergence. 
 CELERITY  Wave speed. 
 CHANNEL  (1) A natural or artificial waterway of perceptible extent which either periodically 
or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting link between two 
bodies of water.  (2) The part of a body of water deep enough to be used for navigation 
through an area otherwise too shallow for navigation.  (3) A large strait, as the English 
Channel.  (4) The deepest part of a stream, bay, or strait through which the main volume 
or current of water flows. 
 
D.4.14-6 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 CHANNEL CAPACITY  The maximum flow which a channel is capable of transmitting 
without its banks being overtopped. 
 CHANNEL-MOUTH BAR  A bar built where a stream enters a body of standing water, 
resulting from decreased flow velocity. 
 CHART A  special-purpose map, esp. one designed for navigation such as a bathymetric chart. 
 CHART DATUM  The plane or level to which soundings (or elevations) or tide heights are 
referenced (usually LOW WATER DATUM).  The surface is called a tidal datum when 
referred to a certain phase of tide.  To provide a safety factor for navigation, some level 
lower than MEAN SEA LEVEL is generally selected for hydrographic charts, such as 
MEAN LOW WATER or MEAN LOWER LOW WATER.  See DATUM PLANE. 
 CHEMICAL WEATHERING  Disintegration of rocks and sediments by chemical alteration of 
the constituent minerals or of the cementing matrix.  It is caused by exposure, oxidation, 
temperature changes, and biological processes. 
 CHOP  The short-crested waves that may spring up quickly in a moderate breeze, and which 
break easily at the crest.  Also WIND CHOP. 
 CHOPPY SEA  Short, rough waves tumbling with a short and quick motion. Short-crested 
waves that may spring up quickly in a moderate breeze, and break easily at the crest. 
 CLAPOTIS  The French equivalent for a type of STANDING WAVE.  In American usage it is 
usually associated with the standing wave phenomenon caused by the reflection of a 
nonbreaking wave train from a structure with a face that is vertical or nearly vertical.  
Full clapotis is one with 100 percent reflection of the incident wave; partial clapotis is 
one with less than 100 percent reflection. 
 CLASTIC ROCKS  Rocks built up of fragments which have been produced by weathering and 
erosion of pre-existing rocks and minerals and, typically, transported mechanically to 
their point of deposition. 
 CLAY  A fine grained, plastic, sediment with a typical grain size less than 0.004 mm.  Possesses 
electromagnetic properties which bind the grains together to give a bulk strength or 
cohesion.  See SOIL CLASSIFICATION. 
 CLIFF  A high, steep face of rock;  a precipice.  See also SEA CLIFF. 
 CLIMATE  The characteristic weather of a region, particularly regarding temperature and 
precipitation, averaged over some significant internal of time (years). 
 CLOSURE DEPTH  The water depth beyond which repetitive profile surveys (collected over 
several years) do not detect vertical sea bed changes, generally considered the seaward 
limit of littoral transport.  The depth can be determined from repeated cross-shore profile 
surveys or estimated using formulas based on wave statistics.  Note that this does not 
imply the lack of sediment motion beyond this depth. 
 CNOIDAL WAVE  A type of wave in shallow water (i.e., where the depth of water is less than 
1/8 to 1/10 the wavelength).  The surface profile is expressed in terms of the Jacobian 
elliptic function cn u; hence the term cnoidal. 
 CO-TIDAL LINES  Lines which link all the points where the tide is at the same stage (or phase) 
of its cycle. 
 COAST  (1)  A strip of land of indefinite width (may be several kilometers) that extends from 
the shoreline inland to the first major change in terrain features.  (2) The part of a country 
regarded as near the coast. 
 COASTAL AREA  The land and sea area bordering the shoreline. 
 
D.4.14-7 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 COASTAL CURRENTS  (1) Those currents which flow roughly parallel to the shore and 
constitute a relatively uniform drift in the deeper water adjacent to the surf zone. These 
currents may be tidal currents, transient, wind-driven currents, or currents associated with 
the distribution of mass in local waters.  (2) For navigational purposes, the term is used to 
designate a current in coastwise shipping lanes where the tidal current is frequently 
rotary. 
 COASTAL DEFENSE  General term used to encompass both coast protection against erosion 
and sea defense against flooding. 
 COASTAL FORCING  The natural processes which drive coastal hydro- and morphodynamics 
(e.g. winds, waves, tides, etc). 
 COASTAL PLAIN  The plain composed of horizontal or gently sloping strata of clastic 
materials, generally representing a strip of sea bottom that has emerged from the sea in 
recent geologic time. 
 COASTAL PROCESSES  Collective term covering the action of natural forces on the shoreline, 
and near shore seabed. 
 COASTAL STRIP  A zone directly adjacent to the waterline, where only coast related activities 
take place. Usually this is a strip of some 100 m wide.  In this strip the coastal defense 
activities take place.  In this strip often there are restrictions to land use. 
 COASTAL ZONE  The transition zone where the land meets water, the region that is directly 
influenced by marine and lacustrine hydrodynamic processes.  Extends offshore to the 
continental shelf break and onshore to the first major change in topography above the 
reach of major storm waves.  On barrier coasts, includes the bays and lagoons between 
the barrier and the mainland. 
 COASTAL ZONE MANAGEMENT  The integrated and general development of the coastal 
zone. Coastal Zone Management is not restricted to coastal defense works, but includes 
also a development in economical, ecological and social terms. Coastline Management is 
a part of Coastal Zone Management. 
 COASTLINE  (1) Technically, the line that forms the boundary between the coast and the shore.  
(2) Commonly, the line that forms the boundary between the land and the water, esp. the 
water of a sea or ocean. 
 COBBLE  A rock fragment between 64 and 256 mm in diameter, usually rounded.  See SOIL 
CLASSIFICATION. 
 COFFERDAM  A temporary watertight structure enclosing all or part of the construction area 
so that construction can proceed in the dry. 
 COHESIVE SEDIMENT  Sediment containing significant proportion of clays, the 
electromagnetic properties of which cause the sediment to bind together. 
 COLLOID  As a size term refers to particles smaller than 0.00024 mm, smaller than clay size. 
 COMBER  (1) A deepwater wave whose crest is pushed forward by a strong wind; much larger 
than a whitecap.  (2) A long-period breaker. 
 COMPETENCE  The ability of a wind or water current to transport detritus, in terms of particle 
size rather than amount, measured as the diameter of the largest particles. 
 COMPLEX SPIT  A large RECURVED SPIT with secondary spits developed at its end.  
Example: Sandy Hook, New Jersey. 
 CONFLUENCE  The junction of two or more river reaches or branches (the opposite of a 
bifurcation). 
 
D.4.14-8 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 CONSOLIDATION  The gradual, slow compression of a cohesive soil due to weight acting on 
it, which occurs as water is driven out of the voids in the soil.  Consolidation only occurs 
in clays or other soils of low permeability. 
 CONTINENTAL SHELF  (1) The zone bordering a continent extending from the line of 
permanent immersion to the depth, usually about 100 m to 200 m, where there is a 
marked or rather steep descent toward the great depths of the ocean.  (2) The area under 
active littoral processes during the HOLOCENE period.  (3) The region of the oceanic 
bottom that extends outward from the shoreline with an average slope of less than 1:100, 
to a line where the gradient begins to exceed 1:40 (the CONTINENTAL SLOPE). 
 CONTINENTAL SLOPE  The declivity from the offshore border of the CONTINENTAL 
SHELF to oceanic depths.  It is characterized by a marked increase in slope. 
 CONTOUR  A line on a map or chart representing points of equal elevation with relation to a 
DATUM.  It is called an ISOBATH when connecting points of equal depth below a 
datum.  Also called DEPTH CONTOUR. 
 CONTROLLING DEPTH  The least depth in the navigable parts of a waterway, governing the 
maximum draft of vessels that can enter. 
 CONVERGENCE  (1) In refraction phenomena, the decreasing of the distance between 
orthogonals in the direction of wave travel.  Denotes an area of increasing wave height 
and energy concentration.  (2) In wind-setup phenomena, the increase in setup observed 
over that which would occur in an equivalent rectangular basin of uniform depth, caused 
by changes in planform or depth; also the decrease in basin width or depth causing such 
increase in setup. 
 CORE  (1) A cylindrical sample extracted from a beach or seabed to investigate the types and 
depths of sediment layers.  (2) An inner, often much less permeable portion of a 
BREAKWATER or BARRIER BEACH. 
 CORIOLIS EFFECT  Force due to the Earth's rotation, capable of generating currents.  It causes 
moving bodies to be deflected to the right in the Northern Hemisphere and to the left in 
the Southern Hemisphere.  The "force" is proportional to the speed and latitude of the 
moving object.  It is zero at the equator and maximum at the poles. 
 COVE  A small, sheltered recess in a coast, often inside a larger embayment. 
 COVER LAYER  The outer layer used in a rubble system as protection against external 
hydraulic loads. 
 CREEK  (1) A stream, less predominant than a river, and generally tributary to a river.  (2) A 
small tidal Channel through a coastal MARSH. 
 CREEP  Very slow, continuous downslope movement of soil or debris. 
 CRENULATE  An indented or wavy shoreline beach form, with the regular seaward- pointing 
parts rounded rather than sharp, as in the cuspate type. 
 CREST  Highest point on a beach face, BREAKWATER, or sea wall. 
 CREST LENGTH, WAVE  The length of a wave along its crest.  Sometimes called CREST 
WIDTH. 
 CREST OF WAVE  (1) the highest part of a wave.  (2) That part of the wave above still-water 
level. 
 CREST OF BERM  The seaward limit of a berm.  Also called BERM EDGE. 
 CROSS-BEDDING  An arrangement of relatively thin layers of rock inclined at an angle to the 
more nearly horizontal BEDDING PLANES of the larger rock unit.  Also referred to as 
cross-stratification. 
 
D.4.14-9 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 CROSS-SHORE  Perpendicular to the shoreline. 
 CROWN WALL  Concrete superstructure on a rubble mound. 
 CURRENT  (1) The flowing of water, or other liquid or gas.  (2) That portion of a stream of 
water which is moving with a velocity much greater than the average or in which the 
progress of the water is principally concentrated.  (3) Ocean currents can be classified in 
a number of different ways.  Some important types include the following:  (1) Periodic - 
due to the effect of the tides; such Currents may be rotating rather than having a simple 
back and forth motion.  The currents accompanying tides are known as tidal currents; (2) 
Temporary - due to seasonal winds; (3) Permanent or ocean - constitute a part of the 
general ocean circulation.  The term DRIFT CURRENT is often applied to a slow broad 
movement of the oceanic water; (4) Nearshore - caused principally by waves breaking 
along a shore. 
 CURRENT, COASTAL  One of the offshore currents flowing generally parallel to the shoreline 
in the deeper water beyond and near the surf zone;  these are not related genetically to 
waves and resulting surf, but may be related to tides, winds, or distribution of mass. 
 CURRENT, DRIFT  A broad, shallow, slow-moving ocean or lake current.  Opposite of 
CURRENT, STREAM. 
 CURRENT, EBB  The tidal current away from shore or down a tidal stream.  Usually associated 
with the decrease in the height of the tide. 
 CURRENT, EDDY  See EDDY. 
 CURRENT, FEEDER  Any of the parts of the nearshore current system that flow parallel to 
shore before converging and forming the neck of the RIP CURRENT. 
 CURRENT, FLOOD  The tidal current toward shore or up a tidal stream.  Usually associated 
with the increase in the height of the tide. 
 CURRENT, INSHORE  See INSHORE CURRENT. 
 CURRENT, LITTORAL  Any current in the littoral zone caused primarily by wave action; e.g., 
LONGSHORE CURRENT, RIP CURRENT.  See also CURRENT, NEARSHORE. 
 CURRENT, LONGSHORE  The littoral current in the breaker zone moving essentially parallel 
to the shore, usually generated by waves breaking at an angle to the shoreline. 
 CURRENT METER  An instrument for measuring the velocity of a current. 
 CURRENT, NEARSHORE  A current in the NEARSHORE ZONE. 
 CURRENT, OFFSHORE  See OFFSHORE CURRENT. 
 CURRENT, PERIODIC  See CURRENT, TIDAL. 
 CURRENT, PERMANENT  See PERMANENT CURRENT. 
 CURRENT, RIP  See RIP CURRENT. 
 CURRENT, STREAM  A narrow, deep, and swift ocean current, as the Gulf Stream.  
CURRENT, DRIFT. 
 CURRENT SYSTEM, NEARSHORE  See NEARSHORE CURRENT SYSTEM. 
 CURRENT, TIDAL  The alternating horizontal movement of water associated with the rise and 
fall of the tide caused by the astronomical tide-producing forces.  Also CURRENT, 
PERIODIC.  See also CURRENT, FLOOD and CURRENT, EBB. 
 CURRENT-REFRACTION  Process by which wave velocity, height, and direction are affected 
by a current. 
 CUSP  One of a series of short ridges on the FORESHORE separated by crescent-shaped 
troughs spaced at more or less regular intervals.  Between these cusps are hollows.  The 
 
D.4.14-10 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
cusps are spaced at somewhat uniform distances along beaches.  They represent a 
combination of constructive and destructive processes.  Also BEACH CUSP. 
CUSPATE BAR  A crescent-shaped bar uniting with the shore at each end.  It may be formed by 
a single spit growing from shore and then turning back to again meet the shore, or by two 
spits growing from the shore and uniting to form a bar of sharply cuspate form. 
 CUSPATE SPIT  The spit that forms in the lee of a shoal or offshore feature (BREAKWATER, 
island, rock outcrop) by waves that are refracted and/or diffracted around the offshore 
feature.  It may eventually grow into a TOMBOLO linking the feature to the mainland. 
 CYCLOIDAL WAVE  A steep, symmetrical wave whose crest forms an angle of 120 degrees 
and whose form is that of a cycloid.  A trochoidal wave of maximum steepness.  See also 
TROCHOIDAL WAVE. 
 CYCLONE  A system of winds that rotates about a center of low atmospheric pressure.  
Rotation is clockwise in the Southern Hemisphere and anti-clockwise in the Northern 
Hemisphere.  In the Indian Ocean, the term refers to the powerful storms called 
HURRICANES in the Atlantic. 
 
 
---------- D ---------- 
 
 
 DAM  Structure built in rivers or estuaries, basically to separate water at both sides and/or to 
retain water at one side. 
 DATUM  Any permanent line, plane or surface used as a reference datum to which elevations 
are referred. 
 DATUM, CHART  See CHART DATUM. 
 DATUM, PLANE  The horizontal plane to which soundings, ground elevations, or water 
surface elevations are referred.  Also REFERENCE PLANE.  The plane is called a 
TIDAL DATUM when defined by a certain phase of the tide.  The following datums are 
ordinarily used on hydrographic charts: MEAN LOW WATER--Atlantic coast (U. S.), 
Argentina, Sweden, and Norway. MEAN LOWER LOW WATER--Pacific coast (U. S.). 
LOW WATER DATUM--Great Lakes (U. S. and Canada). A common datum used on 
United States topographic maps is MEAN SEA LEVEL.  See also BENCH MARK. 
 DAVIDSON CURRENT  Deep-ocean boundary current off the west coast of the U.S. which 
brings warmer, saltier, low oxygen, high phosphate equatorial type water from low to 
high latitudes. 
 DEBRIS LINE  A line near the limit of storm wave uprush marking the landward limit of debris 
deposits. 
 DECAY AREA  Area of relative CALM through which waves travel after emerging from the 
generating area. 
 DECAY DISTANCE  The distance waves travel after leaving the generating area (FETCH). 
 DECAY OF WAVES  The change waves undergo after they leave a generating area (FETCH) 
and pass through a calm, or region of lighter winds.  In the process of decay, the 
significant wave height decreases and the significant wavelength increases. 
 DEEP WATER  Water so deep that surface waves are little affected by the ocean bottom.  
Generally, water deeper than one-half the surface wavelength is considered deep water.  
Compare SHALLOW WATER. 
 
D.4.14-11 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 DEEP WATER WAVES  A wave in water the depth of which is greater than one-half the 
WAVE LENGTH. 
 DEFLATION  The removal of loose material from a beach or other land surface by wind action. 
 DEGRADATION  The geologic process by means of which various parts of the surface of the 
earth are worn away and their general level lowered, by the action of wind and water. 
 DELTA  (1) An ALLUVIAL DEPOSIT, usually triangular or semi-circular, at the mouth of a 
river or stream.  The delta is normally built up only where there is no tidal or current 
action capable of removing the sediment at the same rate as it is deposited, and hence the 
delta builds forward from the coastline.  (2) A TIDAL DELTA is a similar deposit at the 
mouth of a tidal INLET, put there by TIDAL CURRENTS. 
 DELTA PLAIN  The nearly-level surface composing the landward portion of a large DELTA. 
 DENSITY  Mass (in kg) per unit of volume of a substance;  kg/m3.  For pure water, the density 
is 1,000 kg/m3, for seawater the density is usually more.  Density increases with 
increasing salinity, and decreases with increasing temperature.  More information can be 
found in "properties of seawater".  For stone and sand, usually a density of 2,600 kg/m3 is 
assumed.  Concrete is less dense, in the order of 2,400 kg/m3. Some types of basalt may 
reach 2,800 kg/m3. For sand, including the voids, one may use 1,600 kg/m3, while mud 
often has a density of 1,100 – 1,200 kg/m3. 
 DENSITY CURRENT  Phenomenon of relative flow within water due to difference in density.  
For example, the salt-water wedge is a density current, as is a volcanic nuée ardente. 
 DENSITY STRATIFICATION  The lateral expansion of a sediment plume as it moves out of 
the distributary mouth, where salt and fresh water mix.  This is most likely to occur 
where the speed of the river flow is moderate to low and the distributary mouth is 
relatively deep. 
 DENSITY-DRIVEN CIRCULATION  Variations in salinity create variations in density in 
estuaries.  These variations in density create horizontal pressure gradients, which drive 
estuarine circulation. 
 DEPRESSION  A general term signifying any depressed or lower area in the ocean floor. 
 DEPTH  The vertical distance from a specified datum to the sea floor. 
 DEPTH CONTOUR  See CONTOUR., also isobath. 
 DEPTH, CONTROLLING  See CONTROLLING DEPTH. 
 DEPTH FACTOR  See SHOALING COEFFICIENT. 
 DEPTH OF BREAKING  The still-water depth at the point where the wave breaks.  Also 
BREAKER DEPTH. 
 DERRICK STONE  See STONE, DERRICK. 
 DESIGN HURRICANE  See HYPOTHETICAL HURRICANE. 
 DESIGN STORM  A hypothetical extreme storm whose waves coastal protection structures will 
often be designed to withstand.  The severity of the storm (i.e. return period) is chosen in 
view of the acceptable level of risk of damage or failure.  A DESIGN STORM consists of 
a DESIGN WAVE condition, a design water level and a duration. 
 DESIGN WAVE  In the design of HARBORS, harbor works, etc., the type or types of waves 
selected as having the characteristics against which protection is desired. 
 DESIGN WAVE CONDITION  Usually an extreme wave condition with a specified return 
period used in the design of coastal works. 
 DETACHED BREAKWATER  A BREAKWATER without any SUBAERIAL connection to 
the shore. 
 
D.4.14-12 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 DETRITUS  Small fragments of rock which have been worn or broken away from a mass by the 
action of water or waves. 
 DIFFERENTIAL EROSION / WEATHERING  These features develop in rocks which have 
varying resistance to the agencies of erosion and/or weathering so that parts of the rock 
are removed at greater rates than others.  A typical example is the removal of soft beds 
from between harder beds in a series of sedimentary rocks.  The term may be applied to 
any size of feature, from small-scale etching to the regional development of hills and 
valleys controlled by hard and soft rocks. 
 DIFFRACTION (of water waves)  The phenomenon by which energy is transmitted laterally 
along a wave crest.  When a part of a train of waves is interrupted by a barrier, such as a 
BREAKWATER, the effect of diffraction is manifested by propagation of waves into the 
sheltered region within the barrier's geometric shadow. 
 DIFFRACTION COEFFICIENT  Ratio of diffracted wave height to deep water wave height. 
 DIKE  Earth structure along sea or river in order to protect low lands from flooding by high 
water; dikes along rivers are sometimes called levees.  Sometimes written as DYKE. 
 DISCHARGE  The volume of water per unit of time flowing along a pipe or channel. 
 DITCH  A channel to convey water for irrigation or drainage. 
 DIURNAL  Having a period or cycle of approximately one TIDAL DAY. 
 DIURNAL CURRENT  The type of tidal current having only one flood and one ebb period in 
the tidal day.  A ROTARY CURRENT is diurnal if it changes its direction through all 
points of the compass once each tidal day. 
 DIURNAL INEQUALITY  The difference in height of the two high waters or of the two low 
waters of each day.  Also, the difference in velocity between the two daily flood or EBB 
CURRENTS of each day. 
 DIURNAL TIDE  A tide with one high water and one low water in a tidal day. 
 DIVERGENCE  (1) In refraction phenomena, the increasing of distance between orthogonals in 
the direction of wave travel.  Denotes an area of decreasing wave height and energy 
concentration.  (2) In wind-setup phenomena, the decrease in setup observed under that 
which would occur in an equivalent rectangular basin of uniform depth, caused by 
changes in planform or depth.  Also the increase in basin width or depth causing such 
decrease in setup. 
DIVERGING WAVE  Waves that move obliquely out from a vessel’s sailing line. 
DIVERSION CHANNEL  A waterway used to divert water from its natural course.  The term is 
generally applied to a temporary arrangement e.g. to by-pass water around a dam site 
during construction. 
 DOCK  The slip or waterway between two piers, or cut into the land, for the reception of ships. 
 DOLPHIN  A cluster of piles. 
 DOWNDRIFT  The direction of predominant movement of littoral materials. 
 DOWNSTREAM  Along coasts with obliquely approaching waves there is a longshore (wave-
driven) current.  For this current, one can define an upstream and a DOWNSTREAM 
direction.  For example, on a beach with an orientation west-east, the sea is to the north.  
Suppose the waves come from NW, then the current flows from West to East.  Here, 
UPSTREAM is west of the observer, and east is downstream of the observer. 
 DOWNWELLING  A downward movement (sinking) of surface water caused by onshore 
Ekman transport, converging CURRENTS, or when a water mass becomes more dense 
than the surrounding water. 
 
D.4.14-13 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 DRAINAGE BASIN  Total area drained by a stream and its tributaries. 
 DREDGING  Excavation or displacement of the bottom or shoreline of a water body.  Dredging 
can be accomplished with mechanical or hydraulic machines.  Most is done to maintain 
channel depths or berths for navigational purposes; other dredging is for shellfish 
harvesting, for cleanup of polluted sediments, and for placement of sand on beaches. 
 DRIFT (noun)  (1) Sometimes used as a short form for LITTORAL DRIFT.  (2) The speed at 
which a current runs.  (3) Floating material deposited on a beach (driftwood).  (4) A 
deposit of a continental ice sheet;  e.g., a DRUMLIN. 
 DRIFT CURRENT  A broad, shallow, slow-moving ocean or lake current. 
 DRIFT SECTOR  A particular reach of marine shore in which LITTORAL DRIFT may occur 
without significant interruption, and which contain any and all natural sources of such 
drift, and also any accretion shore forms accreted by such drift. 
 DROMOND  A large medieval fast-sailing galley or cutter. 
 DROWNED COAST  A shore with long, narrow channels, implying that subsidence of the 
coast has transformed the lower portions of river valleys into tidal estuaries. 
 DRUMLIN  A low, smoothly-rounded, elongate hill of compact glacial till built under the 
margin of the ice and shaped by its flow. 
 DRYING BEACH  That part of the beach which is uncovered by water (e.g. at low tide).  
Sometimes referred to as 'SUBAERIAL' beach. 
 DUNES  (1) Ridges or mounds of loose, wind-blown material, usually sand.  (2) Bed forms 
smaller than bars but larger than ripples that are out of phase with any water-surface 
gravity waves associated with them. 
 DURABILITY  The ability of a rock to retain its physical and mechanical properties (i.e. resist 
degradation) in engineering service.  
 DURATION  In wave forecasting, the length of time the wind blows in nearly the same 
direction over the FETCH (generating area). 
 DURATION, MINIMUM  The time necessary for steady-state wave conditions to develop for a 
given wind velocity over a given fetch length. 
 DURATION OF EBB  The interval of time in which a tidal current is ebbing, determined from 
the middle of the slack waters. 
 DURATION OF FALL  The interval from high water to low water. 
 DURATION OF FLOOD  The interval of time in which a tidal current is flooding, determined 
from the middle of slack waters. 
 DURATION OF RISE  The interval from low water to high water. 
 DYNAMIC EQUILIBRIUM  Short term morphological changes that do not affect the 
morphology over a long period. 
 DYNAMIC VISCOSITY  In fluid dynamics, the ratio between the shear stress acting along any 
plane between neighboring fluid elements and the rate of deformation of the velocity 
gradient perpendicular to this plane. 
 
 
---------- E ---------- 
 
 
 EAGER  See BORE. 
 
D.4.14-14 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 EBB  Period when tide level is falling;  often taken to mean the ebb current which occurs during 
this period. 
 EBB CURRENT  The movement of a tidal current away from shore or down a tidal stream.  In 
the semidiurnal type of reversing current, the terms greater ebb and lesser ebb are applied 
respectively to the ebb currents of greater and lesser velocity of each day.  The terms of 
maximum ebb and minimum ebb are applied to the maximum and minimum velocities of 
a continuously running ebb current, the velocity alternately increasing and decreasing 
without coming to a slack or reversing.  The expression maximum ebb is also applicable 
to any ebb current at the time of greatest velocity. 
 EBB INTERVAL  The interval between the transit of the moon over the meridian of a place and 
the time of the following strength of ebb. 
 EBB SHIELD  High, landward margin of a flood-tidal shoal that helps divert ebb-tide currents 
around the shoal. 
 EBB STRENGTH  The EBB CURRENT at the time of maximum velocity. 
 EBB TIDAL DELTA  The bulge of sand formed at the seaward mouth of TIDAL INLETS as a 
result of interaction between tidal currents and waves.  Also called inlet-associated bars 
and estuary entrance shoals. 
 EBB TIDE  The period of tide between high water and the succeeding low water; a falling tide. 
 ECHO SOUNDER  An electronic instrument used to determine the depth of water by measuring 
the time interval between the emission of a sonic or ultrasonic signal and the return of its 
echo from the bottom. 
 ECOSYSTEM  The living organisms and the nonliving environment interacting in a given area, 
encompassing the relationships between biological, geochemical, and geophysical 
systems. 
 EDDY  A circular movement of water formed on the side of a main current.  Eddies may be 
created at points where the main stream passes projecting obstructions or where two 
adjacent currents flow counter to each other. 
 EDDY CURRENT  See EDDY. 
 EDGE WAVE  An ocean wave parallel to a coast, with crests normal to the shoreline.  An edge 
wave may be STANDING or PROGRESSIVE.  Its height diminishes rapidly seaward 
and is negligible at a distance of one wavelength offshore. 
 EKMAN TRANSPORT  Resultant flow at right angles to and to the right of the wind direction 
(in the northern hemisphere) referred to as UPWELLING and DOWNWELLING. 
 ELEVATION  The vertical distance from mean sea level or other established datum plane to a 
point on the earth’s surface;  height above sea level.  Although sea floor elevation below 
msl should be marked as a negative value, many charts show positive numerals for water 
depth. 
 EL NIÑO  Warm equatorial water which flows southward along the coast of Peru and Ecuador 
during February and March of certain years.  It is caused by poleward motions of air and 
unusual water temperature patterns in the Pacific Ocean, which cause coastal 
downwelling, leading to the reversal in the normal north-flowing cold coastal currents.  
During many El Niño years, storms, rainfall, and other meteorological phenomena in the 
Western Hemisphere are measurably different than during non-El Niño years.  (See La 
Niña). 
 ELUTRIATION  The process by which a granular material can be sorted into its constituent 
particle sizes by means of a moving stream of fluid (usually air or water).  Elutriators are 
 
D.4.14-15 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
extensively used in studies of sediments for determining Particle size distribution.  Under 
certain circumstances wind, rivers and streams may act as elutriating agents. 
 EMBANKMENT  Fill material, usually earth or rock, placed with sloping sides and with a 
length greater than its height.  Usually an embankment is wider than a dike. 
 EMBAYMENT  An indentation in the shoreline forming an open bay. 
 EMERGENT COAST  A coast in which land formerly under water has recently been exposed 
above sea level, either by uplift of the land or by a drop in sea level. 
 ENDEMIC  Native or confined to a specific geographic area. 
 ENERGY COEFFICIENT  The ratio of the energy in a wave per unit crest length transmitted 
forward with the wave at a point in shallow water to the energy in a wave per unit crest 
length transmitted forward with the wave in deep water.  On refraction diagrams this is 
equal to the ratio of the distance between a pair of orthogonals at a selected shallow-
water point to the distance between the same pair of orthogonals in deep water.  Also the 
square of the REFRACTION COEFFICIENT. 
 ENTRANCE  The avenue of access or opening to a navigable channel or inlet. 
 EOLIAN (also AEOLIAN)  Pertaining to the wind, esp. used with deposits such as loess and 
dune sand, and sedimentary structures like wind-formed ripple marks. 
 EOLIAN SANDS  Sediments of sand size or smaller which have been transported by winds.  
They may be recognized in marine deposits off desert coasts by the greater angularity of 
the grains compared with waterborne particles. 
 EQUATORIAL CURRENTS  (1) Ocean currents flowing westerly near the equator.  There are 
two such currents in both the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.  The one to the north of the 
equator is called the North Equatorial Current and the one to the south is called the South 
Equatorial Current.  Between these two currents there is an easterly flowing stream 
known as the Equatorial Countercurrent.  (2) Tidal currents occurring semimonthly as a 
result of the moon being over the equator.  At these times the tendency of the moon to 
produce DIURNAL INEQUALITY in the current is at a minimum. 
 EQUATORIAL TIDES  Tides occurring semimonthly as the result of the moon being over the 
equator.  At these times the tendency of the moon to produce a DIURNAL 
INEQUALITY in the tide is at a minimum. 
EROSION  The wearing away of land by the action of natural forces.  On a beach, the carrying 
away of beach material by wave action, tidal currents, littoral currents, or by deflation. 
ESCARPMENT  A more or less continuous line of cliffs or steep slopes facing in one general 
direction which are caused by erosion or faulting.  Also SCARP. 
ESTUARY  (1) The part of a river that is affected by tides.  (2) The region near a river mouth in 
which the fresh water of the river mixes with the salt water of the sea and which received 
both fluvial and littoral sediment influx. 
 EUSTATIC SEA LEVEL CHANGE  Change in the relative volume of the world=s ocean 
basins and the total amount of ocean water. 
EYE  In meteorology, usually the "eye of the storm" (hurricane): the roughly circular area of 
comparatively light winds and fair weather found at the center of a severe tropical 
cyclone. 
 
 
 
D.4.14-16 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
---------- F ---------- 
 
 
 FAIRWAY  The parts of a waterway that are open and unobstructed for navigation.  The main 
traveled part of a waterway; a marine thoroughfare. 
 FAR-INFRAGRAVITY  The frequency band (nominally 0.001 - 0.02 Hz) occupied by SHEAR 
INSTABILITIES of the longshore current. This band falls both below and in the lower 
part of the Infragravity band occupied by Infragravity waves. 
 FATHOM  A unit of measurement used for soundings equal to 1.83 meters (6 feet). 
 FATHOMETER  The copyrighted trademark for a type of ECHO SOUNDER. 
 FAULT A fracture in rock along which there has been an observable amount of displacement.  
Faults are rarely single planar units; normally they occur as parallel to sub-parallel sets of 
planes along which movement has taken place to a greater or lesser extent.  Such sets are 
called fault or fracture-zones. 
 FAUNA  The entire group of animals found in an area. 
 FEEDER BEACH  An artificially widened beach serving to nourish downdrift beaches by 
natural littoral currents or forces. 
 FEEDER CURRENT  The currents which flow parallel to shore before converging and forming 
the neck of a RIP CURRENT. 
 FEEDER CURRENT  See CURRENT, FEEDER. 
 FEELING BOTTOM  The initial action of a deepwater wave, in response to the bottom, upon 
running into shoal water. 
 FETCH  The area in which SEAS are generated by a wind having a fairly constant direction and 
speed.  Sometimes used synonymously with FETCH LENGTH.  Also GENERATING 
AREA. 
 FETCH LENGTH  The horizontal distance (in the direction of the wind) over which a wind 
generates seas or creates a WIND SETUP. 
 FETCH-LIMITED  Situation in which wave energy (or wave height) is limited by the size of the 
wave generation area (fetch). 
 FILTER  Intermediate layer, preventing fine materials of an underlayer from being washed 
through the voids of an upper layer. 
 FIORD (FJORD)  A narrow, deep, steep-walled inlet of the sea, usually formed by entrance of 
the sea into a deep glacial trough. 
 FIRTH  A narrow arm of the sea;  also, the opening of a river into the sea. 
 FLOOD  (1) Period when tide level is rising; often taken to mean the flood current which occurs 
during this period  (2) A flow beyond the carrying capacity of a channel. 
 FLOOD CHANNEL  Channel located on ebb-tidal shoal that carries the flood tide over the tidal 
flat into the back bay or lagoon. 
 FLOOD CURRENT  The movement of a tidal current toward the shore or up a tidal stream.  In 
the semidiurnal type of reversing current, the terms greater flood and lesser flood are 
applied respectively to the flood currents of greater and lesser velocity each day.  The 
terms maximum flood and minimum flood are applied to the maximum and minimum 
velocities of a flood current the velocity of which alternately increases and decreases 
without coming to slack or reversing.  The expression maximum flood is also applicable 
to any flood current at the time of greatest velocity. 
 
D.4.14-17 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 FLOOD GATE  A gravity outlet fitted with vertically-hinged doors, opening if the inner water 
level is higher than the outer water level, so that drainage takes place during low water. 
 FLOOD INTERVAL  The interval between the transit of the moon over the meridian of a place 
and the time of the following flood. 
 FLOOD MARK  Proof of any kind on the shoreline, or on structures like bridge abutments, used 
to determine the highest level attained by the water surface during the flood (note: the 
height of the flood mark usually includes the wave run-up). 
 FLOOD PLAIN  (1) A flat tract of land bordering a river, mainly in its lower reaches, and 
consisting of ALLUVIUM deposited by the river.  It is formed by the sweeping of the 
meander belts downstream, thus widening the valley, the sides of which may become 
some kilometers apart.  In time of flood, when the river overflows its banks, sediment is 
deposited along the valley banks and plains.  (2) Synonymous with 100-year floodplain.  
The land area susceptible to being inundated by stream derived waters with a 1 percent 
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
 FLOOD RAMP  Seaward-dipping sand platform dominated by flood-tidal currents, located on 
ebb-tidal shoal near the opening to the inlet. 
 FLOOD ROUTING  The determination of the attenuating effect of storage on a river-flood 
passing through a valley by reason of a feature acting as control (e.g. a reservoir with a 
spillway capacity less than the flood inflow, or the widening or narrowing of a valley). 
 FLOOD TIDAL DELTA  The bulge of sand formed at the landward mouth of TIDAL INLETS 
as a result of flow expansion. 
 FLOOD TIDE  The period of tide between low water and the succeeding high water; a rising 
tide. 
 FLOOD WALL, SPLASH WALL  Wall, retired from the seaward edge of the seawall crest, to 
prevent water from flowing onto the land behind. 
 FLORA  The entire group of plants found in an area. 
 FLUVIAL  Of or pertaining to rivers; produced by the action of a river or stream (e.g., fluvial 
sediment). 
 FLUSHING TIME  The time required to replace all the water in an ESTUARY, HARBOR, etc., 
by action of current and tide. 
 FOAM LINE  (1) The front of a wave as it advances shoreward, after it has broken.  (2) Lines of 
foam such as those which move around the head of a RIP. 
 FOLLOWING WIND  Generally, the same as a tailwind; in wave forecasting, wind blowing in 
the direction of ocean-wave advance. 
 FOREDUNE  The front DUNE immediately behind the backshore. 
 FORERUNNER  Low, long-period ocean SWELL which commonly precedes the main swell 
from a distant storm, especially a tropical cyclone. 
 FORESHORE  The part of the shore, lying between the crest of the seaward berm (or upper 
limit of wave wash at high tide) and the ordinary low-water mark, that is ordinarily 
traversed by the uprush and backrush of the waves as the tides rise and fall.  See BEACH 
FACE. 
 FORE REEF  The seaward side of a REEF (usually coral);  in places a steep slope covered with 
reef talus. 
 FORWARD SPEED  (hurricane)Rate of movement (propagation) of the hurricane eye in meters 
per second, knots, or miles per hour. 
 
D.4.14-18 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 FREEBOARD  At a given time, the vertical distance between the water level and the top of the 
structure.  On a ship, the distance from the waterline to main deck or gunwale. 
 FRINGING REEF  A coral REEF attached directly to an insular or continental shore.  There 
may be a shallow channel or lagoon between the reef and the adjacent mainland. 
 FRONT OF THE FETCH  In wave forecasting, the end of the generating area toward which the 
wind is blowing. 
 FROUDE NUMBER  The dimensionless ratio of the inertial force to the force of gravity for a 
given fluid flow.  It may be given as Fr = V /Lg where V is a characteristic velocity,   is a 
characteristic length, and g the acceleration of gravity - or as the square root of this 
number. 
 FULLY-DEVELOPED SEA  The waves that form when wind blows for a sufficient period of 
time across the open ocean.  The waves of a fully developed sea have the maximum 
height possible for a given wind speed, FETCH and duration of wind. 
 
 
---------- G ---------- 
 
 
 GABION  (1) Steel wire-mesh basket to hold stones or crushed rock to protect a bank or bottom 
from erosion.  (2) Structures composed of masses of rocks, rubble or masonry held tightly 
together usually by wire mesh so as to form blocks or walls.  Sometimes used on heavy 
erosion areas to retard wave action or as a foundation for BREAKWATERS or JETTIES. 
 GALE  A wind between a strong breeze and a storm.  A continuous wind blowing in degrees of 
moderate, fresh, strong, or whole gale and varying in velocity from 28 to 47 nautical 
miles per hour (see BEAUFORT SCALE). 
 GAUGE (GAGE)  Instrument for measuring the water level relative to a datum. 
 GENERATING AREA  In wave forecasting, the continuous area of water surface over which 
the wind blows in nearly a constant direction.  Sometimes used synonymously with 
FETCH LENGTH.  Also FETCH. 
 GEOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS)  Database of information which is 
geographically referenced, usually with an associated visualization system. 
 GEOMETRIC MEAN DIAMETER  The diameter equivalent of the arithmetic mean of the 
logarithmic frequency distribution.  In the analysis of beach sands, it is taken as that grain 
diameter determined graphically by the intersection of a straight line through selected 
boundary sizes, (generally points on the distribution curve where 16 and 84 percent of the 
sample is coarser by weight) and a vertical line through the median diameter of the 
sample. 
 GEOMETRIC SHADOW  In wave diffraction theory, the area outlined by drawing straight 
lines paralleling the direction of wave approach through the extremities of a protective 
structure.  It differs from the actual protected area to the extent that the diffraction and 
refraction effects modify the wave pattern. 
 GEOMORPHOLOGY  (1) That branch of physical geography which deals with the form of the 
Earth, the general configuration of its surface, the distribution of the land, water, etc.  (2) 
The investigation of the history of geologic changes through the interpretation of 
topographic forms. 
 
D.4.14-19 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 GEOPHYSICS  The study of the physical characteristics and properties of the earth, usually 
employing quantitative physical methods. 
 GEOTEXTILE  A synthetic fabric which may be woven or non-woven used as a filter. 
 GLACIER  A large body of ice moving slowly down a slope of valley or spreading outward on 
a land surface (e.g., Greenland, Antarctica) and surviving from year to year. 
 GLACIO-ISOSTACY  The state of hydrostatic equilibrium of the earth=s crust as influenced by 
the weight of glacier ice. 
 GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM (GPS)  A navigational and positioning system developed 
by the U.S. Department of Defense, by which the location of a position on or above the 
Earth can be determined by a special receiver at that point interpreting signals received 
simultaneously from several of a constellation of special satellites. 
 GORGE  (1) The deepest portion of an inlet, the THROAT.  (2) A narrow, deep valley with 
nearly vertical rock walls. 
 GRADED BEDDING  An arrangement of particle sizes within a single bed, with coarse grains 
at the bottom of the bed and progressively finer grains toward the top of the bed. 
 GRADIENT  (1) A measure of slope (soil- or water-surface) in meters of rise or fall per meter 
of horizontal distance.  (2) More general, a change of a value per unit of distance, e.g. the 
gradient in longshore transport causes erosion or accretion.  (3) With reference to winds 
or currents, the rate of increase or decrease in speed, usually in the vertical; or the curve 
that represents this rate. 
 GRADING  Distribution with regard to size or weight, of individual stones within a bulk 
volume; heavy, light and fine grading are distinguished. 
 GRADUAL CLOSURE METHOD  Method in which the final closure gap in a dam is closed 
gradually either by the vertical or horizontal closure method; this in contradiction with a 
sudden closure. 
 GRANULAR FILTER  A layer of granular material which is incorporated in an embankment, 
dam, dike, or bottom protection and is graded so as to allow seepage to flow across or 
down the filter zone without causing the migration of the material adjacent to the filter. 
 GRAVEL  Unconsolidated natural accumulation of rounded rock fragments coarser than sand 
but finer than pebbles (2-4 mm diameter). 
 GRAVITY WAVE  A wave whose velocity of propagation is controlled primarily by gravity.  
Water waves more than 5 cm long are considered gravity waves.  Waves longer than 2.5 
cm and shorter than 5 cm are in an indeterminate zone between CAPILLARY and 
GRAVITY WAVES.  See RIPPLE. 
 GROIN (British, GROYNE)  Narrow, roughly shore-normal structure built to reduce longshore 
currents, and/or to trap and retain littoral material.  Most groins are of timber or rock and 
extend from a SEAWALL, or the backshore, well onto the foreshore and rarely even 
further offshore.  See T-GROIN, PERMEABLE GROIN, IMPERMEABLE GROIN. 
 GROIN BAY  The beach compartment between two groins. 
 GROIN SYSTEM  A series of groins acting together to protect a section of beach.  Commonly 
called a GROIN field. 
 GULF  A relatively large portion of the ocean or sea extending far into land; the largest of 
various forms of inlets of the sea (e.g., Gulf of Mexico, Gulf of Aqaba). 
 GUT  A tidal stream connecting two larger waterways. 
 
 
 
D.4.14-20 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
---------- H ---------- 
 
 
 HALCOCLINE  A zone in which salinity changes rapidly.  
 HALF-TIDE LEVEL  A plane midway between MEAN HIGH WATER and MEAN LOW 
WATER, also called MEAN TIDE LEVEL. 
 HARBOR (British, HARBOUR)  Any protected water area affording a place of safety for 
vessels.  See also PORT. 
 HARBOR OSCILLATION (HARBOR SURGING)  The nontidal vertical water movement in a 
harbor or bay.  Usually the vertical motions are low; but when oscillations are excited by 
a tsunami or storm surge, they may be quite large.  Variable winds, air oscillations, or 
surf beat also may cause oscillations.  See SEICHE. 
 HARD DEFENSES  General term applied to impermeable coastal defense structures of 
concrete, timber, steel, masonry, etc, which reflect a high proportion of incident wave 
energy. 
 HEAD OF RIP  The part of a rip current that has widened out seaward of the breakers.  See also 
CURRENT, RIP; CURRENT, FEEDER; and NECK (RIP). 
 HEADLAND (HEAD)  (1) A comparatively high promontory with either a CLIFF or steep face 
extending out into a body of water, such as a sea or lake.  An unnamed HEAD is usually 
called a headland.  (2) The section of RIP CURRENT which has widened out seaward of 
the BREAKERS, also called HEAD OF RIP.  (3) Seaward end of BREAKWATER or 
dam. 
 HEADWATER LEVEL  The level of water in the reservoir. 
 HEAVE  (1) The vertical rise or fall of the waves or the sea.  (2) The translational movement of 
a craft parallel to its vertical axis.  (3) The net transport of a floating body resulting from 
wave action. 
 HIGH SEAS  This term, in municipal and international law, denotes the continuous body of salt 
water in the world that is navigable in its character and that lies outside territorial waters 
and maritime belts of the various countries. 
 HIGH TIDE, HIGH WATER (HW)  The maximum elevation reached by each rising tide.  See 
TIDE. 
 HIGH WATER (HW)  Maximum height reached by a rising tide.  The height may be solely due 
to the periodic tidal forces or it may have superimposed upon it the effects of prevailing 
meteorological conditions.  Nontechnically, also called the HIGH TIDE. 
 HIGH WATER LINE  In strictness, the intersection of the plane of mean high water with the 
shore.  The shoreline delineated on the nautical charts of the National Ocean Service is an 
approximation of the high water line.  For specific occurrences, the highest elevation on 
the shore reached during a storm or rising tide, including meteorological effects. 
 HIGH WATER MARK  A reference mark on a structure or natural object, indicating the 
maximum stage of tide or flood. 
 HIGH WATER OF ORDINARY SPRING TIDES (HWOST)  A tidal datum appearing in some 
British publications, based on high water of ordinary spring tides. 
 HIGHER HIGH WATER (HHW)  The higher of the two high waters of any tidal day.  The 
single high water occurring daily during periods when the tide is diurnal is considered to 
be a higher high water. 
 
D.4.14-21 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 HIGHER LOW WATER (HLW)  The higher of two low waters of any tidal day. 
 HINDCASTING  In wave prediction, the retrospective forecasting of waves using measured 
wind information. 
 HINTERLAND  The region lying inland from the coast.  Also the inland area served by a port. 
 HISTORIC EVENT ANALYSIS  Extreme analysis based on hindcasting typically ten events 
over a period of 100 years. 
 HOLOCENE  An epoch of the QUATERNARY period, from the end of the PLEISTOCENE, 
about 8,000 years ago, to the present time. 
HOMOPYCNAL FLOW  A condition in which the outflow jet from a river or coastal inlet and 
the water in the receiving basin are of the same density or are vertically mixed. 
 HOOK  A spit or narrow cape of sand or gravel which turns landward at the outer end;  a 
RECURVED SPIT. 
 HORIZONTAL CLOSURE METHOD  Construction of a dam by dumping the materials from 
one or both banks, thus constricting the channel progressively laterally until the dam is 
closed.  This method is also known as end dumping and point tipping. 
 HURRICANE  An intense tropical cyclone in which winds tend to spiral inward toward a core 
of low pressure, with maximum surface wind velocities that equal or exceed 33.5 m/sec 
(75 mph or 65 knots) for several minutes or longer at some points.  TROPICAL STORM 
is the term applied if maximum winds are less than 33.5 m/sec but greater than a whole 
gale (63 mph or 55 knots).  Term is used in the Atlantic, Gulf of Mexico, and eastern 
Pacific. 
 HURRICANE PATH or TRACK  Line of movement (propagation) of the eye through an area. 
 HURRICANE STAGE HYDROGRAPH  A continuous graph representing water level stages 
that would be recorded in a gage well located at a specified point of interest during the 
passage of a particular hurricane, assuming that effects of relatively short-period waves 
are eliminated from the record by damping features of the gage well.  Unless specifically 
excluded and separately accounted for, hurricane surge hydrographs are assumed to 
include effects of astronomical tides, barometric pressure differences, and all other 
factors that influence water level stages within a properly designed gage well located at a 
specified point. 
 HURRICANE WIND PATTERN or ISOVEL PATTERN  An actual or graphical representation 
of near-surface wind velocities covering the entire area of a hurricane at a particular 
instant.  Isovels are lines connecting points of simultaneous equal wind velocities, usually 
referenced 9 meters (30 feet) above the surface, in meters per second, knots, or meters per 
hour; wind directions at various points are indicated by arrows or deflection angles on the 
isovel charts.  Isovel charts are usually prepared at each hour during a hurricane, but for 
each half hour during critical periods. 
 HYDRAULIC RADIUS  Quotient of the wetted cross-sectional area and the wetted perimeter. 
 HYDRAULICALLY EQUIVALENT GRAINS  Sedimentary particles that settle at the same 
rate under the same conditions. 
 HYDROGRAPHY  (1) The description and study of seas, lakes, rivers and other waters.  (2) 
The science of locating aids and dangers to navigation.  (3) The description of physical 
properties of the waters of a region. 
 HYDROGRAPHIC PRESSURE  The pressure exerted by water at any given point in a body of 
water at rest. 
 
D.4.14-22 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 HYPOPYCNAL FLOW  Outflow from a river or coastal inlet in which a wedge of less dense 
water flows over the denser sea water. 
 HYPOTHETICAL HURRICANE ("HYPOHURRICANE")  A representation of a hurricane, 
with specified characteristics, that is assumed to occur in a particular study area, 
following a specified path and timing sequence. TRANSPOSED--A hypohurricane based 
on the storm transposition principle, assumed to have wind patterns and other 
characteristics basically comparable to a specified hurricane of record, but transposed to 
follow a new path to serve as a basis for computing a hurricane surge hydrograph that 
would be expected at a selected point.  Moderate adjustments in timing or rate of forward 
movement may also be made, if these are compatible with meteorological considerations 
and study objectives. HYPOHURRICANE BASED ON GENERALIZED 
PARAMETERS--Hypohurricane estimates based on various logical combinations of 
hurricane characteristics used in estimating hurricane surge magnitudes corresponding to 
a range of probabilities and potentialities.  The STANDARD PROJECT HURRICANE is 
most commonly used for this purpose, but estimates corresponding to more severe or less 
severe assumptions are important in some project investigations. STANDARD PROJECT 
HURRICANE (SPH)--A hypothetical hurricane intended to represent the most severe 
combination of hurricane parameters that is reasonably characteristic of a specified 
region, excluding extremely rare combinations.  It is further assumed that the SPH would 
approach a given project site from such direction, and at such rate of movement, to 
produce the highest HURRICANE SURGE HYDROGRAPH, considering pertinent 
hydraulic characteristics of the area.  Based on this concept, and on extensive 
meteorological studies and probability analyses, a tabulation of "Standard Project 
Hurricane Index Characteristics" mutually agreed upon by representatives of the U. S. 
Weather Service and the Corps of Engineers, is available. PROBABLE MAXIMUM 
HURRICANE--A hypohurricane that might result from the most severe combination of 
hurricane parameters that is considered reasonably possible in the region involved, if the 
hurricane should approach the point under study along a critical path and at optimum rate 
of movement.  This estimate is substantially more severe than the SPH criteria. DESIGN 
HURRICANE--A representation of a hurricane with specified characteristics that would 
produce HURRICANE SURGE HYDROGRAPHS and coincident wave effects at 
various key locations along a proposed project alignment.  It governs the project design 
after economics and other factors have been duly considered.  The design hurricane may 
be more or less severe than the SPH, depending on economics, risk, and local 
considerations. 
 
 
---------- I ---------- 
 
 
 ICE AGE  A loosely-used synonym of glacial epoch, or time of extensive glacial activity; 
specifically of the latest period of widespread continental glaciers, the PLEISTOCENE 
Epoch. 
 ICE FRONT  The floating vertical cliff forming the seaward edge of an ICE SHELF or other 
glacier that enters the sea. 
 
D.4.14-23 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 ICE SHELF  A extensive sheet of ice which is attached to the land along one side but most of 
which is afloat and bounded on the seaward side by a steep cliff (ICE FRONT) rising 2 tp 
50+ m above sea level.  Common along polar coasts (Antarctica, Greenland), and 
generally of great breadth and sometimes extending tens or hundreds of km seaward from 
the continental coastline. 
 IMPERMEABLE GROIN  A GROIN constructed such that sand cannot pass through the 
structure (but sand may still move over or around it). 
 INCIDENT WAVE  Wave moving landward. 
 INFRAGRAVITY WAVE  Long waves with periods of 30 seconds to several minutes. 
 INLET  (1) A short, narrow waterway connecting a bay, lagoon, or similar body of water with a 
large parent body of water.  (2) An arm of the sea (or other body of water) that is long 
compared to its width and may extend a considerable distance inland.  See also TIDAL 
INLET. 
 INLET GORGE  Generally, the deepest region of an inlet channel. 
 INSHORE (ZONE)  In beach terminology, the zone of variable width extending from the low 
water line through the breaker zone.  Also SHOREFACE. 
 INSHORE CURRENT  Any current in or landward of the breaker zone. 
 INSULAR SHELF  The zone surrounding an island extending from the low water line to the 
depth (usually about 183 m; 100 fathoms) where there is a marked or rather steep descent 
toward the great depths. 
 INTERNAL WAVES  Waves that occur within a fluid whose density changes with depth, either 
abruptly at a sharp surface of discontinuity (an interface), or gradually.  Their amplitude 
is greatest at the density discontinuity or, in the case of a gradual density change, 
somewhere in the interior of the fluid and not at the free upper surface where the surface 
waves have their maximum amplitude. 
 INTERTIDAL  The zone between the high and low water tides. 
 IRREGULAR WAVES  Waves with random wave periods (and in practice, also heights), which 
are typical for natural wind-induced waves. 
 IRROTATIONAL WAVE  A wave with fluid particles that do not revolve around an axis 
through their centers, although the particles themselves may travel in circular or nearly 
circular orbits.  Irrotational waves may be PROGRESSIVE, STANDING, 
OSCILLATORY, or TRANSLATORY.  For example, the Airy, Stokes, cnoidal, and 
solitary wave theories describe irrotational waves.  Compare TROCHOIDAL WAVE. 
 ISOBATH  A contour line connecting points of equal water depths on a chart. 
 ISOPACHYTE  Line connecting points on the seabed with an equal depth of sediment. 
 ISOVEL PATTERN  See HURRICANE WIND PATTERN. 
 ISTHMUS  A narrow strip of land, bordered on both sides by water, that connects two larger 
bodies of land. 
 
 
--------- J ---------- 
 
 
 JET  To place (a pile, slab, or pipe) in the ground by means of a jet of water acting at the lower 
end. 
 
D.4.14-24 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 JETTY  On open seacoasts, a structure extending into a body of water, which is designed to 
prevent shoaling of a channel by littoral materials and to direct and confine the stream or 
tidal flow.  Jetties are built at the mouths of rivers or tidal inlets to help deepen and 
stabilize a channel. 
 JOINT PROBABILITY  The probability of two (or more) things occurring together. 
 JOINT PROBABILITY DENSITY  Function specifying the joint distribution of two (or more) 
variables. 
 JOINT RETURN PERIOD  Average period of time between occurrences of a given joint 
probability event. 
 JONSWAP SPECTRUM  Wave spectrum typical of growing deep water waves developed from 
field experiments and measurements of waves and wave spectra in the Joint North Sea 
Wave Project 
 
 
---------- K ---------- 
 
 
 KATABATIC WIND  Wind caused by cold air flowing down slopes due to gravitational 
acceleration. 
 KEY  A cay, esp. one of the low, insular banks of sand, coral, and limestone off the southern 
coast of Florida. 
 KINEMATIC VISCOSITY  The dynamic viscosity divided by the fluid density. 
 KINETIC ENERGY (OF WAVES)  In a progressive oscillatory wave, a summation of the 
energy of motion of the particles within the wave. 
 KNOLL  A submerged elevation of rounded shape rising less than 1000 meters from the ocean 
floor and of limited extent across the summit.  Compare SEAMOUNT. 
 KNOT  The unit of speed used in navigation equal to 1 nautical mile (6,076.115 ft or 1,852 m) 
per hour. 
 
 
---------- L ---------- 
 
 
 LAGGING OF TIDE  The periodic retardation in the time of occurrence of high and low water 
due to changes in the relative positions of the moon and sun. 
 LAGOON  A shallow body of water, like a pond or sound, partly or completely separated from 
the sea by a barrier island or REEF.  Sometimes connected to the sea via an INLET. 
 LAMINAR FLOW  Slow, smooth flow, with each drop of water traveling a smooth path parallel 
to its neighboring drops.  Laminar flow is characteristic of low velocities, and particles of 
sediment in the flow zones are moved by rolling or SALTATION. 
 LAND BREEZE  A light wind blowing from the land to the sea, caused by unequal cooling of 
land and water masses. 
 LAND-SEA BREEZE  The combination of a land breeze and a sea breeze as a diurnal 
phenomenon. 
 
D.4.14-25 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 LANDLOCKED  Enclosed, or nearly enclosed, by land--thus protected from the sea, as a bay or 
a harbor. 
 LANDMARK  A conspicuous object, natural or artificial, located near or on land, which aids in 
fixing the position of an observer. 
 LEAD LINE  A line, wire, or cord used in sounding (to obtain water depth).  It is weighted at 
one end with a plummet (sounding lead).  Also SOUNDING LINE. 
 LEDGE  A rocky formation forming a ridge or REEF, especially one underwater or near shore. 
 LEE  (1) Shelter, or the part or side sheltered or turned away from the wind or waves.  (2) 
(Chiefly nautical) the quarter or region toward which the wind blows. 
 LEEWARD  The direction toward which the wind is blowing; the direction toward which waves 
are traveling. 
 LENGTH OF WAVE  The horizontal distance between similar points on two successive waves 
measured perpendicularly to the crest. 
 LEVEE  (1) A ridge or EMBANKMENT of sand and silt, built up by a stream on its flood plain 
along both banks of its channel.  (2) A large DIKE or artificial EMBANKMENT, often 
having an access road along the top, which is designed as part of a system to protect land 
from floods. 
 LIGHT BREEZE  A wind with velocity from 4 to 6 KNOTS. 
 LIMIT OF BACKRUSH (LIMIT OF BACKWASH)  See BACKRUSH, BACKWASH. 
 LITTORAL  Of or pertaining to a shore, especially of the sea. 
 LITTORAL CELL  A reach of the coast that is isolated sedimentologically from adjacent 
coastal reaches and that features its own sources and sinks.  Isolation is typically caused 
by protruding headlands, submarine canyons, inlets, and some river mouths that prevent 
littoral sediment from one cell to pass into the next.  Cells may range in size from a 
multi-hundred meter POCKET BEACH in a rocky coast to a BARRIER ISLAND many 
tens of kilometers long. 
 LITTORAL CURRENT  See CURRENT, LITTORAL. 
 LITTORAL DEPOSITS  Deposits of littoral drift. 
 LITTORAL DRIFT, LITTORAL TRANSPORT  The movement of beach material in the littoral 
zone by waves and currents.  Includes movement parallel (long shore drift) and 
sometimes also perpendicular (cross-shore transport) to the shore. 
 LITTORAL TRANSPORT RATE  Rate of transport of sedimentary material parallel or 
perpendicular to the shore in the littoral zone.  Usually expressed in cubic meters (cubic 
yards) per year.  Commonly synonymous with LONGSHORE TRANSPORT RATE. 
 LITTORAL ZONE  In beach terminology, an indefinite zone extending seaward from the 
shoreline to just beyond the breaker zone. 
 LOAD  The quantity of sediment transported by a current.  It includes the suspended load of 
small particles and the bedload of large particles that move along the bottom. 
 LONG WAVES  Waves with periods above about 30 seconds; can be generated by wave groups 
breaking in the surf zone.  See also INFRAGRAVITY WAVES. 
 LONGSHORE  Parallel to and near the shoreline; ALONGSHORE. 
 LONGSHORE BAR  A sand ridge or ridges, running roughly parallel to the shoreline and  
extending along the shore outside the trough, that may be exposed at low tide or may 
occur below the water level in the offshore. 
 LONGSHORE CURRENT  See CURRENT, LONGSHORE. 
 LONGSHORE DRIFT  Movement of (beach) sediments approximately parallel to the coastline. 
 
D.4.14-26 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 LONGSHORE TRANSPORT RATE  See LITTORAL TRANSPORT RATE. 
 LONGSHORE TROUGH  An elongate DEPRESSION or series of depressions extending along 
the lower BEACH or in the offshore zone inside the BREAKERS. 
 LOOP  That part of a STANDING WAVE where the vertical motion is greatest and the 
horizontal velocities are least.   Loops (sometimes called ANTINODES) are associated 
with CLAPOTIS and with SEICHE action resulting from wave reflections.  Compare 
NODE. 
 LOW TIDE (LOW WATER, LW)  The minimum elevation reached by each falling tide.  See 
TIDE. 
 LOW TIDE TERRACE  A flat zone of the beach near the low water level. 
 LOW WATER (LW)  The minimum height reached by each falling tide.  Nontechnically, also 
called LOW TIDE. 
 LOW WATER DATUM  An approximation to the plane of mean low water that has been 
adopted as a standard reference plane.  See also DATUM, PLANE and CHART 
DATUM. 
 LOW WATER LINE  The line where the established LOW WATER DATUM intersects the 
shore.  The plane of reference that constitutes the LOW WATER DATUM differs in 
different regions. 
 LOW WATER OF ORDINARY SPRING TIDES (LWOST)  A tidal datum appearing in some 
British publications, based on low water of ordinary spring tides. 
 LOWER HIGH WATER (LHW)  The lower of the two high waters of any tidal day. 
 LOWER LOW WATER DATUM  An approximation to the plane of MEAN LOWER LOW 
WATER that has been adopted as a standard reference plane for a limited area and is 
retained for an indefinite period regardless of the fact that it may differ slightly from a 
better determination of MEAN LOWER LOW WATER from a subsequent series of 
observations. 
 LOWER LOW WATER (LLW)  The lower of the two low waters of any tidal day.  The single 
low water occurring daily during periods when the tide is diurnal is considered to be a 
lower low water. 
 LUNAR DAY  The time of rotation of the Earth with respect to the moon, or the interval 
between two successive upper transits of the moon over the meridian of a place.  The 
mean lunar day is approximately 24.84 solar hours in length, or 1.035 times as great as 
the mean solar day.  Also called TIDAL DAY. 
 LUNAR TIDE  The portion of the tide that can be attributed directly to attraction to the moon. 
 
 
---------- M ---------- 
 
 
 MACH-STEM WAVE  Higher-than-normal wave generated when waves strike a structure at an 
oblique angle. 
 MACRO-TIDAL  Tidal range greater than 4 m. 
 MANAGED RETREAT  The deliberate setting back (moving landward) of the existing line of 
sea defense in order to obtain engineering or environmental advantages - also referred to 
as managed landward realignment.  Sometimes refers to moving roads and utilities 
landward in the face of shore retreat. 
 
D.4.14-27 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 MANGROVE  A tropical tree with interlacing prop roots, confined to low-lying brackish areas. 
 MARGIN, CONTINENTAL  A zone separating a continent from the deep-sea bottom. 
 MARGINAL PROBABILITY  The probability of a single variable in the context of a joint 
probability analysis. 
 MARGINAL RETURN PERIOD  The return period of a single variable in the context of a joint 
probability analysis. 
 MARIGRAM  A graphic record of the rise and fall of the tide.  The record is in the form of a 
curve in which time is represented by abscissas and the height of the tide by ordinates. 
 MARKER, REFERENCE  A mark of permanent character close to a survey station, to which it 
is related by an accurately measured distance and azimuth (or bearing). 
 MARKER, SURVEY  An object placed at the site of a station to identify the surveyed location 
of that station. 
 MARSH  (1) A tract of soft, wet land, usually vegetated by reeds, grasses and occasionally 
small shrubs.  (2) Soft, wet area periodically or continuously flooded to a shallow depth, 
usually characterized by a particular subclass of grasses, cattails and other low plants. 
 MARSH, DIKED  A former salt marsh which has been protected by a DIKE. 
 MARSH, SALT  A marsh periodically flooded by salt water. 
 MASS TRANSPORT, SHOREWARD  The movement of water due to wave motion, which 
carries water through the BREAKER ZONE in the direction of wave propagation.  Part 
of the NEARSHORE CURRENT SYSTEM. 
 MATTRESS  A blanket of brushwood or bamboo, poles, geotextile and reed lashed together to 
protect a shoreline, embankment or river/sea bed against erosion.  Sometimes placed on 
the sea bed during JETTY construction to prevent stone from settling into soft bottom. 
 MEAN DEPTH  The average DEPTH of the water area between the still water level and the 
SHOREFACE profile from the waterline to any chosen distance seaward. 
 MEAN DIAMETER, GEOMETRIC  See GEOMETRIC MEAN DIAMETER. 
 MEAN HIGH WATER SPRINGS (MHWS)  The average height of the high water occurring at 
the time of spring tides. 
 MEAN HIGH WATER (MHW)  The average height of the high waters over a 19-year period.  
For shorter periods of observations, corrections are applied to eliminate known variations 
and reduce the results to the equivalent of a mean 19-year value.  All high water heights 
are included in the average where the type of tide is either semidiurnal or mixed.  Only 
the higher high water heights are included in the average where the type of tide is diurnal.  
So determined, mean high water in the latter case is the same as mean higher high water. 
 MEAN HIGHER HIGH WATER (MHHW)  The average height of the higher high waters over 
a 19-year period.  For shorter periods of observation, corrections are applied to eliminate 
known variations and reduce the result to the equivalent of a mean 19-year value. 
 MEAN LOW WATER (MLW)  The average height of the low waters over a 19-year period.  
For shorter periods of observations, corrections are applied to eliminate known variations 
and reduce the results to the equivalent of a mean 19-year value.  All low water heights 
are included in the average where the type of tide is either semidiurnal or mixed.  Only 
lower low water heights are included in the average where the type of tide is diurnal.  So 
determined, mean low water in the latter case is the same as mean lower low water. 
 MEAN LOW WATER SPRINGS  The average height of low waters occurring at the time of the 
spring tides.  It is usually derived by taking a plane depressed below the half-tide level by 
an amount equal to one-half the spring range of tide, necessary corrections being applied 
 
D.4.14-28 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
to reduce the result to a mean value.  This plane is used to a considerable extent for 
hydrographic work outside of the United States and is the plane of reference for the 
Pacific approaches to the Panama Canal.  Frequently abbreviated to LOW WATER 
SPRINGS. 
 MEAN LOWER LOW WATER (MLLW)  The average height of the lower low waters over a 
19-year period.  For shorter periods of observations, corrections are applied to eliminate 
known variations and reduce the results to the equivalent of a mean 19-year value.  
Frequently abbreviated to LOWER LOW WATER. 
 MEAN RANGE OF TIDE  The difference in height between MEAN HIGH WATER and 
MEAN LOW WATER. 
 MEAN RISE OF THE TIDE  The height of MEAN HIGH WATER above the plane of 
reference or DATUM of chart. 
 MEAN SEA LEVEL  The average height of the surface of the sea for all stages of the tide over 
a 19-year period, usually determined from hourly height readings.  Not necessarily equal 
to MEAN TIDE LEVEL. 
 MEAN STEEPNESS  The ratio of the MEAN DEPTH to the horizontal distance over which the 
MEAN DEPTH was determined. 
 MEAN TIDE LEVEL  A plane midway between MEAN HIGH WATER and MEAN LOW 
WATER.  Not necessarily equal to MEAN SEA LEVEL.  Also HALF-TIDE LEVEL. 
 MEAN WATER LEVEL  The mean surface level as determined by averaging the heights of the 
water at equal intervals of time, usually at hourly intervals. 
 MEAN WAVE HEIGHT  The mean of all individual waves in an observation interval of 
approximately half an hour. In case of a Rayleigh distribution 63% of the significant 
wave height. 
 MEANDERING  A single channel having a pattern of successive deviations in alignment which 
results in a more or less sinusoidal course. 
 MEDIAN DIAMETER  The diameter which marks the division of a given sand sample into two 
equal parts by weight, one part containing all grains larger than that diameter and the 
other part containing all grains smaller. 
 MEGARIPPLE  See SAND WAVE. 
 MESO-TIDAL  Tidal range between 2 m and 4 m. 
 METEOROLOGICAL TIDES  Tidal constituents having their origin in the daily or seasonal 
variation in weather conditions which may occur with some degree of periodicity. 
 MICRO-TIDAL  Tidal range less than 2 m. 
 MID-EXTREME TIDE  A plane midway between the extreme high water and the extreme 
LOW WATER occurring in any locality. 
 MIDDLE-GROUND SHOAL  A shoal formed by ebb and flood tides in the middle of the 
channel of the LAGOON or estuary end of an inlet. 
 MINERAL  A naturally occurring, inorganic, crystalline solid that has a definite chemical 
composition and possesses characteristic physical properties. 
 MINIMUM DURATION  See DURATION, MINIMUM. 
 MINIMUM FETCH  The least distance in which steady-state wave conditions will develop for a 
wind of given speed blowing a given duration of time. 
 MIST  Water vapor suspended in the air in very small drops finer than rain, larger than fog. 
 MIXED CURRENT  Type of tidal current characterized by a conspicuous velocity difference 
between the two floods or two ebbs usually occurring each tidal day. 
 
D.4.14-29 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 MIXED TIDE  A type of tide in which the presence of a diurnal wave is conspicuous by a large 
inequality in either the high or low water heights, with two high waters and two low 
waters usually occurring each tidal day.  In strictness, all tides are mixed, but the name is 
usually applied without definite limits to the tide intermediate to those predominantly 
semidiurnal and those predominantly diurnal. 
 MOLE  In coastal terminology, a massive land-connected, solid-fill structure of earth (generally 
revetted), masonry, or large stone, which may serve as a breakwater or pier. 
 MONOCHROMATIC WAVES  A series of waves generated in a laboratory, each of which has 
the same length and period. 
 MONOLITHIC  Like a single stone or block.  In coastal structures, the type of construction in 
which the structure's component parts are bound together to act as one. 
 MORAINE  An accumulation of earth, stones, etc., deposited by a glacier, usually in the form of 
a mound, ridge or other prominence on the terrain. 
 MORPHODYNAMICS  (1) The mutual interaction and adjustment of the seafloor topography 
and fluid dynamics involving the motion of sediment.  (2) The coupled suite of mutually 
interdependent hydrodynamic processes, seafloor morphologies, and sequences of 
change. 
 MORPHOLOGICALLY AVERAGED  Single wave condition producing the same net 
longshore drift as a given proportion of the annual wave climate. 
 MORPHOLOGY  River/estuary/lake/seabed form and its change with time. 
 MUD  A fluid-to-plastic mixture of finely divided particles of solid material and water. 
 MUD FLAT  A level area of fine silt and clay along a shore alternately covered or uncovered by 
the tide or covered by shallow water. 
 
 
---------- N ---------- 
 
 
 NATIONAL TIDAL DATUM EPOCH (NTDE)  A period of 19 years adopted by the National 
Ocean Service as the period over which observations of tides are to be taken and reduced 
to average values for tidal datums. 
 NATURAL TRACER  A component of a sediment deposit that is unique to a particular source 
and can be used to identify the source and transport routes to a place of deposition. 
 NAUTICAL MILE  The length of a minute of arc, 1/21,600 of an average great circle of the 
Earth.  Generally one minute of latitude is considered equal to one nautical mile.  The 
accepted United States value as of 1 July 1959 is 1,852 meters (6,076.115 feet), 
approximately 1.15 times as long as the U.S. statute mile of 5,280 feet.  Also 
geographical mile. 
 NEAP HIGH WATER  See NEAP TIDE. 
 NEAP LOW WATER  See NEAP TIDE. 
 NEAP RANGE  See NEAP TIDE. 
 NEAP TIDAL CURRENT  Tidal current of decreased velocity occurring semimonthly as the 
result of the moon being in quadrature. 
 NEAP TIDE  Tide of decreased range occurring semimonthly as the result of the moon being in 
quadrature.  The NEAP RANGE of the tide is the average semidiurnal range occurring at 
the time of neap tides and is most conveniently computed from the harmonic constants.  
 
D.4.14-30 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
The NEAP RANGE is typically 10 to 30 percent smaller than the mean range where the 
type of tide is either semidiurnal or mixed and is of no practical significance where the 
type of tide is DIURNAL.  The average height of the high waters of the neap tide is 
called NEAP HIGH WATER or HIGH WATER NEAPS (MHWN), and the average 
height of the corresponding LOW WATER is called NEAP LOW WATER or LOW 
WATER NEAPS (MLWN). 
 NEARSHORE  (1) In beach terminology an indefinite zone extending seaward from the 
SHORELINE well beyond the BREAKER ZONE.  (2) The zone which extends from the 
swash zone to the position marking the start of the offshore zone, typically at water 
depths of the order of 20 m. 
 NEARSHORE CIRCULATION  The ocean circulation pattern composed of the NEARSHORE 
CURRENTS and the COASTAL CURRENTS. 
 NEARSHORE CURRENT SYSTEM  The current system caused primarily by wave action in 
and near the breaker zone, and which consists of four parts: the shoreward mass transport 
of water; longshore currents; seaward return flow, including rip currents; and the 
longshore movement of the expanding heads of rip currents.  See also NEARSHORE 
CIRCULATION. 
 NECK  (1) The narrow strip of land which connects a peninsula with the mainland, or connects 
two ridges.  (2) The narrow band (rip) of water flowing seaward through the surf.  See 
also RIP CURRENT. 
 NESS  Roughly triangular promontory of land jutting into the sea, often consisting of mobile 
material, i.e. a beach form. 
 NETWORK  A set consisting of:  (a) stations for which geometric relationships have been 
determined and which are so related that removal of one station from the set will affect 
the relationships (distances, directions, coordinates, etc.) between the other stations;  and 
(b) lines connecting the stations to show this interdependence. 
 NIP  The cut made by waves in a shoreline of emergence. 
 NODAL ZONE  An area in which the predominant direction of the LONGSHORE 
TRANSPORT changes. 
 NODE  That part of a STANDING WAVE where the vertical motion is least and the horizontal 
velocities are greatest.  Nodes are associated with CLAPOTIS and with SEICHE action 
resulting from wave reflections.  Compare LOOP. 
 NOURISHMENTT  he process of replenishing a beach.  It may occur naturally by longshore 
transport, or be brought about artificially by the deposition of dredged materials or of 
materials trucked in from upland sites. 
 NUMERICAL MODELING  Refers to analysis of coastal processes using computational 
models. 
 
 
---------- O ---------- 
 
 
 OCEANOGRAPHY  The study of the sea, embracing and indicating all knowledge pertaining to 
the sea's physical boundaries, the chemistry and physics of seawater, marine biology, and 
marine geology. 
 
D.4.14-31 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 OFFSHORE  (1) In beach terminology, the comparatively flat zone of variable width, extending 
from the SHOREFACE to the edge of the CONTINENTAL SHELF.  It is continually 
submerged.  (2) The direction seaward from the shore.  (3) The zone beyond the 
nearshore zone where sediment motion induced by waves alone effectively ceases and 
where the influence of the sea bed on wave action is small in comparison with the effect 
of wind.  (4) The breaker zone directly seaward of the low tide line. 
 OFFSHORE BARRIER  See BARRIER BEACH. 
 OFFSHORE BREAKWATER  A BREAKWATER built towards the seaward limit of the 
littoral zone, parallel (or nearly parallel) to the shore. 
 OFFSHORE CURRENT  (1) Any current in the offshore zone.  (2) Any current flowing away 
from shore. 
 OFFSHORE WIND  A wind blowing seaward from the land in the coastal area. 
 ONSHORE  A direction landward from the sea. 
 ONSHORE WIND  A wind blowing landward from the sea in the coastal area. 
 OPPOSING WIND  In wave forecasting, a wind blowing in a direction opposite to the ocean-
wave advance; generally, a headwind. 
 ORBIT  In water waves, the path of a water particle affected by the wave motion.  In deepwater 
waves the orbit is nearly circular, and in shallow-water waves the orbit is nearly elliptical.  
In general, the orbits are slightly open in the direction of wave motion, giving rise to 
MASS TRANSPORT. 
 ORBITAL CURRENT  The flow of water accompanying the orbital movement of the water 
particles in a wave.  Not to be confused with wave-generated LITTORAL CURRENTS. 
 ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM)  That mark that will be found by examining the 
bed and banks and ascertaining where the presence and action of waters are so common 
and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark upon the soil a 
character distinct from that of the abutting upland, in respect to vegetation as that 
condition exists on June 1, 1971, as it may naturally change thereafter, or as it may 
change thereafter in accordance with permits issued by a local government.  Also defined 
as MEAN HIGH WATER LINE. 
 ORDINARY TIDE  This expression is not used in a technical sense by the U.S. Coast and 
Geodetic Survey, but the word "ordinary" when applied to tides, may be taken as the 
equivalent of the word "mean".  Thus "ordinary HIGH WATER LINE" may be assumed 
to be the same as "mean high water line". 
 ORTHOGONAL  On a wave-refraction diagram, a line drawn perpendicularly to the wave 
crests.  Also called WAVE RAY. 
 OSCILLATION  (1) A periodic motion backward and forward.  (2) Vibration or variance above 
and below a mean value. 
 OSCILLATORY WAVE  A wave in which each individual particle oscillates about a point with 
little or no permanent change in mean position.  The term is commonly applied to 
progressive oscillatory waves in which only the form advances, the individual particles 
moving in closed or nearly closed orbits.  Compare WAVE OF TRANSLATION.  See 
also ORBIT. 
 OUTCROP  A surface exposure of bare rock, not covered by soil or vegetation. 
 OUTFALL  A structure extending into a body of water for the purpose of discharging sewage, 
storm runoff, or cooling water. 
 
D.4.14-32 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 OUTFLANKING  EROSION behind or around the land-based end of a GROIN, JETTY, or 
BREAKWATER or the terminus of a BULKHEAD, REVETMENT, or SEAWALL, 
usually causing failure of the structure or its function 
 OVERSPLASH  The water that splashes over the top of a BREAKWATER, SEAWALL, etc. 
 OVERTOPPING  Passing of water over the top of a structure as a result of wave runup or surge 
action. 
 OVERWASH  (1) The part of the UPRUSH that runs over the crest of a BERM or structure and 
does not flow directly back to the ocean or lake.  (2) The effect of waves overtopping a 
COASTAL DEFENSE, often carrying sediment landwards which is then lost to the beach 
system. 
 
 
---------- P ---------- 
 
 
 PARAPET  A low wall built along the edge of a structure such as a SEAWALL or QUAY. 
 PARTICLE VELOCITY  The velocity induced by wave motion with which a specific water 
particle moves within a wave. 
 PATCH REEF  A moundlike or flat-topped organic REEF, generally less than 1 km across, 
frequently forming part of a larger reef complex. 
 PASS  In hydrographic usage, a navigable channel through a bar, REEF, or shoal, or between 
closely adjacent islands.  On the Gulf of Mexico coast, inlets are often known as passes 
(e.g., Sabine Pass). 
 PEAK PERIOD  The wave period determined by the inverse of the frequency at which the wave 
energy spectrum reaches its maximum. 
 PEBBLES  Beach material usually well-rounded and between about 4 mm to 64 mm diameter.  
See SOIL CLASSIFICATION. 
 PENINSULA  An elongated body of land nearly surrounded by water and connected to a larger 
body of land by a neck or isthmus. 
 PERCHED BEACH  A beach or fillet of sand retained above the otherwise normal profile level 
by a submerged dike. 
 PERCOLATION  The process by which water flows through the interstices of a sediment.  
Specifically, in wave phenomena, the process by which wave action forces water through 
the interstices of the bottom sediment and which tends to reduce wave heights. 
 PERIGEAN RANGE  The average semidiurnal range occurring at the time of the PERIGEAN 
TIDES and most conveniently computed from the harmonic constants.  It is larger than 
the mean range where the type of tide is either semidiurnal or mixed and is of no practical 
significance where the type of tide is diurnal. 
 PERIGEAN TIDAL CURRENTS  Tidal currents of increased velocity occurring monthly as the 
result of the moon being in perigee (i.e., at the point in its orbit nearest the Earth). 
 PERIGEAN TIDES  Tides of increased range occurring monthly as the result of the moon being 
in perigee. 
 PERIODIC CURRENT  A current caused by the tide-producing forces of the moon and the sun; 
a part of the same general movement of the sea that is manifested in the vertical rise and 
fall of the tides.  See also CURRENT, FLOOD and CURRENT, EBB. 
 
D.4.14-33 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 PERMANENT CURRENT  A current that runs continuously, independent of the tides and 
temporary causes.  Permanent currents include the freshwater discharge of a river and the 
currents that form the general circulatory systems of the oceans. 
 PERMEABILITY  The property of bulk material (sand, crushed rock, soft rock in situ) which 
permit movement of water through its pores. 
 PERMEABLE GROIN  A GROIN with openings or voids large enough to permit passage of 
appreciable quantities of LITTORAL DRIFT through the structure. 
 PETROGRAPHY  The systematic description and classification of rocks. 
 PETROLOGY  That branch of geology which treats the scientific study of rocks. 
 PHASE  In surface wave motion, a point in the period to which the wave motion has advanced 
with respect to a given initial reference point. 
 PHASE INEQUALITY  Variations in the tides or tidal currents associated with changes in the 
phase of the Moon in relation to the Sun. 
 PHASE VELOCITY  Propagation velocity of an individual wave as opposed to the velocity of a 
wave group. 
 PHI GRADE SCALE  A logarithmic transformation of the Wentworth grade scale for size 
classifications of sediment grains based on the negative logarithm to the base 2 of the 
particle diameter:  = -log2d.  See SOIL CLASSIFICATION. 
 PHOTIC ZONE  The zone extending downward from the ocean surface within which the light is 
sufficient to sustain photosynthesis.  The depth of this layer varies with water clarity, 
time of year and cloud cover, but is about 100 m in the open ocean.  It may be considered 
the Depth to which all light is filtered out except for about one percent and may be 
calculated as about two and one-half times the depth of a SECCHI DISK reading. 
 PHOTOGRAMMETRY  The science of deducing the physical dimensions of objects from 
measurements on images (usually photographs) of the objects. 
 PHOTOMOSAIC  An assemblage of photographs, each of which shows part of a region, put 
together in such a way that each point in the region appears once and only once in the 
assemblage, and scale variation is minimized. 
 PHREATIC LEVEL  Upper surface of an unconfined aquifer (e.g. the top sand layer in a dike) 
at which the pressure in the groundwater is equal to atmospheric pressure. 
 PHYSICAL GEOLOGYA large division of Geology concerned with earth materials, changes of 
the surface and interior of the earth, and the forces that cause those changes. 
 PHYSICAL MODELING  Refers to the investigation of coastal or riverine processes using a 
scaled model. 
 PIER  A structure, usually of open construction, extending out into the water from the shore, to 
serve as a landing place, recreational facility, etc., rather than to afford coastal protection.  
In the Great Lakes, a term sometimes improperly applied to jetties. 
 PIERSON-MOSKOWITZ SPECTRUM  Wave spectrum typical of fully-developed deep water 
waves. 
 PIEZOMETRIC SURFACE  The level at which the hydrostatic water pressure in an aquifer will 
stand if it is free to seek equilibrium with the atmosphere.  For artesian wells, this is 
above the ground surface. 
 PILE  A long, heavy timber or section of concrete or metal that is driven or jetted into the earth 
or seabed to serve as a support or protection. 
 PILING  A group of piles. 
 
D.4.14-34 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 PIPING  Erosion of closed flow channels (tunnels) by the passage of water through soil; flow 
underneath structures, carrying away particles, may endanger the stability of the 
structure. 
 PLACER DEPOSITS  Mineral deposits consisting of dense, resistant and often economically 
valuable minerals which have been weathered from TERRIGENOUS rocks, transported 
to the sea and concentrated in marine sediments by wave or current action. 
 PLACER MINE  Surface mines in which valuable mineral grains are extracted from stream bar 
or beach deposits. 
 PLAIN, COASTAL  See COASTAL PLAIN. 
 PLANFORM  The outline or shape of a body of water as determined by the still-water line. 
 PLATEAU  A land area (usually extensive) having a relatively level surface raised sharply 
above adjacent land on at least one side; table land.  A similar undersea feature. 
 PLEISTOCENE  An epoch of the Quaternary Period characterized by several glacial ages. 
 PLUNGE POINT  (1) For a plunging wave, the point at which the wave curls over and falls.  (2) 
The final breaking point of the waves just before they rush up on the beach. 
 PLUNGING BREAKER  See BREAKER. 
 POCKET BEACH  A beach, usually small, in a coastal reentrant or between two littoral 
barriers. 
 POINT  (1) The extreme end of a CAPE, or the outer end of any land area protruding into the 
water, usually less prominent than a CAPE.  (2) A low profile shoreline promontory of 
more or less triangular shape, the top of which extends seaward. 
 POORLY-SORTED (POORLY-GRADED)  Said of a clastic sediment or rock that consists of 
particles of many sizes mixed together in an unsystematic manner so that no one size 
class predominates. 
 PORE PRESSURE  The interstitial pressure of water within a mass of soil or rock. 
 POROSITY  Percentage of the total volume of a soil not occupied by solid particles but by air 
and water. 
 PORT  A place where vessels may discharge or receive cargo; it may be the entire harbor 
including its approaches and anchorages, or only the commercial part of a harbor where 
the QUAYS, WHARVES, facilities for transfer of cargo, docks, and repair shops are 
situated. 
 POTENTIAL ENERGY OF WAVES  In a progressive oscillatory wave, the energy resulting 
from the elevation or depression of the water surface from the undisturbed level. 
 PRISM  See TIDAL PRISM. 
 PROBABILITY  The chance that a prescribed event will occur, represented by a number (p) in 
the range 0 - 1.  It can be estimated empirically from the relative frequency (i.e. the 
number of times the particular event occurs, divided by the total count of all events in the 
class considered). 
 PROBABILITY DENSITY  Function specifying the distribution of a variable. 
 PROBABLE MAXIMUM WATER LEVEL  A hypothetical water level (exclusive of wave 
runup from normal wind-generated waves) that might result from the most severe 
combination of hydrometeorological, geoseismic, and other geophysical factors and that 
is considered reasonably possible in the region involved, with each of these factors 
considered as affecting the locality in a maximum manner.  This level represents the 
physical response of a body of water to maximum applied phenomena such as hurricanes, 
moving squall lines, other cyclonic meteorological events, tsunamis, and astronomical 
 
D.4.14-35 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
tide combined with maximum probable ambient hydrological conditions such as wave 
setup, rainfall, runoff, and river flow.  It is a water level with virtually no risk of being 
exceeded. 
 PRODELTA  The part of a DELTA that is below the effective depth of wave erosion, lying 
beyond the delta front and sloping down into the basin into which the delta is advancing. 
 PROFILE, BEACH  The intersection of the ground surface with a vertical plane; may extend 
from the behind the DUNE line or the top of a bluff to well seaward of the breaker zone. 
 PROGRESSION (of a beach)  See ADVANCE. 
 PROGRESSIVE WAVE  A wave that moves relative to a fixed coordinate system in a fluid.  
The direction in which it moves is termed the direction of wave propagation. 
 PROMONTORY  A high point of land projecting into a body of water; a HEADLAND. 
 PROPAGATION OF WAVES  The transmission of waves through water. 
 PROTOTYPE  In laboratory usage, the full-scale structure, concept, or phenomenon used as a 
basis for constructing a scale model or copy. 
 
 
---------- Q ---------- 
 
 
 QUARRY RUN  Waste of generally small material, in a quarry, left after selection of larger 
grading. 
 QUARRYSTONE  Any stone processed from a quarry. 
 QUATERNARY  (1) The youngest geologic period;  includes the present time.  (2) The latest 
period of time in the stratigraphic column, 0 B 2 million years, represented by local 
accumulations of glacial (PLEISTOCENE) and post-glacial (HOLOCENE) deposits 
which continue, without change of fauna, from the top of the Pliocene (Tertiary).  The 
quaternary appears to be an artificial division of time to separate pre-human from post-
human sedimentation.  As thus defined, the quaternary is increasing in duration as man’s 
ancestry becomes better understood. 
 QUAY (pronounced KEY)  A stretch of paved bank, or a solid artificial landing place parallel to 
the navigable waterway, for use in loading and unloading vessels. 
 QUICKSAND  Loose, yielding, wet sand which offers no support to heavy objects.  The upward 
flow of the water has a velocity that eliminates contact pressures between the sand grains 
and causes the sand-water mass to behave like a fluid that yields easily to pressure and 
tends to suck down heavy objects. 
 
 
---------- R ---------- 
 
 
 RADAR  An instrument for determining the distance and direction to an object by measuring 
the time needed for radio signals to travel from the instrument to the object and back, and 
by measuring the angle through which the instrument’s antenna has traveled. 
 
D.4.14-36 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 RADIOACTIVE DATING (RADIOMETRIC DATING)  Calculating an age in years for 
geologic materials by measuring the presence of a short-life radioactive element (e.g., 
carbon-14) or a long-life element (e.g., potassium-40/argon-40).  The term applies to all 
methods of age determination based on nuclear decay of naturally-occurring radioactive 
isotopes.  Carbon-14 methods are often used to determine the age of peat or wood found 
in BARRIER ISLANDS. 
 RADIUS OF MAXIMUM WINDS  Distance from the eye of a hurricane, where surface and 
wind velocities are zero, to the place where surface wind speeds are maximum. 
 RAISED BEACH  A wave-cut platform, with or without a covering of beach materials, which is 
now raised above the present sea-level. 
 RANDOM WAVES  The laboratory simulation of irregular sea states that occur in nature. 
 RANGE OF TIDE  The difference in height between consecutive high and low waters.  The 
MEAN RANGE is the difference between MEAN HIGH WATER and MEAN LOW 
WATER.  The GREAT DIURNAL RANGE or DIURNAL RANGE is the difference in 
height between MEAN HIGHER HIGH WATER (MHHW) and MEAN LOWER LOW 
WATER (MLLW).  Where the type of tide is diurnal, the mean range is the same as the 
diurnal range. 
 RAY, WAVE  See ORTHOGONAL. 
 RAYLEIGH DISTRIBUTION  A model probability distribution, commonly used in analysis of 
waves. 
 REACH  (1) An arm of the ocean extending into the land, e.g., an ESTUARY.  (2) A straight 
section of restricted waterway that is uniform with respect to discharge, slope, and cross-
section. 
 RECENT(Geological)  A synonym of HOLOCENE.  See also QUATERNARY. 
 RECESSION  (1) A continuing landward movement of the shoreline.  (2) A net landward 
movement of the shoreline over a specified time. 
 RECHARGE  The addition of new water to an AQUIFER or to the zone of saturation. 
 RECTIFICATION  The process of producing, from a tilted or oblique photograph, a photograph 
from which displacement caused by tilt has been removed. 
 RECURVED SPIT  A spit whose outer end in turned landward by current deflection, by the 
opposing action of two or more currents, or by WAVE REFRACTION; a HOOK. 
 RED TIDE  Discoloration of surface waters, most frequently in COASTAL ZONES, caused by 
large concentrations of microorganisms. 
 REEF  An offshore consolidated rock hazard to navigation, with a least depth of about 20 meters 
(10 fathoms) or less.  Often refers to coral FRINGING REEFS in tropical waters. 
 REEF, ATOLL  See ATOLL. 
 REEF, BARRIER  See BARRIER REEF. 
 REEF BREAKWATER  Rubble mound of single-sized stones with a crest at or below sea level 
which is allowed to be (re)shaped by the waves. 
 REEF, FRINGING  See FRINGING REEF. 
 REFERENCE PLANE  The plane to which sounding and tidal data are referred.  See DATUM 
PLANE. 
 REFERENCE POINT  (1) A specified location (in plan elevation) to which measurements are 
referred.  (2) In beach material studies, a specified point within the REFERENCE ZONE. 
 REFERENCE STATION  A place for which tidal constants have previously been determined 
and which is used as a standard for the comparison of simultaneous observations at a 
 
D.4.14-37 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
second station.  Also, a station for which independent daily predictions are given in the 
tide or current tables from which corresponding predictions are obtained for other stations 
by means of differences or factors. 
 REFERENCE ZONE  In regard to beach measuring procedure, the part of the FORESHORE 
subject to wave action (between the Limit of UPRUSH and the Limit of BACKWASH) 
at mid-tide stage.  In areas of great tidal range a more complex definition is needed. 
 REFLECTED WAVE  That part of an incident wave that is returned seaward when a wave 
impinges on a steep beach, barrier, or other reflecting surface. 
 REFLECTION  The process by which the energy of the wave is returned seaward. 
 REFRACTION (of water waves)  (1) The process by which the direction of a wave moving in 
shallow water at an angle to the contours is changed: the part of the wave advancing in 
shallower water moves more slowly than that part still advancing in deeper water, 
causing the wave crest to bend toward alignment with the underwater contours.  (2) The 
bending of wave crests by currents. 
REFRACTION COEFFICIENT  The square root of the ratio of the distance between adjacent 
orthogonals in deep water to their distance apart in shallow water at a selected point.  
When multiplied by the SHOALING FACTOR and a factor for friction and percolation, 
this becomes the WAVE HEIGHT COEFFICIENT or the ratio of the refracted wave 
height at any point to the deepwater wave height.  Also, the square root of the ENERGY 
COEFFICIENT. 
 REFRACTION DIAGRAM  A drawing showing positions of wave crests and/or orthogonals in 
a given area for a specific deepwater wave period and direction. 
 REGULAR WAVES  Waves with a single height, period, and direction. 
 RESERVOIR  An artificial lake, basin or tank in which a large quantity of water can be stored. 
 RESIDUAL (WATER LEVEL)  The components of water level not attributable to astronomical 
effects. 
 RESONANCE  The phenomenon of amplification of a free wave or oscillation of a system by a 
forced wave or oscillation of exactly equal period.  The forced wave may arise from an 
impressed force upon the system or from a boundary condition. 
 RETARDATION  The amount of time by which corresponding tidal phases grow later day by 
day (about 50 minutes). 
 RETROGRESSION (of a beach)  See RECESSION. 
 RETURN PERIOD  Average period of time between occurrences of a given event. 
 REVERSING TIDAL CURRENT  A tidal current that flows alternately in approximately 
opposite directions with a SLACK WATER at each reversal of direction.  Currents of this 
type usually occur in rivers and straits where the direction of flow is more or less 
restricted to certain channels.  When the movement is towards the shore, the current is 
said to be flooding, and when in the opposite direction it is said to be ebbing. 
 REVETMENT  (1) A facing of stone, concrete, etc., to protect an EMBANKMENT, or shore 
structure, against erosion by wave action or currents.  (2) A retaining wall.  (3) Facing of 
stone, concrete, etc., built to protect a SCARP, EMBANKMENT or shore structure 
against erosion by waves of currents. 
 REYNOLDS NUMBER  The dimensionless ratio of the inertial force to the viscous force in 
fluid motion, Re = VL/ν where L is a characteristic length, ν the kinematic viscosity, and 
V a characteristic velocity.  The Reynolds number is of importance in the theory of 
hydrodynamic stability and the origin of turbulence. 
 
D.4.14-38 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 RIA  A long, narrow inlet, with depth gradually diminishing inward.  Shorter and shallower than 
a FJORD. 
 RIDGE AND RUNNEL  Beach topography consisting of sand bars that have welded to the 
shore during the recovery stage after a storm.  At low tide, water ponds in the runnels and 
flows seaward through gaps in the ridge. 
 RIDGE, BEACH  A nearly continuous mound of beach material that has been shaped by wave 
or other action.  Ridges may occur singly or as a series of approximately parallel 
deposits. 
 RILL MARKS  Tiny drainage channels in a beach caused by the flow seaward of water left in 
the sands of the upper part of the beach after the retreat of the tide or after the dying 
down of storm waves. 
 RIP  A body of water made rough by waves meeting an opposing current, particularly a tidal 
current;  often found where tidal currents are converging and sinking. 
 RIP CHANNEL  A channel cut by seaward flow of RIP CURRENT, usually crosses a 
LONGSHORE BAR. 
 RIP CURRENT  A strong surface current flowing seaward from the shore.  It usually appears as 
a visible band of agitated water and is the return movement of water piled up on the shore 
by incoming waves and wind.  With the seaward movement concentrated in a limited 
band its velocity is somewhat accentuated.  A rip consists of three parts:  the FEEDER 
CURRENTS flowing parallel to the shore inside the breakers;  the NECK, where the 
feeder currents converge and flow through the breakers in a narrow band or "rip";  and 
the HEAD OF RIP, where the current widens and slackens outside the breaker line.  A rip 
current is often miscalled a rip tide.  Also called RIP SURF. 
 RIP SURF  See RIP CURRENT. 
 RIP TIDE  Incorrect term for RIP CURRENT. 
 RIPARIAN  (1) Pertaining to the banks of a body of water.  (2) Of, on or pertaining to the banks 
of a river. 
 RIPPLE  (1) The ruffling of the surface of water; hence, a little curling wave or undulation.  (2) 
A wave less than 0.05 meter (2 inches) long controlled to a significant degree by both 
surface tension and gravity.  See CAPILLARY WAVE and GRAVITY WAVE. 
 RIPPLE MARKS  Undulations produced by fluid movement over sediments.  Oscillatory 
currents produce symmetric ripples whereas a well-defined current direction produces 
asymmetrical ripples.  The crest line of ripples may be straight or sinuous.  The 
characteristic features of ripples depend upon current velocity, particle size, persistence 
of current direction and whether the fluid is air or water.  Sand DUNES may be regarded 
as a special kind of super-ripple. 
 RIPPLES (bed forms)  Small bed forms with wavelengths less than 0.3 m (1 foot) and heights 
less than 0.03 m (0.1 foot). 
 RIPRAP  A protective layer or facing of quarrystone, usually well graded within wide size limit, 
randomly placed to prevent erosion, scour, or sloughing of an embankment or bluff; also 
the stone so used.  The quarrystone is placed in a layer at least twice the thickness of the 
50 percent size, or 1.25 times the thickness of the largest size stone in the gradation. 
 RISK ANALYSIS  Assessment of the total risk due to all possible environmental inputs and all 
possible mechanisms. 
 ROCK WEATHERING  Physical and mineralogical decay processes in rock brought about by 
exposure to climatic conditions either at the present time or in the geological past. 
 
D.4.14-39 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 ROCK  (1) An aggregate of one or more minerals; or a body of undifferentiated mineral matter 
(e.g., obsidian).  The three classes of rocks are:  (a) Igneous B crystalline rocks formed 
from molten material. Examples are granite and basalt.  (b) Sedimentary B resulting from 
the consolidation of loose sediment that has accumulated in layers. Examples are 
sandstone, shale and limestone.  (c) Metamorphic B formed from preexisting rock as a 
result of burial, heat, and pressure.  (2) A rocky mass lying at or near the surface of the 
water or along a jagged coastline, especially where dangerous to shipping. 
 ROLLER  An indefinite term, sometimes considered to denote one of a series of long-crested, 
large waves which roll in on a shore, as after a storm. 
 ROTARY CURRENT, TIDAL  A tidal current that flows continually with the direction of flow 
changing through all points of the compass during the tidal period.  Rotary currents are 
usually found offshore where the direction of flow is not restricted by any barriers.  The 
tendency for the rotation in direction has its origin in the deflecting force of the earth’s 
rotation and, unless modified by local conditions, the change is clockwise in the Northern 
Hemisphere and counterclockwise in the Southern Hemisphere.  The velocity of the 
current usually varies throughout the tidal cycle, passing through two maxima in 
approximately opposite directions and two minima with the direction of the current at 
approximately ninety degrees from the direction at the time of maximum velocity. 
 RUBBLE  (1) Loose angular waterworn stones along a beach.  (2) Rough, irregular fragments of 
broken rock. 
 RUBBLE-MOUND STRUCTURE  A mound of random-shaped and random-placed stones 
protected with a cover layer of selected stones or specially shaped concrete armor units.  
(Armor units in a primary cover layer may be placed in an orderly manner or dumped at 
random.) 
 RUN-UP, RUN-DOWN  The upper and lower levels reached by a wave on a beach or coastal 
structure, relative to still-water level. 
 RUNNEL  A corrugation or trough formed in the foreshore or in the bottom just offshore by 
waves or tidal currents. 
 
 
---------- S ---------- 
 
 
 S-SLOPE BREAKWATER  Rubble mound with gentle slope around still-water level and 
steeper slopes above and below. 
 SALIENT  Coastal formation of beach material developed by WAVE REFRACTION and 
diffraction and long shore drift comprising of a bulge in the coastline towards an offshore 
island or breakwater, but not connected to it as in the case of a TOMBOLO - see also 
Ness and Cusp. 
 SALINITY  Number of grams of salt per thousand grams of sea water, usually expressed in 
parts per thousand (ppt). 
 SALINITY GRADIENT  Change in salinity with expressed in parts per thousand per foot. 
 SALT MARSH  A marsh periodically flooded by salt water (also tidal marsh;  sea marsh). 
 SALT-WEDGE ESTUARY  In this circulation type, the density-driven component dominates 
and two well-mixed layers are separated by a sharp HALOCLINE.  The seawater 
entering the channel appears as a tongue or wedge. 
 
D.4.14-40 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 SALTATION  That method of sand movement in a fluid in which individual particles leave the 
bed by bounding nearly vertically and, because the motion of the fluid is not strong or 
turbulent enough to retain them in suspension, return to the bed at some distance 
downstream.  The travel path of the particles is a series of hops and bounds. 
 SAND  Sediment particles, often largely composed of quartz, with a diameter of between 0.062 
mm and 2 mm, generally classified as fine, medium, coarse or very coarse.  Beach sand 
may sometimes be composed of organic sediments such as calcareous reef debris or shell 
fragments. 
 SAND BAR  (1) See BAR.  (2) In a river, a ridge of sand built to or near the surface by river 
currents. 
 SAND BYPASSING  See BYPASSING, SAND. 
 SAND DUNE  A DUNE formed of sand. 
 SAND REEF  See BAR. 
 SAND SPIT  A narrow sand EMBANKMENT, created by an excess of deposition at its seaward 
terminus, with its distal end (the end away from the point of origin) terminating in open 
water.  
 SAND WAVES  (1) Longshore sand waves are large-scale features that maintain form while 
migrating along the shore with speeds on the order of kilometers per year.  (2) Large-
scale asymmetrical bedforms in sandy river beds having high length to height ratios and 
continuous crestlines. 
 SCARP, BEACH  An almost vertical slope along the beach caused by erosion by wave action.  
It may vary in height from a few cm to a meter or so, depending on wave action and the 
nature and composition of the beach.  See also ESCARPMENT. 
 SCATTER DIAGRAM  A two-dimensional histogram showing the joint probability density of 
two variables within a data sample. 
 SCOUR  Removal of underwater material by waves and currents, especially at the base or toe of 
a shore structure. 
 SCOUR PROTECTION  Protection against erosion of the seabed in front of the toe. 
 SEA  (1) A large body of salt water, second in rank to an ocean, more or less landlocked and 
generally part of, or connected with, an ocean or a larger sea. Examples:  Mediterranean 
Sea;  South China Sea.  (2) Waves caused by wind at the place and time of observation.  
(3) State of the ocean or lake surface, in regard to waves. 
 SEA BREEZE  A light wind blowing from the sea toward the land caused by unequal heating of 
land and water masses. 
 SEA CHANGE  (1) A change wrought by the sea.  (2) A marked transformation. 
 SEA CLIFF  A cliff situated at the seaward edge of the coast. 
  SEA GRASS  Members of marine seed plants that grow chiefly on sand or sand-mud bottom.  
They are most abundant in water less than 9 m deep.  The common types are: Eel grass 
(Zostera), Turtle grass (Thallasia), and Manatee grass (Syringodium). 
 SEA LEVEL  See MEAN SEA LEVEL. 
 SEA LEVEL RISE  The long-term trend in MEAN SEA LEVEL. 
 SEA PUSS  A dangerous longshore current;  a rip current caused by return flow; loosely, the 
submerged channel or inlet through a bar caused by those currents. 
 SEA STATE  Description of the sea surface with regard to wave action.  Also called state of 
sea. 
 SEACOAST  The coast adjacent to the sea or ocean. 
 
D.4.14-41 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 SEAMOUNT  An elevation rising more than 1000 meters above the ocean floor, and of limited 
extent across the summit.  Compare KNOLL. 
 SEAS  Waves caused by wind at the place and time of observation. 
 SEASHORE  (1) (Law) All ground between the ordinary high-water and low-water mark.  (2) 
The shore of the sea or ocean, often used in a general sense (e.g., to visit the seashore). 
 SEAWALL  (1) A structure, often concrete or stone, built along a portion of a coast to prevent 
erosion and other damage by wave action.  Often it retains earth against its shoreward 
face.  (2) A structure separating land and water areas to alleviate the risk of flooding by 
the sea.  Generally shore-parallel, although some reclamation SEAWALLS may include 
lengths that are normal or oblique to the (original) shoreline.  A SEAWALL is typically 
more massive and capable of resisting greater wave forces than a BULKHEAD. 
 SECHHI DISK  Visibility disk (white and black, 30 cm diameter) used to measure the 
transparency of the water. 
 SEDIMENT  (1) Loose, fragments of rocks, minerals or organic material which are transported 
from their source for varying distances and deposited by air, wind, ice and water.  Other 
sediments are precipitated from the overlying water or form chemically, in place.  
Sediment includes all the unconsolidated materials on the sea floor.  (2) The fine grained 
material deposited by water or wind. 
 SEDIMENT CELL  In the context of a strategic approach to coastal management, a length of 
coastline in which interruptions to the movement of sand or shingle along the beaches or 
near shore sea bed do not significantly affect beaches in the adjacent lengths of coastline. 
 SEDIMENT SINK  Point or area at which beach material is irretrievably lost from a coastal cell, 
such as an estuary, or a deep channel in the seabed. 
 SEDIMENT SOURCE  Point or area on a coast from which beach material is supplied, such as 
an eroding cliff, or river mouth. 
 SEDIMENT TRANSPORT  The main agencies by which sedimentary materials are moved are: 
gravity (gravity transport); running water (rivers and streams); ice (glaciers); wind; the 
sea (currents and LONGSHORE DRIFT).  Running water and wind are the most 
widespread transporting agents.  In both cases, three mechanisms operate, although the 
particle size of the transported material involved is very different, owing to the 
differences in density and viscosity of air and water.  The three processes are: rolling or 
traction, in which the particle moves along the bed but is too heavy to be lifted from it; 
SALTATION; and suspension, in which particles remain permanently above the bed, 
sustained there by the turbulent flow of the air or water. 
 SEDIMENT TRANSPORT PATHS  The routes along which net sediment movement occurs. 
 SEEPAGE  The movement of water through small cracks, pores, interstices, out of a body of 
surface of subsurface water.  The loss of water by infiltration from a canal, reservoir or 
other body of water or from a field.  It is generally expressed as flow volume per unit of 
time. 
 SEICHE  (1) A standing wave oscillation of an enclosed waterbody that continues, pendulum 
fashion, after the cessation of the originating force, which may have been either seismic 
or atmospheric.  (2) An oscillation of a fluid body in response to a disturbing force 
having the same frequency as the natural frequency of the fluid system.  Tides are now 
considered to be seiches induced primarily by the periodic forces caused by the Sun and 
Moon.  (3) In the Great Lakes area, any sudden rise in the water of a harbor or a lake 
 
D.4.14-42 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
whether or not it is oscillatory (although inaccurate in a strict sense, this usage is well 
established in the Great Lakes area). 
 SEISMIC REFLECTION  The return of part of the energy of seismic waves to the earth=s 
surface after the waves bounce off an acoustic boundary (typically rock or material of 
different density). 
 SEISMIC REFRACTION  The bending of seismic waves as they pass from one material to 
another. 
 SEISMIC SEA WAVE  See TSUNAMI. 
 SELECTIVE SORTING  A process occurring during sediment transport that tends to separate 
particles according to their size, density, and shape.  A well-sorted distribution contains a 
limited range of grain sizes and usually indicates that the depositional environment 
contains a narrow range of sediment sizes or a narrow band of depositional energy.  A 
poorly-sorted distribution contains a wide range of grain sizes indicating multiple sources 
of sediment or a wide range of deposition energies. 
 SELF-SUSTAINING BEACH  A BEACH that has either natural or engineered sand retention 
and that can be stable through the continued supply of natural sediment sources, without 
any mechanical nourishment over a long period.  Subsets include: Natural or 
Geomorphically Self-sustaining Beaches:  self-sustaining naturally without the 
construction of retaining structures and with no continued mechanical sand nourishment. 
Anthropogenically Self-sustaining Beaches:  self-sustaining by the construction of 
retaining structure(s) with or without initial beach fill but with no continued mechanical 
sand nourishment. 
 SEMIDIURNAL  Having a period or cycle of approximately one-half of a tidal day (12.4 
hours).  The predominating type of tide throughout the world is semidiurnal, with two 
high waters and two low waters each tidal day.  The tidal current is said to be semidiurnal 
when there are two flood and two ebb periods each day. 
 SENSING, REMOTE  The response of an instrument or organism to stimuli from a distant 
source. 
 SETBACK  A required open space, specified in shoreline master programs, measured 
horizontally upland from an perpendicular to the ordinary high water mark. 
 SETUP, WAVE  Superelevation of the water surface over normal surge elevation due to 
onshore mass transport of the water by wave action alone. 
 SETUP, WIND  See WIND SETUP. 
 SHALLOW WATER  (1) Commonly, water of such a depth that surface waves are noticeably 
affected by bottom topography.  It is customary to consider water of depths less than one-
half the surface wavelength as shallow water.  See TRANSITIONAL ZONE and DEEP 
WATER.  (2) More strictly, in hydrodynamics with regard to progressive gravity waves, 
water in which the depth is less than 1/25 the wavelength. 
 SHALLOW WATER WAVE  A PROGRESSIVE WAVE which is in water less than 1/25 the 
wave length in depth. 
 SHEAR INSTABILITIES  Instabilities of the surf zone longshore current commonly found on 
beaches with barred depth profiles.  These instabilities are vertical motions with little 
surface elevation expression.  Conservation of vorticity is the restoring mechanism. 
 SHEAR WAVES  See SHEAR INSTABILITIES 
 SHEET EROSION  The removal of a thin layer of surface material, usually topsoil, by a 
flowing sheet of water. 
 
D.4.14-43 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 SHEET FLOW  Sediment grains under high sheer stress moving as a layer that extends from the 
bed surface to some distance below (on the order of a few cm).  Grains are transported in 
the direction of fluid flow. 
 SHEET PILE  See PILE, SHEET. 
 SHEET, SMOOTH  A sheet on which field control and hydrographic data such as soundings, 
depth curves, and regions surveyed with a wire drag are finally plotted before being used 
in making a final chart. 
 SHELF, CONTINENTAL  See CONTINENTAL SHELF. 
 SHELF, INSULAR  See INSULAR SHELF. 
 SHINGLE  (1) Loosely and commonly, any beach material coarser than ordinary gravel, 
especially any having flat or flattish pebbles.  (2) Strictly and accurately, beach material 
of smooth, well-rounded pebbles that are roughly the same size.  The spaces between 
pebbles are not filled with finer materials.  Shingle often gives out a musical sound when 
stepped on.  The term is more widely used in Great Britain than in the U.S. 
 SHOAL  (1) (noun) A detached area of any material except rock or coral.  The depths over it are 
a danger to surface navigation.  Similar continental or insular shelf features of greater 
depths are usually termed BANKS.  (2) (verb) To become shallow gradually.  (3) To 
cause to become shallow.  (4) To proceed from a greater to a lesser depth of water. 
 SHOALING  Decrease in water depth.  The transformation of wave profile as they propagate 
inshore. 
 SHOALING COEFFICIENT  The ratio of the height of a wave in water of any depth to its 
height in deep water with the effects of refraction, friction, and percolation eliminated.  
Sometimes SHOALING FACTOR or DEPTH FACTOR.  See also ENERGY 
COEFFICIENT and REFRACTION COEFFICIENT. 
 SHOALING FACTOR  See SHOALING COEFFICIENT. 
 SHORE  The narrow strip of land in immediate contact with the sea, including the zone between 
high and low water lines.  A shore of unconsolidated material is usually called a BEACH.  
Also used in a general sense to mean the coastal area (e.g., to live at the shore). 
 SHORE NORMAL  A line at right-angles to the contours in the surf zone. 
 SHORE TERRACE  A terrace made along a COAST by the action of waves and shore currents; 
it may become dry land by the uplifting of the shore or the lowering of the water.  Also 
known as shore platform or wave-cut platform. 
 SHOREFACE  The narrow zone seaward from the low tide SHORELINE, covered by water, 
over which the beach sands and gravels actively oscillate with changing wave conditions.  
See INSHORE (ZONE). 
 SHORELINE  The intersection of a specified plane of water with the shore or beach (e.g., the 
high water shoreline would be the intersection of the plane of mean high water with the 
shore or beach).  The line delineating the shoreline on National Ocean Service nautical 
charts and surveys approximates the mean high water line. 
 SHORELINE MANAGEMENT  The development of strategic, long-term and sustainable 
Coastal defense and land-use policy within a sediment cell. 
 SHORT-CRESTED WAVE  A wave, the crest length of which is of the same order of 
magnitude as the wave length.  A system of short-crested waves has the appearance of 
hills being separated by troughs. 
 SIGNIFICANT WAVE  A statistical term relating to the one-third highest waves of a given 
wave group and defined by the average of their heights and periods.  The composition of 
 
D.4.14-44 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
the higher waves depends upon the extent to which the lower waves are considered.  
Experience indicates that a careful observer who attempts to establish the character of the 
higher waves will record values which approximately fit the definition of the significant 
wave. 
 SIGNIFICANT WAVE HEIGHT  The average height of the one-third highest waves of a given 
wave group.  Note that the composition of the highest waves depends upon the extent to 
which the lower waves are considered.  In wave record analysis, the average height of the 
highest one-third of a selected number of waves, this number being determined by 
dividing the time of record by the significant period.  Also CHARACTERISTIC WAVE 
HEIGHT. 
 SIGNIFICANT WAVE PERIOD  An arbitrary period generally taken as the period of the one-
third highest waves within a given group.  Note that the composition of the highest waves 
depends upon the extent to which the lower waves are considered.  In wave record 
analysis, this is determined as the average period of the most frequently recurring of the 
larger well-defined waves in the record under study. 
 SILL  (1) A submerged structure across a river to control the water level upstream.  (2) The crest 
of a spillway. 
 SILT  Sediment particles with a grain size between 0.004 mm and 0.062 mm, i.e. coarser than 
clay particles but finer than sand.  See SOIL CLASSIFICATION. 
 SINUSOIDAL WAVE  An oscillatory wave having the form of a sinusoid. 
 SLACK TIDE (SLACK WATER)  The state of a tidal current when its velocity is near zero, 
especially the moment when a reversing current changes direction and its velocity is zero.  
Sometimes considered the intermediate period between ebb and flood currents during 
which the velocity of the currents is less than 0.05 meter per second (0.1 knot).  See 
STAND OF TIDE. 
 SLIDE  In mass wasting, movement of a descending mass along a plane approximately parallel 
to the slope of the surface. 
 SLIP  A berthing space between two piers. 
 SLIP FACE  The steep, downwind slope of a DUNE; formed from loose, cascading sand that 
generally keeps the slope at the ANGLE OF REPOSE (about 34 deg.). 
 SLOPE  The degree of inclination to the horizontal.  Usually expressed as a ratio, such as 1:25, 
indicating one unit rise in 25 units of horizontal distance; or in a decimal fraction (0.04).  
Also called GRADIENT. 
 SLOUGH  A small muddy marshland or tidal waterway which usually connects other tidal 
areas.  See BAYOU. 
 SLUICE  A structure containing a gate to control the flow of water from one area to another. 
 SLUMP  In mass wasting, movement along a curved surface in which the upper part moves 
vertically downward while the lower part moves outward. 
 SOFT DEFENSES  Usually refers to beaches (natural or designed) but may also relate to 
energy-absorbing beach-control structures, including those constructed of rock, where 
these are used to control or redirect coastal processes rather than opposing or preventing 
them. 
 SOIL  A layer of weathered, unconsolidated material on top of bed rock; in geologic usage, 
usually defined as containing organic matter and being capable of supporting plant 
growth. 
 
D.4.14-45 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 SOIL CLASSIFICATION (size)  An arbitrary division of a continuous scale of grain sizes such 
that each scale unit or grade may serve as a convenient class interval for conducting the 
analysis or for expressing the results of an analysis.  There are many classifications used. 
 SOLITARY WAVE  A wave consisting of a single elevation (above the original water surface), 
whose height is not necessarily small compared to the depth, and neither followed nor 
preceded by another elevation or depression of the water surfaces. 
 SORTING  Process of selection and separation of sediment grains according to their grain size 
(or grain shape or specific gravity). 
 SORTING COEFFICIENT  A coefficient used in describing the distribution of grain sizes in a 
sample of unconsolidated material.  It is defined as So = Q1/Q3, where Q1 is the diameter 
(in millimeters) which has 75 percent of the cumulative size-frequency (by weight) 
distribution smaller than itself and 25 percent larger than itself, and Q3 is that diameter 
having 25 percent smaller and 75 percent larger than itself. 
 SOUND  (1) (noun) a relatively long arm of the sea or ocean forming a channel between an 
island and a mainland or connecting two larger bodies, as a sea and the ocean, or two 
parts of the same body; usually wider and more extensive than a STRAIT. Example: 
Long Island Sound.  (2) (verb) To measure the depth of the water. 
 SOUNDING  A measured depth of water.  On hydrographic charts the soundings are adjusted to 
a specific plane of reference (SOUNDING DATUM). 
 SOUNDING DATUM  The plane to which soundings are referred.  See also CHART DATUM. 
 SOUNDING LINE  A line, wire, or cord used in sounding, which is weighted at one end with a 
plummet (sounding lead).  Also LEAD LINE. 
 SPILLING BREAKER  See BREAKER. 
 SPILLOVER LOBE  Linguoid, bar-like feature formed by ebb tidal current flow over a low area 
of an ebb shield. 
 SPILLWAY  A structure over or through a dam for discharging flood flows. 
 SPIT  A small point of land or a narrow shoal projecting into a body of water from the shore. 
 SPOIL  Overburden or other waste material removed in mining, dredging, and quarrying. 
 SPRING RANGE  The average SEMIDIURNAL range occurring at the time of SPRING 
TIDES and most conveniently computed from the harmonic constants.  It is larger than 
the MEAN RANGE where the type of tide is either SEMIDIURNAL or MIXED, and is 
of no practical significance where the type of tide is DIURNAL. 
 SPRING TIDAL CURRENTS  Tidal currents of increased velocity occurring semi-monthly as 
the result of the moon being new or full. 
 SPRING TIDE  A tide that occurs at or near the time of new or full moon (SYZYGY) and 
which rises highest and falls lowest from the mean sea level. 
 SPUR-DIKE  See GROIN. 
 STACK  An isolated, pillar-like rocky island isolated from a nearby headland by wave erosion; 
a needle or chimney rock. 
 STAND OF TIDE  A interval at high or low water when there is no sensible change in the 
height of the tide.  The water level is stationary at high and low water for only an instant, 
but the change in level near these times is so slow that it is not usually perceptible.  See 
SLACK TIDE. 
 STANDARD PROJECT HURRICANE  See HYPOTHETICAL HURRICANE. 
 STANDING WAVE  A type of wave in which the surface of the water oscillates vertically 
between fixed points, called nodes, without progression.  The points of maximum vertical 
 
D.4.14-46 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
rise and fall are called antinodes or loops.  At the nodes, the underlying water particles 
exhibit no vertical motion, but maximum horizontal motion.  At the antinodes, the 
underlying water particles have no horizontal motion, but maximum vertical motion.  
They may be the result of two equal progressive wave trains traveling through each other 
in opposite directions.  Sometimes called CLAPOTIS or STATIONARY WAVE. 
 STATION, CONTROL  A point on the ground whose horizontal or vertical location is used as a 
basis for obtaining locations of other points. 
 STATIONARY WAVE  A wave of essentially stable form which does not move with respect to 
a selected reference point; a fixed swelling.  Sometimes called STANDING WAVE. 
 STEP  The nearly horizontal section which more or less divides the BEACH from the 
SHOREFACE. 
 STILLWATER LEVEL (SWL)  The surface of the water if all wave and wind action were to 
cease.  In deep water this level approximates the midpoint of the wave height.  In shallow 
water it is nearer to the trough than the crest.  Also called the UNDISTURBED WATER 
LEVEL. 
 STOCHASTIC  Having random variation in statistics. 
 STOCKPILE  Sand piled on a beach foreshore to nourish downdrift beaches by natural littoral 
currents or forces.  See FEEDER BEACH. 
 STONE  Quarried or artificially-broken rock for use in construction, either as aggregate or cut 
into shaped blocks as dimension stone. 
 STONE, DERRICK  Stone heavy enough to require handling individual pieces by mechanical 
means, generally weighing 900 kg (1 ton) and up. 
 STORM SURGE  A rise above normal water level on the open coast due to the action of wind 
stress on the water surface.  Storm surge resulting from a hurricane also includes that rise 
in level due to atmospheric pressure reduction as well as that due to wind stress.  See 
WIND SETUP. 
 STORM TIDE  See STORM SURGE. 
 STRAIT  A relatively narrow waterway between two larger bodies of water (e.g., Strait of 
Gibraltar).  See also SOUND. 
 STRAND  (1) The shore or beach of the ocean or a large lake.  The land bordering any large 
body of water, especially a sea or an arm of the ocean.  (2) WHARF, QUAY, or roadway 
along a water body, esp. in a city. 
 STRAND PLAIN  A prograded shore built seawards by waves and currents. 
 STRANDFLAT  A wave-cut platform;  an elevated wave-cut terrace 
 STRANDING  The running aground of a ship upon a STRAND, ROCK, or bottom so that it is 
fast for a time. 
 STRANDLINE  An accumulation of debris (e.g. seaweed, driftwood and litter) cast up onto a 
beach, and lying along the limit of wave up rush.  A shoreline above the present water 
level. 
 STRATIGRAPHY  (1) The study of stratified rocks (sediments and volcanics) especially their 
sequence in time.  (2) The character of the rocks and the correlation of beds in different 
localities. 
 STREAM  (1) A course of water flowing along a bed in the Earth.  (2) A current in the sea 
formed by wind action, water density differences, etc.; e.g. the Gulf Stream.  See also 
CURRENT, STREAM. 
 
D.4.14-47 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 STREAM CURRENT  A narrow, deep and swift ocean current, such as the Gulf Stream.  
Opposite of DRIFT CURRENT. 
 STRUCTURAL GEOLOGY  The branch of geology concerned with the internal structure of 
bed rock and the shapes, arrangement, and interrelationships of rock units. 
 SUBAERIAL  Situated or occurring on or adjacent to the surface of the earth, usually meaning 
above the water surface. 
 SUBAERIAL BEACH  That part of the beach which is uncovered by water (e.g. at low tide 
sometimes referred to as drying beach). 
 SUBAQUEOUS  Existing, formed, or taking place under water; submerged. 
 SUB-TIDAL BEACH  The part or the beach (where it exists) which extends from low water out 
to the approximate limit of storm erosion.  The latter is typically located at a maximum 
water depth of 8 to 10 meters and is often identifiable on surveys by a break in the slope 
of the bed. 
 SUBCRITICAL FLOW  Flow for which the Froude number is less than unity; surface 
disturbances can travel upstream. 
 SUBDUCTION ZONE  Elongate region in which the sea floor slides beneath a continent or 
island arc. 
 SUBMARINE CANYON  V-shaped valleys that run across the CONTINENTAL SHELF and 
down the CONTINENTAL SLOPE. 
 SUBMERGENT COAST  A COAST in which formerly dry land has been recently drowned, 
either by land subsidence or a rise in seal level. 
 SUBORDINATE STATION  A tide or current station at which a short series of observations has 
been obtained, which is to be reduced by comparison with simultaneous observations at 
another station having well-determined tidal or current constants. 
 SUBSIDENCE  Sinking or downwarping of a part of the earth’s surface. 
 SUBTIDAL  Below the low-water datum;  thus permanently. 
 SUPER-CRITICAL FLOW  Flow for which the Froude number is greater than unity; surface 
disturbances will not travel upstream. 
 SURF  (1) Collective term for BREAKERS.  (2) The wave activity in the area between the 
shoreline and the outermost limit of breakers.  (3) In literature, the term surf usually 
refers to the breaking waves on shore and on reefs when accompanied by a roaring noise 
caused by the larger waves breaking. 
 SURF BEAT  Irregular oscillations of the nearshore water level with periods on the order of 
several minutes. 
 SURF ZONE  The zone of wave action extending from the water line (which varies with tide, 
surge, set-up, etc.) out to the most seaward point of the zone (breaker zone) at which 
waves approaching the coastline commence breaking, typically in water depths of 
between 5 to 10 meters. 
 SURFACE GRAVITY WAVE (PROGRESSIVE)  (1) this is the term which applies to the 
WIND WAVES and SWELL of lakes and oceans, also called SURFACE WATER 
WAVE, SURFACE WAVE or DEEP WATER WAVE,  (2) a progressive GRAVITY 
WAVE in which the disturbance is confined to the upper limits of a body of water.  
Strictly speaking this term applies to those progressive GRAVITY WAVES whose 
celerity depends only upon the wave length. 
 SURFACE WATER WAVE  See SURFACE GRAVITY WAVE (PROGRESSIVE). 
 
D.4.14-48 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 SURGE  (1) The name applied to wave motion with a period intermediate between that of the 
ordinary wind wave and that of the tide, say from 2 to 60 min.  It is low height, usually 
less than 0.9 m (3 ft).  See also SEICHE.  (2) In fluid flow, long interval variations in 
velocity and pressure, not necessarily periodic, perhaps even transient in nature.  (3) see 
STORM SURGE. 
 SURGING BREAKER  See BREAKER. 
 SURVEY, CONTROL  A survey that provides coordinates (horizontal or vertical) of points to 
which supplementary surveys are adjusted. 
 SURVEY, HYDROGRAPHIC  A survey that has as its principal purpose the determination of 
geometric and dynamic characteristics of bodies of water. 
 SURVEY, PHOTOGRAMMETRIC  A survey in which monuments are placed at points that 
have been determined photogrammetrically. 
 SURVEY, TOPOGRAPHIC  A survey which has, for its major purpose, the determination of 
the configuration (relief) of the surface of the land and the location of natural and 
artificial objects thereon. 
 SUSPENDED LOAD  (1) The material moving in suspension in a fluid, kept up by the upward 
components of the turbulent currents or by colloidal suspension.  (2) The material 
collected in or computed from samples collected with a SUSPENDED LOAD 
SAMPLER.  Where it is necessary to distinguish between the two meanings given above, 
the first one may be called the "true suspended load." 
 SUSPENDED LOAD SAMPLER  A sampler which attempts to secure a sample of the water 
with its sediment load without separating the sediment from the water. 
 SUSTAINABLE BEACH  A beach area that is now and will continue to receive sufficient 
sediment input over a long period (years or decades) to remain stable.  Such sediment 
input can be through either natural supplies of sediment or various forms of mechanical 
beach nourishment (placement by hydraulic dredge, land haul of material, nearshore 
deposition, etc.) 
 SWALE  The depression between two beach ridges. 
 SWASH  The rush of water up onto the beach face following the breaking of a wave.  Also 
UPRUSH, RUNUP. 
 SWASH BARS  Low broad sandy bars formed by sediment in the surf and swash zones, 
separated by linear depressions, or RUNNELS, running parallel to the shore.  Sand 
bodies that form and migrate across ebb-tidal shoals because of currents generated by 
breaking waves. 
 SWASH CHANNEL  (1) On the open shore, a channel cut by flowing water in its return to the 
present body (e.g., a rip channel).  (2) A secondary channel passing through or shoreward 
of an inlet or river bar. 
 SWASH MARK  The thin wavy line of fine sand, mica scales, bits of seaweed, etc., left by the 
uprush when it recedes from its upward limit of movement on the beach face. 
 SWASH PLATFORM  Sand sheet located between the main ebb channel of a coastal inlet and 
an adjacent barrier island. 
 SWASH ZONE  The zone of wave action on the beach, which moves as water levels vary, 
extending from the limit of run-down to the limit of run-up. 
 SWELL  Wind-generated waves that have traveled out of their generating area.  Swell 
characteristically exhibits a more regular and longer period and has flatter crests than 
waves within their fetch (SEAS). 
 
D.4.14-49 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 SYNOPTIC CHART  A chart showing the distribution of meteorological conditions over a 
given area at a given time.  Popularly called a weather map. 
 SYZYGY  The two points in the Moon's orbit when the Moon is in conjunction or opposition to 
the Sun relative to the Earth; time of new or full Moon in the cycle of phases. 
 
 
---------- T ---------- 
 
 
 T-GROIN  A GROIN built in the shape of a letter T with the trunk section connected to land. 
 TECTONIC FORCES  Forces generated from within the earth that result in uplift, movement, or 
deformation of part of the earth’s crust. 
 TECTONICS  The study of the major structural features of the Earth’s crust or the broad 
structure of a region. 
 TERMINAL GROIN  A GROIN, often at the end of a barrier spit, intended to prevent sediment 
passage into the channel beyond. 
 TERRACE  A horizontal or nearly horizontal natural or artificial topographic feature 
interrupting a steeper slope, sometimes occurring in a series. 
 TERRIGENOUS SEDIMENTS  Literally land-formed sediment that has found its way to the 
sea floor.  The term is applied  (a) to sediments formed and deposited on land (e.g., soils, 
sand DUNES), and  (b) to material derived from the land when mixed in with purely 
marine material (e.g., sand or clay in a shelly limestone). 
 THALWEG  In hydraulics, the line joining the deepest points of an inlet or stream channel. 
 THRESHOLD OF MOTION  The point at which the forces imposed on a sediment particle 
overcome its inertia and it starts to move. 
 THRESHOLD VELOCITY  The maximum orbital velocity at which the sediment on the BED 
begins to move as waves approach shallow water. 
 TIDAL CREEK  A creek draining back-barrier areas with a current generated by the rise and 
fall of the tide. 
 TIDAL CURRENT  See CURRENT, TIDAL. 
 TIDAL DATUM  See CHART DATUM and DATUM PLANE. 
 TIDAL DAY  The time of the rotation of the Earth with respect to the Moon, or the interval 
between two successive upper transits of the Moon over the meridian of a place, 
approximately 24.84 solar hours (24 hours and 50 minutes) or 1.035 times the mean solar 
day.  Also called lunar day. 
 TIDAL DELTA  See DELTA. 
 TIDAL FLATS  (1) Marshy or muddy areas covered and uncovered by the rise and fall of the 
tide. A TIDAL MARSH.  (2) Marshy or muddy areas of the seabed which are covered 
and uncovered by the rise and fall of tidal water. 
 TIDAL INLET  (1) A natural inlet maintained by tidal flow.  (2) Loosely, any inlet in which the 
tide ebbs and flows.  Also TIDAL OUTLET. 
 TIDAL MARSH  Same as TIDAL FLATS. 
 TIDAL PERIOD  The interval of time between two consecutive, like phases of the tide.  
 TIDAL POOL  A pool of water remaining on a beach or reef after recession of the tide. 
 
D.4.14-50 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 TIDAL PRISM  (1) The total amount of water that flows into a harbor or out again with 
movement of the tide, excluding any fresh water flow.  (2) The volume of water present 
between MEAN LOW and MEAN HIGH TIDE. 
 TIDAL RANGE  The difference in height between consecutive high and low (or higher high 
and lower low) waters. 
 TIDAL RISE  The height of tide as referred to the datum of a chart. 
 TIDAL RIVER  That part of a river where the water level is influenced by the tide. 
 TIDAL SHOALS  Shoals that accumulate near inlets due to the transport of sediments by tidal 
currents associated with the inlet. 
 TIDAL STAND  An interval at high or low water when there is no observable change in the 
height of the tide.  The water level is stationary at high and Low water for only an instant, 
but the change in level near these times is so slow that it is not usually perceptible. 
 TIDAL WAVE  (1) The wave motion of the tides.  (2) In popular usage, any unusually high and 
destructive water level along a shore.  It usually refers to STORM SURGE or 
TSUNAMI. 
 TIDALLY DRIVEN CIRCULATION  The movement of fresh water and seawater that are 
mixed by the sloshing back and forth of the ESTUARY in response to ocean tides. 
 TIDE  The periodic rising and falling of the water that results from gravitational attraction of the 
Moon and Sun and other astronomical bodies acting upon the rotating Earth.  Although 
the accompanying horizontal movement of the water resulting from the same cause is 
also sometimes called the tide, it is preferable to designate the latter as TIDAL 
CURRENT, reserving the name TIDE for the vertical movement. 
 TIDE, DAILY RETARDATION OF  The amount of time by which corresponding tides grow 
later day by day (about 50 minutes).  Also LAGGING. 
 TIDE, DIURNAL  A tide with one high water and one low water in a day. 
 TIDE, EBB  See EBB TIDE. 
 TIDE, FLOOD  See FLOOD TIDE. 
 TIDE, MIXED  See MIXED TIDE. 
 TIDE, NEAP  See NEAP TIDE. 
 TIDE, SEMIDIURNAL  See SEMIDIURNAL TIDE. 
 TIDE, SLACK  See SLACK TIDE. 
 TIDE, SPRING  See SPRING TIDE. 
 TIDE STAFF  A tide gage consisting of a vertical graduated staff from which the height of the 
tide can be read directly.  It is called a fixed staff when it is secured in place so that it 
cannot be easily removed.  A portable staff is designed for removal from the water when 
not in use. 
 TIDE STATION  A place at which tide observations are being taken.  It is called a primary tide 
station when continuous observations are to be taken over a number of years to obtain 
basic tidal data for the locality.  A secondary tide station is one operated over a short 
period of time to obtain data for a specific purpose. 
 TIDE, STORM  See STORM SURGE. 
  TIDE TABLES  Tables which give daily predictions of the times and heights of the tide.  These 
predictions are usually supplemented by tidal differences and constants by means of 
which additional predictions can be obtained for numerous other places. 
 TIDE, WIND  See WIND TIDE. 
 TIDES, RIP  See RIP. 
 
D.4.14-51 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 TOE  Lowest part of sea- and portside BREAKWATER slope, generally forming the transition 
to the seabed. 
 TOMBOLO  A bar or spit that connects or "ties" an island to the mainland or to another island.  
See CUSPATE SPIT.  Also applied to sand accumulation between land and a 
DETACHED BREAKWATER. 
 TONGUE  A long narrow strip of land, projecting into a body of water. 
 TOPOGRAPHIC MAP  A map on which elevations are shown by means of contour lines. 
 TOPOGRAPHY  The configuration of a surface, including its relief and the positions of its 
streams, roads, building, etc. 
 TRAINING WALL  A wall or jetty to direct current flow. 
 TRANSGRESSION, MARINE  The invasion of a large area of land by the sea in a relatively 
short space of time (geologically speaking).  Although the observable result of a marine 
transgression may suggest an almost instantaneous process, it is probable that the time 
taken is in reality is thousands or millions of years.  The plane of marine transgression is 
a plane of UNCONFORMITY. 
 TRANSITIONAL ZONE (TRANSITIONAL WATER)  In regard to progressive gravity waves, 
water whose depth is less than 2 but more than 1/25 the wavelength.  Often called 
shallow water. 
 TRANSLATORY WAVE  See WAVE OF TRANSLATION. 
 TRANSPOSED HURRICANE  See HYPOTHETICAL HURRICANE. 
 TRANSVERSE BAR  A bar which extends approximately right angles to shorelines. 
 TRANSVERSE WAVE  Waves that propagate along a sailing line of a vessel. 
 TRENCH  A long narrow submarine depression with relatively steep sides. 
 TROCHOIDAL WAVE  A theoretical, progressive oscillatory wave first proposed by Gerstner 
in 1802 to describe the surface profile and particle orbits of finite amplitude, 
nonsinusoidal waves.  The wave form is that of a prolate cycloid or trochoid, and the 
fluid particle motion is rotational as opposed to the usual irrotational particle motion for 
waves generated by normal forces.  Compare IRROTATIONAL WAVE. 
 TROPICAL CYCLONE  See HURRICANE. 
 TROPICAL STORM  A tropical cyclone with maximum winds less than 34 m/sec (75 mile per 
hour).  Compare with HURRICANE or TYPHOON (winds greater than 34 m/sec). 
 TROUGH  A long and broad submarine DEPRESSION with gently sloping sides. 
 TROUGH OF WAVE  The lowest part of a waveform between successive crests.  Also, that 
part of a wave below still-water level. 
 TRUNCATED LANDFORM  A landform cut off, especially by EROSION, and forming a steep 
side or CLIFF. 
 TSUNAMI  A long-period wave caused by an underwater disturbance such as a volcanic 
eruption or earthquake.  Also SEISMIC SEA WAVE.  Commonly miscalled "tidal 
wave." 
 TURBIDITY  (1) A condition of a liquid due to fine visible material in suspension, which may 
not be of sufficient size to be seen as individual particles by the naked eye but which 
prevents the passage of light through the liquid.  (2) A measure of fine suspended matter 
in liquids. 
 TURBIDITY CURRENT  A flowing mass of sediment-laden water that is heavier than clear 
water and therefore flows downslope along the bottom of the sea or a lake. 
 
D.4.14-52 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 TURBULENT FLOW  Any flow which is not LAMINAR, i.e., the stream lines of the fluid, 
instead of remaining parallel, become confused and intermingled. 
 TYPHOON  See HURRICANE.  The term typhoon is applied to tropical cyclones in the 
western Pacific Ocean. 
 
 
---------- U ---------- 
 
 
 UNCONFORMITY  A surface that represents a break in the geologic record, with the rock unit 
immediately above it being considerably younger than the rock beneath.  There are three 
major aspects to consider:  (1) Time.  An unconformity develops during a period of time 
in which no sediment is deposited.  This concept equates deposition and time, and an 
unconformity represents unrecorded time.  (2) Deposition.  Any interruption of 
deposition, whether large or small in extent, is an unconformity.  This aspect of 
unconformity pre-supposes a standard scale of deposition which is complete. Major 
breaks in sedimentation can usually be demonstrated easily, but minor breaks may go 
unrecorded until highly detailed investigations are made.  (3) Structure.  Structurally, 
unconformity may be regarded as planar structures separating older rocks below from 
younger rocks above, representing the break as defined in (1) and (2) above.  A plane of 
unconformity may be a surface of weathering, Erosion or denudation, or a surface of non-
deposition, or possibly some combination of these factors.  It may be parallel to the upper 
strata, make an angle with the upper strata, or be irregular.  Subsequent Earth movements 
may have folded or faulted it. 
 UNCONSOLIDATED  In referring to sediment grains, loose, separate, or unattached to one 
another. 
 UNDERCUTTING  Erosion of material at the foot of a Cliff or bank, e.g., a sea cliff, or river 
bank on the outside of a meander.  Ultimately, the overhang collapses, and the process is 
repeated. 
UNDERTOW  (1) A current below water surface flowing seaward; the receding water below the 
surface from waves breaking on a shelving beach.  (2) Actually undertow is largely 
mythical.  As the BACKWASH of each wave flows down the BEACH, a current is 
formed which flows seaward.  However, it is a periodic phenomenon.  The most common 
phenomena expressed as undertow are actually RIP CURRENTS. 
UNDERWATER GRADIENT  The slope of the sea bottom.  See SLOPE. 
UNDEVELOPED COASTAL BARRIER A depositional geologic feature that is subject to wave, 
tidal, and wind energies, and protects landward aquatic habitats from direct wave attack, 
and all associated aquatic habitats, including adjacent wetlands, marshes, estuaries, inlets, 
and Nearshore waters, but only if there are few manmade structures and human activities 
do not significantly impede geomorphic and ecological processes. 
 UNDISTURBED WATER LEVEL  Same as STILL WATER LEVEL.  
 UNDULATION  A continuously propagated motion to and fro, in any fluid or elastic medium, 
with no permanent translation of the particles themselves. 
 UPCOAST  In United States usage, the coastal direction generally trending toward the north. 
 UPDRIFT  The direction opposite that of the predominant movement of littoral materials. 
 
D.4.14-53 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 UPLAND  Dry land area above and landward of the ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK 
(OHWM).  Often used as a general term to mean high land far from the COAST and in 
the interior of the country. 
 UPLIFT  The upward water pressure on the base of a structure or pavement. 
 UPRUSH  The rush of water up the FORESHORE following the breaking of a wave, also called 
SWASH or RUNUP. 
 UPSTREAM  Along coasts with obliquely approaching waves there is a longshore (wave-
driven) current.  For this current one can define an upstream and a DOWNSTREAM 
direction.  For example, on a beach with an orientation west-east with the sea to the 
north, the waves come from NW.  Then the current flows from West to East.  Here, 
upstream is West of the observer, and East is DOWNSTREAM of the observer. 
 UPWELLING  The process by which water rises from a deeper to a shallower depth, usually as 
a result of offshore surface water flow.  It is most prominent where persistent wind blows 
parallel to a coastline so that the resultant Ekman transport moves surface water away 
from the coast. 
 
 
---------- V ---------- 
 
 
 VALLEY  An elongated depression, usually with an outlet, between BLUFFS or between 
ranges of hills or mountains. 
 VALLEY, SEA  A submarine depression of broad valley form without the steep side slopes 
which characterize a canyon. 
 VALLEY, SUBMARINE  A prolongation of a land valley into or across a continental or insular 
shelf, which generally gives evidence of having been formed by stream erosion. 
 VELOCITY OF WAVES  The speed at which an individual wave advances.  See WAVE 
CELERITY. 
 VELOCITY PROFILE  The velocity gradient within the BOTTOM BOUNDARY LAYER, 
displayed as a graph of height above the bed against the velocity of the flow. 
 VISCOSITY (or internal friction)  That molecular property of a fluid that enables it to support 
tangential stresses for a finite time and thus to resist deformation.  Resistance to flow. 
 
 
---------- W ---------- 
 
 
 WASH LOAD  Part of the suspended load with particle sizes smaller than found in the bed; it is 
in near-permanent suspension and transported without deposition; the amount of wash 
load transported through a reach does not depend on the transport capacity of the flow; 
the load is expressed in mass or volume per unit of time. 
 WASHOVER  Sediment deposited inland of a beach by overwash processes. 
 WATER DEPTH  Distance between the seabed and the still water level. 
 WATER LEVEL  Elevation of still water level relative to some datum. 
 
D.4.14-54 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 WATERLINE  A juncture of land and sea.  This line migrates, changing with the tide or other 
fluctuation in the water level.  Where waves are present on the beach, this line is also 
known as the limit of backrush (approximately, the intersection of the land with the still-
water level.) 
 WAVE  A ridge, deformation, or undulation of the surface of a liquid. 
 WAVE AGE  The ratio of wave speed to wind speed. 
 WAVE, CAPILLARY  See CAPILLARY WAVE. 
 WAVE CELERITY  The speed of wave propagation. 
 WAVE CLIMATE  The seasonal and annual distribution of wave height, period and direction. 
 WAVE CLIMATE ATLAS  Series of maps showing the variability of wave conditions over a 
long coastline. 
 WAVE CREST  See CREST OF WAVE. 
 WAVE CREST LENGTH  See CREST LENGTH, WAVE. 
 WAVE, CYCLOIDAL  See CYCLOIDAL WAVE. 
 WAVE DECAY  See DECAY OF WAVES. 
 WAVE DIRECTION  The direction from which a wave approaches. 
 WAVE DIRECTIONAL SPECTRUM  Distribution of wave energy as a function of wave 
frequency and direction. 
 WAVE FORECASTING  The theoretical determination of future wave characteristics, usually 
from observed or predicted meteorological phenomena. 
 WAVE FREQUENCY  The inverse of wave period. 
 WAVE FREQUENCY SPECTRUM  Distribution of wave energy as a function of frequency. 
 WAVE, GRAVITY  See GRAVITY WAVE. 
 WAVE GROUP  A series of waves in which the wave direction, wavelength, and wave height 
vary only slightly.  See also GROUP VELOCITY. 
 WAVE HEIGHT  The vertical distance between a crest and the preceding trough.  See also 
SIGNIFICANT WAVE HEIGHT. 
 WAVE HEIGHT COEFFICIENT  The ratio of the wave height at a selected point to the 
deepwater wave height.  The REFRACTION COEFFICIENT multiplied by the shoaling 
factor. 
 WAVE HINDCASTING  See HINDCASTING, WAVE. 
 WAVE, INFRAGRAVITY  See INFRAGRAVITY WAVE. 
 WAVE, IRROTATIONAL  See IRROTATIONAL WAVE. 
 WAVE, MONOCHROMATIC  See MONOCHROMATIC WAVES. 
 WAVE OF TRANSLATION  A wave in which the water particles are permanently displaced to 
a significant degree in the direction of wave travel.  Distinguished from an 
OSCILLATORY WAVE. 
 WAVE, OSCILLATORY  See OSCILLATORY WAVE. 
 WAVE PEAK FREQUENCY  The inverse of wave peak period. 
 WAVE PERIOD  The time for a wave crest to traverse a distance equal to one wavelength.  The 
time for two successive wave crests to pass a fixed point.  See also SIGNIFICANT 
WAVE PERIOD. 
 WAVE, PROGRESSIVE  See PROGRESSIVE WAVE. 
 WAVE PROPAGATION  The transmission of waves through water. 
 WAVE RAY  See ORTHOGONAL. 
 
D.4.14-55 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 WAVE, REFLECTED  That part of an incident wave that is returned seaward when a wave 
impinges on a steep beach, barrier, or other reflecting surface. 
 WAVE REFRACTION  See REFRACTION (of water waves). 
 WAVE ROSE  Diagram showing the long-term distribution of wave height and direction. 
 WAVE SETDOWN  Drop in water level outside of the breaker zone to conserve momentum as 
wave particle velocities and pressures change prior to wave breaking. 
 WAVE SETUP  See SETUP, WAVE. 
 WAVE, SINUSOIDAL  An oscillatory wave having the form of a sinusoid. 
 WAVE, SOLITARY  See SOLITARY WAVE. 
 WAVE SPECTRUM  In ocean wave studies, a graph, table, or mathematical equation showing 
the distribution of wave energy as a function of wave frequency.  The spectrum may be 
based on observations or theoretical considerations.  Several forms of graphical display 
are widely used. 
 WAVE, STANDING  See STANDING WAVE. 
 WAVE STEEPNESS  The ratio or wave height to wavelength also known as sea steepness. 
 WAVE TRAIN  A series of waves from the same direction. 
 WAVE TRANSFORMATION  Change in wave energy due to the action of physical processes. 
 WAVE, TROCHOIDAL  See TROCHOIDAL WAVE. 
 WAVE TROUGH  The lowest part of a wave form between successive crests.  Also that part of 
a wave below still-water level. 
 WAVE VELOCITY  The speed at which an individual wave advances. 
 WAVE, WIND  See WIND WAVES. 
 WAVELENGTH  The horizontal distance between similar points on two successive waves 
measured perpendicular to the crest. 
 WAVES, INTERNAL  See INTERNAL WAVES. 
 WEIBULL DISTRIBUTION  A model probability distribution, commonly used in wave 
analysis. 
 WEIR  A low dam or wall across a stream to raise the upstream water level. Termed fixed crest 
weir when uncontrolled. 
 WEIR JETTY  A jetty with a low section or weir over which littoral drift moves into a 
predredged deposition basin which is then dredged periodically. 
 WETLANDS  Lands whose saturation with water is the dominant factor determining the nature 
of soil development and the types of plant and animal communities that live in the soil 
and on its surface (e.g. Mangrove forests). 
 WELL-SORTED  Clastic sediment or rock that consists of particles all having approximately 
the same size.  Example: sand dunes. 
 WHARF  A structure built on the shore of a harbor, river, or canal, so that vessels may lie 
alongside to receive and discharge cargo and passengers. 
 WHITECAP  On the crest of a wave, the white froth caused by wind. 
 WICKER FAGGOT  Bundles of twigs or sticks, often willow, used in building earthworks or 
levees (traditional practice in Holland and China.).  Alternate term: fascine 
 WIND CHOP  See CHOP. 
 WIND, FOLLOWING  See FOLLOWING WIND. 
 WIND, KATABATIC  See KATABATIC WIND 
 WIND, OFFSHORE  A wind blowing seaward from the land in a coastal area. 
 WIND, ONSHORE  A wind blowing landward from the sea in a coastal area. 
 
D.4.14-56 
Section D.4.14 
Guidelines and Specifications for Flood Hazard Mapping Partners [November 2004] 
 
 WIND, OPPOSING  See OPPOSING WIND. 
 WIND ROSE  Diagram showing the long-term distribution of wind speed and direction. 
 WIND SEA  Wave conditions directly attributable to recent winds, as opposed to swell. 
 WIND SETDOWN  Drop in water level below the still water level on the windward ends of 
enclosed bodies of water and semi- enclosed bays. 
 WIND SETUP  On reservoirs and smaller bodies of water  (1) the vertical rise in the still-water 
level on the leeward side of a body of water caused by wind stresses on the surface of the 
water;  (2) the difference in still-water levels on the windward and the leeward sides of a 
body of water caused by wind stresses on the surface of the water.  STORM SURGE 
(usually reserved for use on the ocean and large bodies of water). 
 WIND STRESS  The way in which wind transfers energy to the sea surface. 
 WIND TIDE  See WIND SETUP, STORM SURGE. 
 WIND WAVES  (1) Waves being formed and built up by the wind.  (2) Loosely, any wave 
generated by wind. 
 WINDWARD  The direction from which the wind is blowing. 
 
D.4.14-57 
Section D.4.14 
