This is a preprint of a paper intended for publication in a journal or 
proceedings. Since changes may not be made before publication, 
this preprint should not be cited or reproduced without permission of 
the author. This document was prepared as an account of work 
sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. Neither 
the United States Government nor any agency thereof, or any of 
their employees, makes any warranty, expressed or implied, or 
assumes any legal liability or responsibility for any third party’s use, 
or the results of such use, of any information, apparatus, product or 
process disclosed in this report, or represents that its use by such 
third party would not infringe privately owned rights. The views 
expressed in this paper are not necessarily those of the United 
States Government or the sponsoring agency. 
INL/CON-05-00013
PREPRINT
INL SUBSURFACE 
WIRELESS SENSOR 
PLATFORM
21st Annual International Conference 
on Soils, Sediments and Water 
Dennis C. Kunerth 
John M. Svoboda 
James T. Johnson 
October 2005 
INL SUBSURFACE WIRELESS SENSOR 
PLATFORM
Dennis C. Kunerth, John M. Svoboda, and James T. Johnson 
Idaho National Laboratory, Idaho Falls, ID 83415 
Abstract: 
The Idaho National Laboratory is developing a versatile micro-power sensor 
interface platform for periodic subsurface sensing of environmental variables 
important to waste disposal sites such as volumetric moisture, water potential, 
and temperature. The key characteristics of the platform architecture are that 
the platform is passive until externally energized—no internal power source is 
required—and that it communicates with a "reader" via short-range 
telemetry—no wires penetrate the subsurface. Other significant attributes 
include the potential for a long service life and a compact size that makes it 
well suited for retrofitting existing landfill structures. Functionally, the sensor 
package is “read” by a short-range induction coil that activates and powers the 
sensor platform as well as detects the sensor output via a radio frequency 
signal generated by the onboard programmable interface controller microchip. 
As a result, the platform has a functional subsurface communication range of 
approximately 10 to 12 ft. and can only accept sensors that require low power 
to operate. 
Key words: 
Wireless; sensor platform; subsurface sensing; moisture; water potential. 
1.
INTRODUCTION
For many of the soil waste sites within the Department of Energy 
complex, in-place containment with surface barriers (caps) is expected to be 
the primary means of remediation. As part of the capping process, there will 
be years of post-closure monitoring to assure/verify performance. 
Consequently, monitoring technologies are needed that are economical, 
reliable, require low-maintenance, and have the potential for a long service 
2 
Dennis C. Kunerth, John M. Svoboda, and James T. Johnson
life. Implementation techniques will need to minimize the impact of the 
monitoring technology on cap integrity.  
An example is found at DOE’s Hanford Site. The 200 Areas of the 
Hanford Site are on the National Priorities List under the Comprehensive 
Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA) of 
1980. Operations in the 200 Areas were related to separation of nuclear 
materials from spent nuclear fuel. Significant quantities of chemical and 
radioactive waste, as well as chemicals associated with the separations 
processes, were disposed to the environment. The 200 Areas contain about 
800 soil waste sites, including liquid disposal structures, solid waste burial 
sites, and spills. Types of waste received at these sites include radioactive, 
mixed radioactive, hazardous, sanitary, and demolition waste. The use of 
surface barriers (caps) is expected to be the preferred approach to 
containment as identified in the DOE-RL baseline (DOE-RL, 1999a). Barrier 
performance data are needed for remediation decisions and, if barriers are 
selected, to verify their performance.  
A number of different methodologies are used to monitor the 
performance of barrier caps, including monitoring wells, bore hole 
sampling/sensing, lysimeters, and networks of embedded sensors wired to 
data loggers or telemetry units. The wires associated with embedded systems 
can present difficulties during construction and subsequent cap maintenance 
because the wires penetrate the cap, providing potential paths for water 
infiltration. Any maintenance of the sensors after extended service also 
means additional penetrations and disruption of barrier integrity. An 
approach to mitigate a number of these issues is to implement a sensor 
platform that is wireless and passive with the potential for extended service. 
In most cases, platform service life will be limited to the useful service life 
of the integrated sensors interacting with the environment.  
The Idaho National Laboratory (INL) is developing a sensor platform 
that is both wireless and passive. Passive is defined as not having an onboard 
power supply. The platform architecture has the following attributes: 1) all 
platform components are inactive until energized by an external power 
source, thus no internal power such as a battery is required; 2) a magnetic 
induction field generated by a “reader” is used to both power and 
communicate with the platform, eliminating the need for wires to penetrate 
to the subsurface; 3) sensor platforms are individually addressable, allowing 
a single reader to interrogate a number of different platforms; and 4) each 
platform can support multiple low-power sensors. Although well suited for 
the intended application, this approach does have inherent limitations and/or 
tradeoffs. These include a limited functional range, as defined by the extent 
of the interrogating induction field, and a power budget, as defined by the 
onboard energy storage capacitors that provide power to platform 
INL Subsurface Wireless Sensor Platform 
3
components as well as integrated sensors. Specific applications require 
tradeoffs between charge time (measurement cycle time), available power, 
and working depth. For example, an increase in required power to run 
sensors will result in either a reduced working depth and/or an increase in 
charge time. A working configuration as it relates to a landfill cap is 
illustrated in Figure 1.  
2.
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
The platform is designed around a microcontroller produced by 
Microchip Technology.1 In essence, it is a single-chip computer containing 
onboard nonvolatile memory, multiple analog-to-digital (A/D) channels, and 
digital communication ports. The microcontroller can be programmed and/or 
hardwired  to handle all of the logic  needed for power  management, opera 
Figure 1. Functional configuration for INL sensor platform as it relates to a landfill barrier 
cap.
1 Microchip Technology Inc., Programmable Interface Controller PIC16F877A. 
4 
Dennis C. Kunerth, John M. Svoboda, and James T. Johnson
tion of one or more sensors, and communication with the reader.hardwired to 
handle all of the logic needed for power management, operation of one or 
more sensors, and communication with the reader. Associated with the 
microcontroller are circuits to communicate as well as collect and store 
energy from the aboveground reader. Telemetry and power transfer between 
the reader and sensor platform are accomplished through a low-frequency 
magnetic field (nominal 125 kHz working frequency). The reader is a 
conventional radio transceiver connected to a resonant antenna.
The basic sequence to acquire sensor readings is as follows. The reader 
sends out energy in the form of an alternating magnetic field, which is 
captured and stored in a capacitor within the platform/sensor package. When 
sufficient energy has been collected, the microcontroller will initiate a 
routine to have one or more sensors perform a measurement. The values 
collected (e.g. volumetric moisture, temperature, and/or pressure) are then 
digitized. At that point, the microcontroller powers the probe transmitter and 
also controls frequency-shift keying to impress the digital readings on the 
transmitted waveform, with subsequent decoding by the reader. The reader 
supplies instructions to the platform, as well as energy. For example, the 
platform might be instructed to report the value of a particular onboard 
sensor or to adjust the operating range of a sensor. 
Figure 2 shows a simplified block diagram of the probe. The antenna, 
actually a resonant circuit, is used both for capturing energy from the reader 
and transmitting data back to the reader. As energy builds in the storage 
capacitor, the microcontroller begins to operate and polls the energy detector 
circuit to determine if the capacitor is fully charged, i.e. has a 5 Volt reserve 
available for use. When that condition is achieved, the RF detection circuit is 
polled to determine if the reader is still transmitting the energizing pulse. If 
not, the reader has stopped to listen. If so, the microcontroller interrogates 
the sensor(s), which requires applying power and digitizing its analog 
output. At this point, the measurement results are stored in the 
microcontroller's memory. Power is then applied to the transmitter, which in 
turn drives the antenna. Frequency-shift keying is accomplished by 
switching a small capacitance in and out of the resonant circuit of the 
antenna; the switching is controlled by the communications port on the 
microcontroller. The receiving process is straightforward. An FM receiver is 
tuned such that its passband is centered on one of the frequency components 
of the modulated wave. This produces analog output from the receiver that is 
level shifted to become a proper RS-232 signal. That signal is captured by 
the serial port of a computer, which serves as the data logger.  
INL Subsurface Wireless Sensor Platform 
5
Figure 2. Simplified block diagram of the sensor platform and reader. 
3.
RESULTS 
To date, the development of the INL sensor platform has progressed from 
a breadboard model demonstrating feasibility (Kunerth et al., 2001) to a 
number of prototype models that have been tested in the field.  
Early prototype platforms with temperature, pressure, and volumetric 
water sensors were developed and tested at a moisture sensor calibration 
facility at the Nevada Test Site (NTS) developed for the calibration of 
neutron moisture meters in different well casing types. This facility consists 
of arrays of time domain reflectometry (TDR) probes buried at depths of 1, 
2, and 3 feet in screened alluvium. TDR probes measure water content. The 
TDR probes were calibrated in the laboratory using NTS alluvium prior to 
installation in the field and provide accurate measurements of volumetric 
water content. Use of this facility permitted the direct comparison of the 
INEEL sensor technology to an accepted moisture measurement technology. 
Four prototype sensor packages were buried at various depths in the NTS 
facility within the sensing volume of the TDR arrays. Subsequent to burial, 
the area was flooded and the water infiltration recorded with time, see Figure 
3. Figure 4 presents the volumetric water measurements recorded for INL 
sensor package #3 with time. Figure 5 shows the volumetric water 
measurements made by TDR sensors at the 1-ft level. Spaces in the data 
resulted  from  alternating  measurements  between  the TDR  probes and the  
6 
Dennis C. Kunerth, John M. Svoboda, and James T. Johnson
Figure 3. INL wireless sensor platform field test. For this test, the buried sensor packages 
(marked by the blue flags) are located on the exterior of the antenna encircling the aluminum 
well casing. 
Figure 4. Volumetric water measurements recorded by INL Sensor Package #3 as water 
infiltrated into the soil. Sampling depth for this sensor package was 13 to 20 inches. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
8:00
9:00
10:00 11:00 12:00 13:00
Time 
Moisture Content 
(Percent)
INL Subsurface Wireless Sensor Platform 
7
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
8:00
10:00
12:00
14:00
16:00
18:00
20:00
22:00
0:00
Time 
Vol water content
21
23
49
50
51
52
54
Figure 5. Volumetric water measurements recorded by NTS TDR sensors at a 1 ft. (TDR 
measurements provided by Charles Lohrstorfer and Alen Wittig, NTS.) 
INEEL sensors. Cross talk between the two sensor types, TDR and INL 
platform, prevented their simultaneous use. The platform’s volumetric water 
sensor uses a calibration provided by the manufacturer that is not specific to 
each probe or the composition of the alluvium at the NTS. This resulted in 
absolute measurements that were different from those obtained from the 
TDR probes, but the INEEL sensor packages did duplicate the TDR’s 
response to the wetting front moving through the soil. 
A second field test was performed with similar prototype sensor packages 
capable of monitoring volumetric water, temperature, and pressure. These 
packages were embedded in a barrier cap during construction at a superfund 
site in South Dakota. A year later, after construction was complete, the 
sensor packages were located and sensor data collected without any platform 
failures. Figure 6 shows a sensor package as it was being embedded and the 
barrier cap under construction.
After the field testing at NTS, a heat dissipation based matric water 
potential sensor was added to the sensor platform. To accomplish this task, 
the capabilities of the platform were extended to include two separate energy 
storage banks that could be individually charged and controlled. The primary 
storage bank is used to power the basic functionality of the platform and one 
or more low-power sensors such as temperature and volumetric water. The 
second storage bank is significantly larger (6.3 joules versus 0.003 joules) 
and is used to power the energy-intensive water potential measurement or 
other tasks that require extended power. This storage bank is software 
controlled and is only active when commanded. However, due to the size of 
the second bank,  charge / measurement  cycle times are  significantly longer  
8 
Dennis C. Kunerth, John M. Svoboda, and James T. Johnson
Figure 6. INL wireless sensor platform field test at superfund site in South Dakota. 
when activated, i.e. hours versus seconds for the primary bank alone. Figure 
7 shows sensor packages with platforms having commercial volumetric 
water, water potential, and temperature sensors. To date, all sensors used 
with the platform have been commercial off-the-shelf technologies.2,3,4
Calibration of the water potential sensor using a modified pressure plate 
extractor system engineered and build by NTS personnel is underway. 
Figure 8 shows the calibration system along with sensor data periodically 
collected at different system pressure settings. Two sensor packages are set 
vertically in the green plastic pipes attached to the lid of the pressure plate 
extractor. A small hoop resonant antenna is mounted above the pressure 
system. It is connected to a reader and laptop computer that controls data 
acquisition. The plastic pipes are used to allow the alternating magnetic field 
generated by the reader to couple with the sensor platforms encased within 
the pressure system. The system is programmed to periodically collect data 
2 Decagon Devices Inc., Pullman, WA, ECH2O volumetric water sensor. 
3 Campbell Scientific Inc., Logan, UT, 229-L matric water potential sensor. 
4 Microchip Technology Inc., Chandler, AZ, TC1047AVNB temperature sensor. 
INL Subsurface Wireless Sensor Platform 
9
from the two sensor packages at set time intervals. Upon completion of the 
calibration process, the sensors packages will be field tested at NTS. 
Figure 7. Sensor packages with INL platform and integrated volumetric water, water 
potential, and temperature sensors. 
Figure 8. NTS-modified pressure plate extractor system used to calibrate the water potential 
sensors. The two green plastic tubes house two sensor packages during calibration as well as 
allow the alternating magnetic fields generated by the reader and sensor platform to pass 
through the pressure system boundary. 
10 
Dennis C. Kunerth, John M. Svoboda, and James T. Johnson
4.
DISCUSSION/CONCLUSIONS
The INL sensor platform was developed to provide a method for long 
term subsurface sensing that does not require wires to penetrate the barriers. 
Due to the passive nature of the design, no maintenance needs to be 
performed and the low duty cycle provides the potential for a long service 
life. Service life will, in most cases, be defined by the service life of the 
sensors that directly interact with the environment or their ability to maintain 
calibration. Although the platform has been demonstrated to be fully 
functional, there are operational limits that define how the platform can be 
implemented.  
Those limitations are: 
1. A reader is required to be temporarily or permanently located on the 
surface to provide power and communications when measurements are 
made. An exception to this is possible if the platform is configured and 
programmed to use the large secondary energy storage bank to run low-
power sensors for an extended period of time after the reader has been 
shut off or removed.  
2. Operational depths are defined by the extent to which the resonant 
antennas on the reader and sensor platform can couple to transfer power 
and communicate. Laboratory and field testing at the INL indicates that 
the present system is limited to approximately 12 ft. Also note that the 
physical alignment of the antennas contribute to the efficiency of energy 
transfer, i.e. maximum efficiency is achieved when they are coaxial. Soil 
types and water content may also influence operational depths, but all 
testing to date suggests that the effects are small.  
3. There is a trade off between operational depth and measurement cycle 
time. Increased working depths result in weaker magnetic field strengths 
and thus less energy transfer. As a result, it takes longer to charge the 
energy storage banks. At maximum operational depths, a platform with 
low-power sensors can be energized and read in seconds while it will 
take hours to charge the secondary energy storage bank for use with a 
high-power sensor such as the heat dissipation water potential sensor.
In conclusion, the INL sensor platform does provide a viable means for 
subsurface sensing when it is desirable not to penetrate structures with wires.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The Advanced Monitoring Systems Initiative (AMSI) provided support 
to INL for the design, development and testing of the moisture sensors. 
AMSI is an integrated DT&E project that aggressively searches for, 
INL Subsurface Wireless Sensor Platform 
11
develops, tests, evaluates, and integrates promising new sensors and 
monitoring systems for end-user applications. AMSI is funded through the 
National Nuclear Security Administration’s Nevada Site Office, and 
managed by Bechtel Nevada (BN). 
AMSI also designed the required modification to the water content 
calibration system, funded the BN Engineering Department to complete 
design drawings and specifications, and the fabrication group to manufacture 
this innovative design. Work at INL was performed under DOE Idaho 
Operations Office Contract DE-AC07-05ID14517. 
REFERENCES
DOE-RL, 1999a, 200 Areas Remedial Investigation/Feasibility Study Implementation Plan – 
Environmental Restoration Program, DOE/RL-98-28, Rev. 0, U.S. Department of Energy, 
Richland Operations Office, Richland, Washington. 
Kunerth, D. C., Svoboda, J. M. Slater, J. M. and Lee, J. E., “Monitoring Moisture Content In 
Surface Barriers Using A Passive Sensor Platform,” INRA Subsurface Science 
Symposium, Idaho Falls, Idaho, Sept. 6-7, 2001.  
