Middle East Region and
Arabian Peninsula,
1969–1972; Jordan,
September 1970
Middle East Region
1.
National Security Study Memorandum 21
Washington, January 21, 1969.
TO
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
SUBJECT
Middle East Policy
The President has directed the preparation of two papers on 
Arab-Israel problems for consideration by the NSC. One paper should
consider alternative US policy approaches aimed at securing a Middle
East settlement, including (1) direct Arab-Israeli negotiations (2) U.S.-
Soviet negotiations and (3) Four Power negotiations.2 The paper should
also consider the possibility that no early settlement will be reached,
and US interests and policies in such a situation. The second paper
should consider alternative views of basic US interests in the area and
should include consideration of the issues listed in the attachment.
The President has directed that the NSC Interdepartmental Group
for the Near East perform this study.
1
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–126, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 2. Secret.
2 The first study required by this NSSM is scheduled for publication in Foreign Re-
lations, 1969–1976, volume XXIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1969–1972.
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–020, NSC Meetings, Briefing by Joint Staff: SOIP, 2/4/69.
Secret. This paper was prepared in response to NSSM 2, Document 1. A January 24 ver-
sion of this paper is in the National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files,
NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–020, NSC Meetings, Middle East, 2/1/69. Saun-
ders’s comments on the paper, sent in a January 23 memorandum to the chairman of the
IG, are ibid., NSC Files, Box 1233, Saunders Files, Basic Policy, Middle East, 1/20/69–
12/31/69.
The first paper should be forwarded to the NSC Review Group by
January 25, 1969. The second paper should be forwarded to the NSC
Review Group by February 24, 1969.
Attachment
1. What is the role of the Middle East today in U.S. global strat-
egy? What are the real U.S. interests there and how important are they?
2. What is the nature of the Soviet threat to the Middle East? How
likely is Soviet dominance or predominance? What forces will tend to
limit Soviet influence?
3. What is the precise nature of the Soviet threat to NATO via the
Middle East?
4. What is the present state of the U.S. position in the Middle East?
Is it eroding drastically? Or is there a level of common interests shared
with some nations in the area which will prevent it from deteriorating
beyond a certain point? Is an early Arab-Israel settlement essential to
preserving the U.S. position?
5. In the light of answers to these questions, what is the most ap-
propriate U.S. posture toward the Middle East? What level and kinds
of involvement are appropriate in view of our interests and U.S. and
Soviet capabilities?
2.
Paper Prepared by the Interdepartmental Group for Near
East and South Asia1
NSCIG/NEA 69–1B (Revised)
Washington, January 30, 1969.
BASIC US INTERESTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST
This paper examines some of the basic interests and assumptions
that underlie US policy formulation in the Middle East. Alternative
2
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
views on the following questions are addressed: (1) How important are
our interests in that area? (2) How grave is the Soviet threat to these
interests? (3) To what extent does the expansion of Soviet influence in
the Middle East threaten NATO? (4) What is the present US position
in the area? (5) How important is an early Arab-Israel settlement to the
preservation of our interests? (6) What posture should the United States
adopt vis-à-vis the conflicting states and groupings of states in the area?
1. What are our interests and how important are they?
In the Northern Tier of the Middle East region, the independence
and integrity of our NATO allies, Greece and Turkey, and perhaps of
Iran are generally recognized as vital US interests.
While there is also general agreement that the area south of the
Northern Tier, comprising the Eastern Arab world and Israel, is im-
portant, the degree of its importance is debatable. At one end of the
spectrum is the view that the area as a whole is vital on the grounds
that it represents, in toto, a conglomerate of Western interests whose
loss would tip the global strategic balance in favor of the Soviets. This
view leans heavily on the importance of Arab oil to the Free World and
the need to prevent its becoming a pawn subject to the whims of
regimes under Soviet influence or control. Supporters of this view ar-
gue that the Arabs control the only geography and resources of vital
importance to us in the area and would have us cast our lot firmly with
the Arabs.
At the other extreme, it is argued that the foregoing view is based
on outmoded strategic concepts (e.g., we no longer rely on forward air
bases) and on an oversimplified picture of the Arab world as a homo-
geneous entity. While not denying the importance of Arab oil to the
Free World, supporters of this position argue that the oil flow will not
be interrupted for political reasons because the Arabs have nowhere to
market their oil except Western Europe. As a corollary, it is also argued
that the US commitment to Israel makes that nation’s security a vital
US interest—an argument frequently bolstered by the contention that
a strong Israel offers the best hope for holding the line against further
Soviet penetration of the Middle East.
Neither of these theses, it seems to us, correctly defines the degree and
ways in which the Arab-Israel area of the Middle East is important to the
United States. It is difficult to prove that this area is vital to our secu-
rity, in the sense that our own survival would be threatened by the ex-
tinction of any state in the area. With the possible exception of Israel,
which is a special case, developments in or affecting a given country
at a given time do not vitally affect the United States. On the other
hand, the collective or substantial loss of the area to the Free World by
incorporation into the Soviet orbit would present a serious long-term
threat to the American position in the world.
Middle East Region
3
Although we have no treaty commitment to the preservation of
Israel’s security, there is a long-standing national consensus that we
have a basic interest in Israel’s survival. That fact, and Arab opposi-
tion to Israel’s existence, complicate the analysis. Leaving aside sub-
sidiary though significant considerations related to investment, trade
and communications, we are perforce deeply involved in the Middle
East for two fundamental purposes: (1) because we wish to assure the
survival of Israel, and (2) because, in terms of our global strategic in-
terests, we do not wish the land mass, population and resources of the
eastern Arab world to fall under Soviet domination. We seek the
achievement of both purposes. But, given the underlying forces of con-
flict in the area, pursuit of either purpose tends to militate against
achievement of the other. While neither purpose is “vital” in the strict
sense that failure to achieve it would require us to go to war to safe-
guard our national security, both are of sufficient importance that we
cannot disengage from the area without sustaining a serious blow to
our Great Power position.
Under any definition of our interests in the Arab-Israel situation,
the avoidance of military confrontation between the Soviets and our-
selves is the Number One priority. Next in order of priority are the pre-
vention of the introduction by a Middle East power of strategic mis-
siles or nuclear weapons into the area, the avoidance of a situation in
which the use of US military forces in the Arab-Israel conflict would
be necessary and the avoidance of another war itself between Israel
and the Arabs. Beyond that, we see a continuing American interest in
Israel’s ability to defend itself against any combination of Arab states
and in Western access to Arab oil as well as to transit and communi-
cations through the area.
2. How grave is the Soviet threat? The Soviet Union continues its ef-
forts to reduce Western, and particularly American, positions and in-
fluence in the Middle East, and to expand its own. It has established
strong—but not “dominant”—positions in the UAR, Syria, and Iraq. It
has replaced the bulk of the military equipment lost in the war by these
states.2 It has increased the number of its military advisors substan-
tially. It has sought to exploit opportunities to expand Soviet influence
in the Yemen and the new state of South Yemen. The Soviets have
bartered military equipment to Iran and have offered military assist-
ance to Jordan and Lebanon. The Soviet Navy has been strengthened
in the Mediterranean, and Soviet ships have made port calls in the In-
dian Ocean–Persian Gulf area. The Soviet Navy has been allowed
greater use of Egyptian ports and repair facilities, and a small number
4
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
2 The June 1967 Arab-Israeli War. See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XIX,
Arab-Israeli Crisis and War, 1967.
of Soviet aircraft (with Egyptian markings) have been conducting re-
connaissance operations over the Sixth Fleet.
However, while the Soviets have undeniably made great gains in
the Middle East in the past dozen years, it can also be said they were
starting from zero and are still a long way from “dominating” the area.
The Northern Tier states (Greece, Turkey, and Iran) are strongly con-
cerned over the expansion of Soviet influence over the Arab states.
Among the Arabs themselves, indigenous forces of nationalism, xeno-
phobia and desire for full independence are major obstacles to the
achievement of Soviet aims. Regional and bilateral rivalries among the
Arabs militate against Soviet dominance. Language, religion, and other
cultural factors also play their part.
Therefore, powerful indigenous and limiting forces make it un-
likely the USSR can ever “dominate” the area, but the high-water mark
of Soviet potential influence has not been reached.
3. Is NATO threatened? There are those that see Soviet successes in
gaining access for their military forces in Arab states as the beginning
of an outflanking of NATO and the Northern Tier, which could become
critical if the Soviets are given full-fledged use of Arab territory for mil-
itary purposes, including possibly emplacement of strategic missiles.
It is our judgment, however, that the threat to NATO is manageable
and likely to remain so in the foreseeable future. The Arabs are un-
likely to grant the USSR full-fledged military bases on their territory.
Even if they did, it would not basically affect the policies of Greece and
Turkey, which would continue to play their roles within NATO. The
expansion of Soviet naval activity in the Mediterranean has mainly po-
litical rather than military significance.
4. What is the current US position in the Middle East? There are those
who see the June 1967 war and its aftermath as having dangerously
accelerated the erosion of US influence in the Middle East. The trend
toward polarization has intensified, driving the radical Arab states fur-
ther into the Soviet orbit and making it increasingly difficult for the
Arab moderates to maintain ties with the United States. On the other
hand, some see our position as difficult but not by any means unten-
able over the longer run. In this view, the Arabs and Soviets recognize
and respect the great power they know we can bring to bear in sup-
port of our interests in the Middle East. The Arab moderates will main-
tain their ties with us because it is in their interest to do so. Our basic
position has not really been hurt by the loss of influence in radical Arab
states.
To place the foregoing conflicting views in perspective, it is nec-
essary to understand the fundamentals on which the US position in
the Middle East is based. Unlike some other areas where the US posi-
tion is anchored in alliance systems sometimes coupled with a military
Middle East Region
5
presence, in the Arab-Israel area the US position rests largely on how
other states, both within and outside the area, assess our capacity and
intentions vis-à-vis their own objectives. Viewed in this sense, the prin-
cipal positive elements of the US position in the Arab-Israel area can
be summarized as follows:
(a) Recognition by the countries of the Middle East that the United
States is a major global power with the capability, if it chooses to use
it, to bring its power to bear in the area.
(b) Desire on the part of the countries of the Middle East for the
United States to provide a counterweight against Soviet domination.
This consideration weighs more heavily in the Northern Tier and the
moderate Arab states than among the radical Arabs but is a factor with
the latter as well.
(c) Recognition on the part of the Arabs and the USSR that only
the United States has the potential to influence and restrain Israel,
which is today the strongest military power in the Arab-Israel complex
and which the Arabs see as a threat to themselves.
(d) Recognition by Israel that US support is fundamental to its na-
tional existence over the long run.
(e) Arab recognition that the US presence—financial, managerial,
and technical—in Arab oil development, production, and marketing,
while important to the United States, is also important to the Arabs at
the present juncture.
(f) The pro-United States orientation of many members of the 
Arab elite based on deep-rooted historical, religious, and educational
associations.
Viewed in light of these factors, the US position is neither as bad
as the Cassandras claim nor as unshakeable as their detractors insist.
Our position is still significant, but it is probably vulnerable to the ero-
sion of time. At the present juncture, the key elements of strength in
our position are (a) the Arab and Soviet recognition that we alone could
exercise some effective influence over Israel, and (b) the Israeli aware-
ness of how important our support is for Israel’s survival. However, if
the Arabs lose hope that we will use our influence, or if the Israelis con-
clude that we will not use it no matter what they do, these elements
of strength will become rapidly wasting assets and our potential for
playing a decisive role in the area will be seriously diminished.
Furthermore, despite the various positive elements in our position
as sketched out above, it is only too clear that there are limits on how
far we can influence any state in the area on any given issue. For ex-
ample, the Israelis evince a fierce independence of any outside influ-
ence on issues which they consider basic to their survival as a state.
And it is still most uncertain whether we (or the USSR) can bring suf-
ficient influence on the Arabs, and particularly the radical Arabs, to ac-
cept what we would consider as a reasonable settlement.
5. How important is an early Arab-Israel settlement to our position in
the Middle East? Israel wants “true peace,” but the Arabs are not ready
6
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
for it. The relevant question is whether any Arab state or Israel is pre-
pared in the near future to make the compromises and concessions nec-
essary to the conclusion of a political settlement that would at least de-
fuse the situation and offer a reasonable basis for stability.
The Government of Israel is the leading advocate of the view that
the Arabs are not ready to move for a true peace. The Israelis contend,
furthermore, that neither Israel nor the United States need be in a rush
to settle for something less that would not remove the roots of Arab
hostility. The problem with the latter view, in our judgment, is that it
ignores certain dynamics in the Middle East that contain risks for the
United States if a settlement is not soon achieved. These include the
possibility of a collapse of the regime in Jordan if it cannot recover the
West Bank, with potentially dangerous repercussions elsewhere in the
area; the growing strength of the fedayeen which could limit the free-
dom of action of the UAR and Jordan to move toward a settlement;
and the opportunity for the USSR to expand its influence with the Arabs
under conditions of continuing Arab-Israel hostility.
6. What posture should the United States adopt in the Middle East? It
is generally agreed that the US position in the Middle East (and par-
ticularly in the Arab world) has deteriorated and is in some jeopardy;
also, that the best chance of improving our position would lie in an
early Arab-Israeli settlement. It is also agreed that we should continue
our close alignment with Greece, Turkey, and Iran.
The basic alternative answers to the question of what posture we
should adopt, then, hinge on differing assumptions concerning certain
key issues involving the Arab states and Israel: the possibility of achiev-
ing a reasonably general settlement in the near future; and the impor-
tance of US relations with the Arab states broadly, and particularly with
the radical Arab states.
All are agreed that it will be very difficult, and perhaps not pos-
sible, to achieve a reasonable general peace settlement between the Arabs
and Israel in the near future. Argument centers on whether there is
enough hope to make it worthwhile to pursue the effort, or whether
we should conclude that a general settlement is not now in the cards
and concentrate instead on a settlement between Israel and Jordan.
(a) One view is that there continues to be some reasonable hope
for a settlement that would encompass both the UAR and Jordan and
thus resolve major elements of the Arab-Israel problem. Given the im-
portance of such a settlement, we should emphatically not give up on
the effort at this time. This view also holds that a narrower settlement
between Israel and Jordan is not feasible because Jordan does not have
the strength to break with its radical Arab neighbors on this issue, and
that an effort by Hussein to reach a bilateral agreement with Israel
would mean the end of his regime.
Middle East Region
7
(b) A second view is that the UAR and Israel will not be able to
come to a political settlement, and that our efforts should now be di-
rected toward achieving a separate Israel-Jordan settlement. This view
holds that an Israel-Jordan settlement could be the first step to a broader
agreement. It also contends that we can be more influential with Israel
if we confine our efforts in this regard to the more limited bilateral set-
tlement. The risks to Hussein are recognized, but the gamble is advo-
cated because the present trends, if continued, probably mean he will
be eliminated in any case, and also because our arming of both Israel
and Jordan becomes harder to explain and defend.
As for relations with the Arabs, there is considerable sentiment that we
cannot protect and promote our enduring interests unless we base our-
selves broadly in the area. This view accepts the particular importance of
keeping good ties with the moderate Arab regimes (such as Jordan) but
holds that we cannot count on the survival of those regimes under con-
ditions of acute tension between the Arabs and Israel; these conditions
impel the moderate states (including those in North Africa) to become
increasingly radical and increase the opportunities for the expansion of
Soviet influence. It is therefore essential, in this view, to benefit from op-
portunities to improve our relations with the radical Arab states.
A second view notes that the potential growth of Soviet influence
in the Arab world is limited primarily by the internal forces in the Arab
states, and holds furthermore that unless we are willing to compete at
high cost with the USSR in the radical states, our influence in these
states can only be marginal under presently foreseeable circumstances.
It holds that to maintain broad ties with the radical Arab states would
adversely affect our relations with other states, especially the moder-
ate Arab states and Iran; that especially in the absence of a settlement,
such broad ties would not mitigate the adverse effects on moderate
regimes of fedayeen activities; that it is in the Northern Tier, Israel, and
the moderate Arabs that our primary interests lie; and therefore we
should remain aloof from greater involvement with the radical Arabs.
In summary, the issues faced by the United States are highlighted
by two differing viewpoints:
(1) A broad Arab-Israeli settlement is very important and there is
enough possibility of achieving it to make its continued pursuit worth-
while. It is important that we seek to establish a broader base for our
relations and possible influence with the Arabs, but not at Israel’s 
expense. We should continue to press Israel to agree to withdrawal
from major territories it occupied in June 1967, in return for a peace
settlement. We must simultaneously exert all the influence we have to
prevent Israel from going the route of nuclear weapons and strategic
missiles.
(2) A broad settlement, although desirable, is not possible in the
near future; without writing off publicly or completely our hope for a
more general settlement, we should concentrate on bringing about a
8
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
bilateral settlement between Israel and Jordan; we have little to gain in
expanding our relationship with the radical Arabs, and should not com-
pete with the Soviets; it would be improper and perhaps impossible to
force Israel to give up the militarily important Sinai to a hostile Egypt;
our highest and most immediate priority with Israel is to prevent the
introduction of strategic missiles and nuclear weapons.
The posture summarized in the first viewpoint is considered
preferable by the Interdepartmental Group with the exception of the
Defense (ISA) representative. The Defense (ISA) preference is repre-
sented by the second viewpoint above.
Both courses would call for a greater involvement by the United
States than at present in the affairs of the area. Both assume that the United
States retains elements of strength in the Middle East; we need not be
panicked into precipitate actions or abandonment of sound positions out
of fear that the Soviets are about to take over. On the other hand, there
are no grounds for complacency. Our approach should be one of delib-
erate speed, to take advantage of opportunities attendant on the advent
of a new US Administration. Under either viewpoint, it is only realistic
to recognize that the realities of the situation in the area and of the lim-
its on external influence are such that the odds for any political settle-
ment between the Arabs and Israel cannot be rated high. As we seek
progress along this line, we should also be examining how we can best
protect our position in the area in the continued absence of a settlement.
3.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
Washington, February 1, 1969.
NSC MEETING ON MIDDLE EAST
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Vice President
The Secretary of State, William P. Rogers
The Secretary of Defense, Melvin R. Laird
The Secretary of the Treasury, David M. Kennedy
Middle East Region
9
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–109, NSC Meeting Minutes, NSC Minutes Originals 1969.
Top Secret. Drafted by Saunders on May 1. According to an undated draft of the min-
utes, the meeting was held from 9:35 to 11:55 a.m. (Ibid., Box H–120, NSC Draft Min-
utes, NSC Meeting—February 1, 1969) All brackets are in the original.
The Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Earle G. Wheeler
The Director of Central Intelligence, Richard M. Helms
Under Secretary of State, Eliot L. Richardson
State Department Counselor, Richard F. Pederson
US Ambassador to the UN, Charles Yost
Assistant Secretary of State, Joseph J. Sisco
Former Assistant Secretary of State, Parker T. Hart
Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, Rodger P. Davies
Director, Office of Emergency Preparedness, General George A. Lincoln
Colonel Alexander Haig
Harold H. Saunders
Dr. Henry A. Kissinger
Briefings
Helms: History of Arab-Jewish relations and the course of Arab na-
tionalism (disunity).
Fedayeen movement (Fatah, PLO, PFLP): adamantly opposed to any
solution other than the destruction of Israel. Their influence makes it
questionable whether any Arab government could reach settlement
with Israel. Current significance is that terrorism brings on Israeli
reprisals, which raise likelihood of broader conflict.
Military balance: Israelis will almost certainly retain military su-
periority for next year or so. Superiority qualitative—depends partly
on pre-emptive strategy. Jericho missiles—10 or so could be deployed
1970–1. Arabs’ 1967 losses just about made up—assume USSR believes
equipment sent is about all Arabs can now absorb.
Soviet interests: USSR has leapfrogged Northern Tier. Soviet naval
expansion—steadier, more effective than Khrushchev’s2 rather oppor-
tunistic move to put missiles in Cuba.
Question:
President: You talk about USSR’s “measured, effective plan.” Does
this emanate from military strategy or something that just happens?
Do they have a meeting like ours here today, decide on policy and then
execute it? Or do they just muddle along.
Policy result of high-level decision—considered policy—or just
happen?
Helms: Highest level decision. Considered policy.
Briefing (continued)
Helms: Soviet peace plan. Acknowledge that peace is a package plan.
Arabs want imposed peace. These Arab objections main reason for Is-
raeli rejection of plan.
10
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
2 Nikita Sergeyevich Khrushchev, Chairman of the Communist Party, 1953–1964,
and Premier of the Soviet Union, 1958–1964.
Arab attitudes toward U.S.: Growing hostility—see us as backing 
Israel—Arab “gift for twisted analysis”—Arabs see even those things
we do for them as somehow directed against them.
US image good in Israel. But Israel has its own brand of reserva-
tion about our inability to see the Arabs through Israeli eyes, tendency
to rely only on themselves.
JCS briefing:
1. Significance of Soviet fleet.
—Sharp increase in 1967 and 1968 [President assured himself that
trend was always low before 1963 and that present trend is new.]
—Primary concern: missile and torpedo threat.
—60 technicians at Mers-el-Kebir in Algeria.
—A “challenge” to US operations. Could affect future US decisions
to commit forces in the area.
2. Strategic implications for US of renewed conflict.
—Arab-Israeli balance.
[President: Looking at chart showing 2 bombers in Israeli air force
asked how Israel was able to take out Arab airfields with just 2 bombers.
General Wheeler answered: “fighter-bombers.” President nodded
quickly.]
Vice President: How do present air inventories compare with those
of June, 1967.
Wheeler: Qualitative differences here and there but generally 
comparable.
Lincoln: How do Soviet advisors operate in Units.
Wheeler: Strictly advisory. Arabs xenophobic and not likely to sub-
mit to Soviet command.
Briefing (continued)
JCS: Imbalance in supersonic aircraft could be dangerous to Israel
by June 1969
Strategic implications
—US intervention capability. US contingency plan designed to
drive a wedge between opposing forces.
Questions
President: I understand your contingency plan is based on intelli-
gence estimate that local conflict main possibility.
I agree that US–USSR conflict remote, but what if one of Arab coun-
tries where Soviet fleet present is attacked?
Wheeler: Contingency plan if US–USSR
President: What if a more limited Soviet involvement?
Middle East Region
11
Kissinger: What if Israeli raid on Aswan dam or Israeli city shelled
by Soviet fleet?
President: Could you give some thought to that?
Wheeler: Possibilities we are examining:
—US attack on Soviet bases in Siberia.
—Sink one Soviet ship in Mediterranean.
—Seize Soviet intelligence trawler.
President: Could you consider what we could do indirectly
through the Israelis.
Seems to me Soviet naval presence is primarily political. There-
fore, we must be prepared for a less-than-military contingency.
Wheeler: Primarily political. But Soviet presence in ports puts a
Soviet umbrella over those ports. In a tenuous sense, fleet therefore
does have military use.
Briefing continued
Described plan for introduction of US ground forces—initial force,
follow-on and on-call forces. Plan could be fulfilled but would degrade
strategic reserve.
Final arrival of on-call forces 39 days; 18 days for follow-on; 2–17
days initial. Airlift.
Questions
President: Are we capable of repeating Lebanon-type operation?
Wheeler: I believe so. Would modify this plan.
President: Any military exercises politically useful?
Wheeler: Continuous US bilateral and NATO exercise. NATO has
just put together surveillance unit to keep track of subs.
President: Are Sovs, Israelis, Arabs aware of these things?
Wheeler: Yes. This is one purpose of exercises.
Laird: Sixth Fleet not as “ready” as it should be in manning lev-
els. Have to look at this as situation heats up.
President: How is Malta being used?
Wheeler: NATO has returned small air surveillance unit to Malta.
Tenuous relationship of Malta to NATO via Secretary General, mainly
to keep Soviets out.
President: Is Sixth Fleet NATO-related?
Wheeler: US controlled in peace; in war under NATO.
President: In a Lebanon-type situation, who controls Sixth Fleet?
Wheeler: “You do sir.”
President: Isn’t there significant British and French presence?
12
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
Wheeler: Significant French and Italian presence. French navy in
Mediterranean. Navy most cooperative since French withdrawal till de
Gaulle3 blew whistle.
President: Could Italians and French block or compete with Soviet
past presence?
Wheeler: Mers-el-Kebir main instance. Little opportunity for us to
exercise influence.
French still have residual influence which, depending on de
Gaulle, could be helpful. But unlikely France could swing Algerians
away from Soviet backing.
President: What has happened to French political influence?
Lincoln: What if USSR says its fleet will screen UAR coast?
Wheeler: Have to go ashore in Israel.
President: Could we phase deployment?
Wheeler: Yes—move into Europe, for instance.
Vice President: Could we involve NATO instead of us?
Wheeler: We couldn’t involve NATO. Only last few months that
NATO concerned about Soviet presence.
President: NATO pathological on point of involvement. For instance,
may even be problem if Berlin, one of their own cities, threatened.
Vice President: Is that true about political moves?
Wheeler: Not as true.
Kissinger: To what extent could Soviet fleet be used as a hostage
in Berlin crisis.
Wheeler: Yes.
President: I’m just thinking about symbolic acts.
Lincoln: If Israeli port attacked, might be unclear who did it.
Wheeler: We have pretty fair surveillance activity. We could 
identify—though not necessarily prove. This political problem.
Briefing continued
JCS: Main military problem (Soviets would have same problems):
1. —Deployment routes and staging areas. Need Azores or 
equivalent.
—Transportation resources: would require “major revision of our
worldwide program.”
2. Would USSR intervene? Paratroops. Two routes—Western over
Yugoslavia.
Middle East Region
13
3 General Charles de Gaulle, President of France, 1958–1969.
Questions
President: If Sovs flew troops into Cairo or Damascus, what could
we do?
Wheeler: Fly into Crete, Italy, Athens. Turkey not possible. Incir-
lik not usable in 1967. Malta airfield not good enough. Greeks cooper-
ative in 1967.
Briefing continued
JCS: Syria offers best landing place—eastern overflight route over
Iran.
41,000 troops into Damascus in 2 days, without supporting 
equipment.
By sealift using maritime fleet, could move 6–10 divisions from
Baltic (transit 13 days), 3–10 divisions from northern division (15 days),
Black Sea 6–10 divisions (3 days). They have exercised in small way in
Black Sea.
Impact of local conflict on US commitments. Cause problems in
NATO somewhat like Czechoslovakia.
Question
Lincoln: Are Soviets stockpiling?
Wheeler: Not in UAR but in Algeria there is equipment the Alge-
rians can’t possibly use.
President: In State briefing, could you include country-by-country
relations with us.
Briefing continued
Hart: In Turkey, attitude not pro-Arab but rather pro-Israeli but
Turkey focuses on Cyprus and that requires Arab votes. Tend favor
moderate Arab states. Want good relationship with Iraq, because of
Kurds. Trying to bind Iraq quietly to Turkey (gas line). Relations with
US basically good, though strains.
President: Is this one area for patting on back—a little preventive
medicine? In terms of planning of visits, Turks and others, let’s have
meeting soon.
Hart: Yes, sir. We have strategic and intelligence installation. Con-
ditions of use—Turkish permission.
Morocco—Algerian tension. Never broke with us, generally
friendly relations. Get as much as it can from us. Some influence on
other Arab states.
Libya—Considerable US influence. Fears Nasser. US–UK bulwark
against radicals.
President: Get in best team we can in terms of ambassadorial ap-
pointments. “Get heavy weights in there.”
14
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
Algeria—If we renewed relations with.
President: What influence does Tito have?4 Could he be helpful?
Hart: Mainly in UAR.
Sisco: Shift in his view since Czechoslovakia.
President: I would be open to meeting with Tito if you recommend
it.
Briefing continued
Hart: In principle, it would help with radical states—even Iraq—
marginally.
Sudan—broke relations but represented there. Would be one of first
to resume.
Lebanon—delicate democracy. Genesis based on fear of Muslim ma-
jority around it.
Syria—unstable. Will be last to resume relations with us.
Iraq—basic instability. Will not be quick to resume relations unless
regime changes.
Arab-Israeli—The main interests involved—Arab fear of Israeli 
expansion and Israel wants formalized peace. Johnston and Johnson
missions.5
In 1948, no Arab state lost any territory; it was Palestinians who
lost their homes.
Fedayeen riding ground swell of popularity.
In a way, Jordan and UAR have—by accepting UN resolution6—
accepted existence of Israel.
Jordan most committed to peace settlement but Hussein caught
between radicals and need to get land back.
If we resume relations with Arabs, that will strengthen moderates.
Middle East Region
15
4 Josef Broz Tito, President of Yugoslavia, 1953–1980.
5 The Johnston Mission, led by President Eisenhower’s Special Representative Eric
Johnston, was organized in October 1953 to secure an agreement among Lebanon, Syria,
Jordan, and Israel to develop the Jordan River basin. By 1955, the mission had ended.
The Johnson Mission, led by Joseph Johnson, President Kennedy’s Special Representa-
tive to the Palestine Conciliation Commission, was established in 1962 to help resolve
the Palestinian refugee problem. Johnson resigned January 31, 1963.
6 A reference to UN Security Council Resolution 242. Following the Arab-Israeli
War in June 1967, this resolution was passed on November 22, calling for the “with-
drawal of Israeli armed forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict” and for
the “termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and acknowl-
edgement of the sovereignty, territorial integrity, and political independence of every
state in the area and their right to live in peace within secure and recognized bound-
aries free from threats or acts of force.” (Yearbook of the United Nations, 1967, pp. 257–258)
Questions
President: If we have a Lebanon-type situation in Jordan, what ca-
pability would we have—if, for instance, we faced a fedayeen takeover
in Jordan?
Wheeler: “Could probably—of course would have problems.”
Problem: Israelis not basically interested in survival of Hussein.
Hart: “I’m not sure they’ve made up their minds finally on this.”
If Jordan became a radical state, easier for Israel to move.
President: “That kind of thinking is a death wish. They must not
be given any encouragement.”
The political problem in the US—“we just can’t tote that.” Ex-
tremely difficult for us to move in to save Israel.
Laird: What’s the possibility of Israel-Jordan settlement?
Hart: Hard without UAR. Have to be simultaneous movement.
Rogers: We don’t think Hussein could survive separate settlement.
Laird: Hope Israel doesn’t misinterpret mood in US.
Rogers: On basis my talk with Rabin, “I don’t think they 
misinterpret.”
President: Dayan7 says we should have good relations with Arabs.
Lincoln: We should make clear to Israel and its friends importance
of Hussein.
President: Harder to explain to Israel’s friends in US.
Rabin–Dayan have fatalistic attitude—it will blow and they’ll take
care of it.
Wheeler: Rabin explained deep Israeli feelings against Hussein—
in 6-day war Jordanians inflicted much heavier casualties.
Briefing continued
Hart: Israel suspicious of UAR intentions.
Politics in Israel will reduce Israeli flexibility between now and
November.
Siege atmosphere in Israel. Don’t trade territory for political 
agreements.
Status quo of today works against peace and even Israel’s long-
term security.
Settlement will require pressure on Israel—for arrangements that
will include well-policed demilitarization.
President: Guaranteed by whom?
16
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
7 Moshe Dayan, Israeli Minister of Defense, 1967–1974.
Hart: UN sanctified.
Lincoln: Who pays for UN forces?
Hart: Senator Javits8 interest in refugee settlement.
Briefing continued
Hart: Have to be clear where Israel and US coincide: We don’t want
Israel destroyed but don’t have stake in boundaries. Want lasting set-
tlement. Above all, want to avoid war with USSR.
In deciding how much pressure we apply on Israel, have to de-
cide how UAR can be brought along.
Important to develop maximum public understanding in US.
Sisco: Elements in our policy as it evolved after June War:
—Commitment to territorial integrity.
—Nasser’s May 1967 blockade, he was overturning post-Suez US
arrangements.
—We wanted to try this time to achieve lasting peace.
—These combined in 5 principles of June 19, 1967. “Parties to con-
flict, parties to peace.” These incorporated in November 22 resolutions.
The equation: withdrawal in return for end of belligerency.
While resolution adopted unanimously, there were not unanimous
interpretations. We really passed these differences on to Jarring.9 Reflected
in semantic argument “accepting and implementing” the resolution.
Rogers: Rabin says Arabs are trying to “force us into settlement
short of peace.”
Sisco: July 1968, we got Israel to soften stand on (1) direct negoti-
ations as a precondition to exchanging substance, (2) peace treaty. Par-
ties have been exchanging views through Jarring. But Israel wants bind-
ing commitment on peace.
President: Israel insists on bilateral agreements. What is Israeli
view toward outside participation?
Sisco: Israel wants to be left alone to deal with Hussein—and the
UAR.
Israel-Jordan exchanges. Allow plan as non-starter with Hussein.
Israel nervous about big-power intervention. Last Soviet note—“a
five-legged horse that could move in any direction.”
We don’t honestly know what USSR intends.
Middle East Region
17
8 Senator Jacob Javits (R–NY).
9 See Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1969–1972,
for documentation on U.S.-Soviet negotiations and the efforts of Gunnar Jarring, a
Swedish diplomat, who served as the UN representative in the Middle East appointed
to negotiate the details necessary for the implementation of UN Resolution 242.
Shall we await Soviet reply or develop a plan of our own to 
discuss.
Whatever we put in, we have to be sure we can produce Israel.
Israel’s Cabinet divided—explains inability to decide on territorial
objectives. Arabs made it easy for Israelis to avoid decision. Election
will make flexibility difficult.
President: Javits or somebody mentioned USSR made propaganda
hay. What’s the answer?
Sisco: Soviets have had a propaganda ride. We didn’t refute pub-
licly because we wanted to work out our response without appearing
to throw cold water.
Lincoln: Could Israel and Jordan consider Allon Plan10 with UN
force?
Sisco: May be feasible.
President: Israel says it wants peace via bilateral agreements. Yet in
intelligence we hear extremists so strong that Arab governments can’t
control them. Do sophisticated Israelis discount outside guarantees?
Rogers: Fedayeen raids not significant now. Could be handled if
contractual peace.
Israelis afraid we’ll be stampeded by tension. Say Russians are
heating up atmosphere to panic us. Russians won’t use nuclear
weapons. Arabs won’t start war. Sovs won’t intervene; they don’t have
air cover over this fleet. Rabin says: “Don’t make decisions because
you think you’re on the brink of war. We’re not going to take more ter-
ritory. Permanent peace will be anti-Soviet.”
President: When you come down to it, a peace that he (Rabin) ne-
gotiates with any of these wobbly governments, isn’t a peace either
with revolutionary movements there.
“I can see the symbolism there; they want recognition.” But un-
less they have some outside recognition.
Rogers: Israelis know they need guarantees.
Sisco: Four-power proposal has to be handled delicately. As pro-
posed, it gives preference to Soviet plan and downplays Jarring. We
see Jarring and UN as central. Sovs and French disagree. UK wavers
but waiting to see what we’ll do.
Response will be one of your Administration’s first moves. Jarring
wants step by parties or anything four powers can. We’re boxed in.
18
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
10 Following the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, Allon proposed that Israel relinquish po-
litical control of the West Bank to Jordan in exchange for military control of a strip of
land along the eastern side of the Jordan River as a means of securing the border be-
tween them.
Propose: informal, individual consultations but they will quickly be-
come more formal. Might nudge Israelis, who are thinking of putting
forward ideas through secret channel toward Jordan.
President: What’s timing?
Rogers: I have a draft reply for you to consider quickly.
Kissinger: Review Group has not seen proposal. Maybe 2-power
approach better. This just one sub-choice in one of three options.
President: I want to tie this into announcement of NPT. Get points
with de Gaulle.
UN thinks this a good move?
Yost: Yes, Arabs prefer.
Rogers: Pressure on both sides.
President: Could Jarring make a significant contribution?
Yost: Not going get to first base by himself.
Yost: Hard keep Jarring and four-powers going same time—but
possible.
President: Four-powers with Jarring?
Yost: Jarring wants to stay independent.
President: Don’t like idea of saying “me too.” Propose variant
method of implementation.
Kissinger: Choice may be between 2-power and 4-power not 4-
power and nothing. May be Soviet talks be more fruitful.
President: Does 4-power rule out 2-power?
Rogers: No. Make it clear 4-power in framework of Jarring.
Yost: Maintain two-power element in four-power.
President: The real powers are the US and USSR.
Rogers: How do we say that.
President: Different—what we say and what we do.
Sisco: USSR has made clear US–USSR dialogue the prime one de-
spite its acceptance of French proposal. Could have four sets of talks
going on at same time. Four-powers could do some marginal work.
President: “Trying to be devil’s advocate,” another element that
appeals: reassure our NATO allies. You feel we should go on all four
lines?
Sisco: Yes.
Laird: Must move soon. High expectancy of a US move because
press aware that NSC discussing the issue.
President: We’ll make a move.
Lincoln: What about Israelis?
President: Leave that to Secretary of State! (Laughter)
Middle East Region
19
Yost: Israelis underestimate Fedayeen movement.
Kissinger: Have to distinguish between Israeli statements and
what their situation is.
Israelis say they won’t settle for less than a real peace, but they
must know that isn’t possible. They must really be saying that they
find it hard to see how legal arrangement could increase their security.
They must know that most wars start between countries who recog-
nize each other and are at peace. The only peace arrangements that
work are settlements that (1) increase will of the parties to peace, or 
(2) decrease ability to make war.
We haven’t systematically discussed options. Must know what we
want if we’re going to try to get.
President: Our ability to deliver Israelis gets down to what we
will do.
Richardson: Not only what we’ll do but what we can do in de-
escalating.
President: What will we do vis-à-vis the Russians? That’s the heart.
Yost: Italians go along with Four-Power if in UN framework.
Lincoln: Have we gone into guarantees?
Rogers: That’s down the road.
President: Have to get to that.
Kissinger: Why can’t we go till Wednesday to review systematically?
President: Move Council up to Tuesday at 10:00 A.M.11
What we have in mind:
—Respond affirmatively.
Kissinger: Distribute draft reply to French note before Tuesday and
meeting.12
20
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
11 February 4.
12 Telegram 19022 to Amman, February 6, is scheduled for publication in Foreign
Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1969–1972.
4.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1
Washington, February 10, 1969.
SUBJECT
Long-range Programs for Mid-East Water Development
Knowing your interest in weaving water development into our
Mid-East strategy, I suggest that we schedule an NSC paper to help
you come to grips with this complex issue.
I do not wish to bother you with the intricacies of this subject now,
but you should know of work in progress along two tracks:
1. Large-scale desalting. In response to the Senate’s December 1967
passage of the “Baker Resolution” supporting the Eisenhower–
Strauss plan, the Johnson Administration ordered the Oak Ridge 
National Laboratory to study the applicability of large-scale desalting
to the Middle East. The Eisenhower–Strauss plan grew out of an 
earlier Oak Ridge study describing how large desalting-agricultural-
industrial complexes might work in theory.2 Oak Ridge was then 
asked how that theoretical model might actually work in the Middle
East and what costs might be. That study should be done later this
year. Technicians have visited the area (including the UAR) to gather
data.
2. Israeli desalter. President Johnson early in January sent legisla-
tion to Congress proposing authorization of US participation up to $40
million in the construction of a middle-sized development desalter 
in Israel. This was the result of four years of joint US-Israeli study.
George Woods personally framed the final proposal, and Prime 
Middle East Region
21
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–141, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 30. Secret;
Exdis. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
2 The Baker Resolution (S Res 155), introduced by Senator Howard H. Baker, Jr.
(R–TN) and sponsored by 52 Senators, passed unanimously in December 1967. It called
upon the President to pursue the “prompt design, construction and operation of nuclear
desalting plants” to provide fresh water for Arab and Israeli territories. (Congressional
Quarterly Almanac, vol. XXIII, 1967, p. 962) Former President Eisenhower and former
Atomic Energy Commission Chairman Lewis Strauss proposed in 1967 that an interna-
tional corporation be established to construct three nuclear-fueled desalting plants in the
Middle East. They would be operated by the AEC and would provide ample water sup-
plies for the arid regions through international cooperation, thus easing political ten-
sions. (Ibid.) The Senate Foreign Relations Committee held hearings October 19–20, 1967,
which resulted in Senate Resolution 155. Documentation on the Johnson administration’s
policies on Water for Peace is printed in Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XXXIV, En-
ergy Diplomacy and Global Issues, Documents 130–174.
Minister Eshkol said it was acceptable to Israel.3 We can probably 
delay active consideration of this legislation for a couple of months
until you have a chance to review the whole water picture and relate
it to your political strategy.
It is only fair to state that these are both controversial issues. On
the technological-economic side, the state of the desalting art is still in
the research and development stage and is yet short of being a strictly
commercial proposition. Experts are divided on the best use of our
money at this stage, since it is possible to argue that more water per
dollar can be bought today by other methods. On the political side,
some experts feel that water development could provide a political ve-
hicle for bringing Arabs and Israelis together while others are highly
skeptical that it could by itself ever overcome intense Arab-Israeli hos-
tility, though they acknowledge that it might help reinforce political
arrangements once made. But these are the issues we would try to clar-
ify for you.
I would, of course, work hand-in-hand with Lee DuBridge on this.
He is aware of this memo.
Recommendation: That we issue the attached NSSM to start a sys-
tematic review of this whole issue.4
22
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
3 In a January 17, 1969, letter to Eshkol, President Johnson stated that, as one of his
last official acts, he had recommended to Congress a maximum of $40 million for U.S.
participation in the construction of a desalting plant in Israel that would produce 40 mil-
lion gallons of desalted water per day. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials,
NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–141, National Security Study Mem-
oranda, NSSM 30) Eshkol replied that same day that this decision, along with that of
sending Phantoms to Israel, was crucial for the prevention of war and the advancement
of Israel’s economic progress. (Ibid.)
4 Draft attached; the signed NSSM is printed as Document 5.
5.
National Security Study Memorandum 301
Washington, March 19, 1969.
TO
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of the Interior
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
SUBJECT
Water Development and Middle East Policy
The President has requested a paper covering the economic and
technological aspects of the following:
—the pros and cons in current thinking about the applicability of
large-scale desalting in the Middle East;
—the pros and cons of proceeding with a 40-million-gallon-per-
day desalting plant in Israel;
—the alternative approaches to water development in the Middle
East.
This paper should identify ways in which the U.S. private sector
is involved in programs now dealing with these matters.
In addition to the above report on the economic and technologi-
cal aspects, a paper should present alternative strategies for relating
the technological track to our political strategy in the area.
The President has directed that the study be prepared by the NSC
Interdepartmental Group for Near East and that the Secretary of the
Interior, the Secretary of Agriculture, the Chairman of the Atomic En-
ergy Commission and the Administrator of AID each designate a rep-
resentative to sit on the Group for this purpose.
These papers should be forwarded to the NSC Review Group by
May 23.
Henry A. Kissinger
Middle East Region
23
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–141, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 30. Secret;
Exdis. Copies were sent to Mayo and DuBridge.
6.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, March 27, 1969.
PARTICIPANTS
Iran:
General Bahram Ariana, Chief of the 
Supreme Commanders Staff, 
Imperial Iranian Armed Forces
Colonel Vali Allah Dana, Military, 
Naval and Air Attaché
Turkey:
General Cemal Tural, Chief of the
Turkish General Staff
UK:
Marshal of the Royal Air Force
Sir Charles Elworthy, Chief of 
the Defense Staff
Air Marshal Sir Frederick Rosier, 
Permanent Military Deputy 
to CENTO
Pakistan:
Lieutenant General Akhtar Hussain 
Malik, Permanent Military 
Deputy to CENTO
The President greeted the group in the Cabinet Room where the
Generals were lined up by the French doors in order of rank. After be-
ing introduced by General Wheeler and shaking hands with each one,
the President invited the group into the Oval Office where he said it
would be less formal. The group ranged itself on the sofas and chairs
around the burning fire with the President sitting at one end of the sofa
by the fireplace.
24
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1234,
Saunders Files, CENTO 1/20/69–12/31/69. Confidential. Drafted by Saunders on April
11. According to the President’s Daily Diary, the meeting lasted from 10:51 to 11:15 a.m.
(Ibid., White House Central Files) On March 17, Kissinger had recommended to Nixon
that he meet with CENTO officials because “Our real policy toward CENTO is to keep
it going until these countries are ready for something to replace it. The patterns of co-
operation built up within CENTO have blossomed modestly into broader relationships
in the field of communication, politics and investigation of complementary economic
projects. Everyone knows CENTO itself is not a vital organization, but everyone also rec-
ognizes that Pakistan, Iran, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, the Persian Gulf sheikhdoms, Jordan
and even Israel clandestinely are groping for some new relationship in the region which
would be meaningful for them in the face of British withdrawal from the Persian Gulf,
increased Soviet activity and radicalization of some Arab governments.” (Ibid., Box 212,
Agency Files, CENTO)
US:
General Theodore J. Conway, 
Commander-in-Chief, U.S. 
Strike Command, U.S. 
Representative
General Earle G. Wheeler, Chairman, 
Joint Chiefs of Staff
Henry A. Kissinger, Special Assistant 
to the President for National 
Security Affairs
Harold H. Saunders, Senior Staff 
Member, National Security 
Council
USPMD:
Lieutenant General Stanley J. Donovan,
Permanent Military Deputy to
CENTO
After a brief session for the photographers, the President opened
the conversation by saying that the international situation had changed
a great deal since CENTO was formed, but that “the threat was still
there.” He noted that in the year since the formation of CENTO we
have become much more conscious of the relationship between eco-
nomic progress and security. He felt that the military had played an
important role in this progress by maintaining a framework of stabil-
ity within which it could take place.
The President conceded that each nation had its political difficul-
ties from time to time, including our own. He specifically expressed
his concern over the political trouble in Pakistan and pointed out that
President Ayub Khan and his military colleagues had played an im-
portant role there in bringing stability to Pakistan in the past.
General Wheeler and the other Generals agreed on the importance
of this military role. The President returned to his thoughts of the So-
viet threat. He noted that the atmosphere within all of the alliances had
changed in recent years—even in NATO. However, he had been im-
pressed during his recent tour of NATO capitals2 of the need for a
strong alliance, not only for military purposes, but also so that the mem-
bers of the alliance could negotiate credibly from a position of strength.
He said he accepted changes in these relationships as normal evolu-
tion, but he remained convinced of the importance of keeping the re-
lationship strong, even in a changing context.
The President noted that he had visited each of the countries of the
Generals present. In the course of the conversation, he found an occasion
to mention each country by name—Iran, in connection with impressive
economic progress; Pakistan, in connection with the combination of a firm
military and economic progress; Turkey, in its connection as a NATO
member; and Great Britain in connection with his European trip.
The President concluded by saying that he had just wished to ex-
press a few of his views but would welcome the opportunity to hear
from his guests.
General Ariana of Iran, the only one of the guests to speak through
an interpreter, commented very briefly that he was honored to meet
the President and concurred in the President’s views that the the im-
portant role of the military is to provide a stable atmosphere within
which development and progress can take place.
Air Marshal Sir Charles Elworthy spoke of how deeply he and his
colleagues had been impressed with the President’s NATO trip. He 
Middle East Region
25
2 Between February 23 and March 2, Nixon traveled to Belgium, the United King-
dom, Germany, Italy, and Vatican City.
said that he had stressed to his colleagues after the President’s Euro-
pean trip the importance of the contribution of the European govern-
ments to the alliance. He felt that the President has spoken truly when
he pointed out that the Europeans could not expect Americans to do
more if Europe did less. The President agreed, saying he had pressed
this point on Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau.
Harold H. Saunders3
3 Printed from a copy that bears Saunders’s typed signature.
7.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Libya1
Washington, April 23, 1969, 0008Z.
62432. Subject: Arab Governments Financial Support for Fedayeen.
1. Department remains very concerned about continued Arab fi-
nancial support for fedayeen organizations, notably Fatah, sanctioned
by Arab governments, particularly Kuwait, Libya and Saudi Arabia.2
We aware of numerous arguments put forth by these governments dis-
claiming that they contribute directly as governments to fedayeen and
of allegedly non-official devices for contributions. It is clear, however,
that funds flowing to fedayeen are at least officially sanctioned through
withholdings from salaries and similar “voluntary” arrangements.
2. Department and concerned posts have repeatedly cautioned
Arab governments that financial support to fedayeen who have failed
to observe cease-fire and have consistently opposed Security Council
Resolution 2423 makes more difficult attainment of peaceful settlement
26
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 629,
Country Files, Middle East, Saudi Arabia, Vol. I. Secret. Drafted by Robert P. Paganelli
(NEA/ARN); cleared in NEA/ARN, AF/N, and NEA/ARP; and approved by Sisco. It
was repeated to Algiers, Amman, Beirut, Cairo, Jerusalem, London, Rabat, Tel Aviv, Tu-
nis, and USUN.
2 In telegram 3078 from Jidda, August 10, the Embassy detailed Saudi assistance
to the fedayeen. (Ibid., Vol. II) According to a December 7, 1970, CIA memorandum to
Wrampelmeier, Saudi Arabian aid to the fedayeen was $3 million in 1969–1970 and pro-
jected to be the same for 1970–1971. (Central Intelligence Agency, ORR Files, Job
80–T01315A, Box 22)
3 See footnote 6, Document 3.
of Middle East crisis, goal endorsed by Arab Summit at Khartoum.4
Equally important, we have made point that fedayeen pose serious
threat to internal stability of moderate Arab regimes. Jordan and in-
creasingly Lebanon are prime examples of deleterious effect of feday-
een activities on internal security. Counter argument that Fatah in par-
ticular is apolitical and not interested in interfering in internal affairs
of Arab countries is becoming increasingly thin in light of recent PLO–
Fatah merger.
3. We expect that efforts to achieve peaceful Middle East settle-
ment will be entering critical phase over next few months. US-Soviet
talks and Four Power discussions are proceeding and, although there
have as yet been no major breakthroughs, we do see modicum of
progress. We view fedayeen as clear obstacle to peace in the area. Arab
argument that there is no alternative to fedayeen struggle in Arab-
Israel conflict can be rebutted with argument that an acceptable peace
settlement, which would of course include withdrawal which Arabs
seek, is a viable alternative to which US has committed its full efforts.
As evidence of US active commitment to peace, continuing US–USSR
talks, Four Power discussions and Hussein visit5 can be cited.
4. During recent Hussein visit to US Jordanians acknowledged
that a confrontation with fedayeen in Jordan is inevitable and indicated
that GOJ is preparing for it. In Jordan context, we are faced with ab-
surd situation of Kuwaitis, Saudis and Libyans giving financial sup-
port to both sides of a potential GOJ–fedayeen confrontation. It can
hardly be in net interest of conservative Arabs if moderate Jordanian
regime under Hussein seriously weakened and conceivably over-
thrown by intensifying fedayeen machinations.
6. Department is very much aware of sensitivity of Saudi, Kuwaiti
and Libyan authorities when USG representatives continue remind
them of counter productive aspects of their support for fedayeen—their
counter arguments are familiar to us. We also recognize that addressees
previous representations to host governments on this question have
fallen on deaf ears. Nevertheless, as fedayeen threat to Government of
Jordan and Lebanon mounts, matter assumes increasing urgency. Ac-
cordingly, Embassies Jidda, Kuwait and Tripoli are requested to take
Middle East Region
27
4 The Khartoum Conference occurred August 29 to September 1, 1968. At the Con-
ference, Nasser and Faisal resolved their differences over Yemen, and subsidies from the
oil producing states for Egypt and Jordan were approved. The Arab heads of state also
agreed to take “any necessary steps” to consolidate Arab strength against any possible
aggression, and to eliminate “all foreign military bases within Arab territory.” They also
decided to enforce the “principles of non-recognition and non-negotiation, and to make
no peace with Israel for the sake of the rights of the Palestinian people in their home-
land.” (Keesing’s Contemporary Archives, vol. XVI, 1967–1968, pp. 22275–22276)
5 King Hussein met with Nixon and Rogers on April 8. (President’s Daily Diary;
National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, White House Central Files)
an early opportunity to express the Department’s concern over host
governments continuing support for the fedayeen in light of the cir-
cumstances outlined above, emphasizing that such effort seems in-
creasingly to run counter to best interests of our moderate Arab friends.
Rogers
8.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassy in
Pakistan1
Washington, April 23, 1969, 2100Z.
62792. Subject: CENTO and Military Supply Policy. Ref: Rawalpindi
3982 (Notal) and 4048.2
1. In past several weeks we here have done considerable soul
searching over future of CENTO, including helpful discussions with you
last month based in part on NEA’s “Contingency Study on Pakistan and
the Alliances,”3 copy of which had previously been pouched to you.
2. At CENTO Ministerial meeting in Tehran we envisage our prin-
cipal objective as signifying our continuing deep interest in future of
our relations with regional countries (and particularly Turkey and
Iran). Foresee collateral objective as “holding action” on CENTO itself
while we reassess its future. We would hope get clearer idea of value
that regional members and UK attach to CENTO and what changes
(including possibly dismantling) they might desire or be prepared 
to accept. (Copy of our “Objectives” paper for Tehran meeting, as 
28
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 4 CENTO. Secret;
Exdis. Drafted by Stein, Sidney Sober (NEA/RA), and James W. Spain (NEA/PAF);
cleared by Brown (S/S); and approved by Sisco. It was repeated to Ankara, London, and
Tehran. 
2 In telegram 3982 from Rawalpindi, April 21, the Embassy argued that the United
States should allow Pakistan to leave CENTO and carefully limit supplies to Pakistan
for its own defense. (Ibid.) In telegram 4048 from Rawalpindi, April 22, the Embassy
concluded that U.S. interests in Pakistan would be well served by early moves “toward
graceful dissolution of CENTO structure, perhaps maintaining CENTO treaty.” (Ibid.)
Other Embassies had reached a similar conclusion. (Telegram 1090 from Tehran, March
28; and telegram 2023 from Ankara, March 27; ibid.) In telegram 1416 from Moscow,
April 4, the Embassy noted that although the Soviets already discounted CENTO’s mil-
itary significance, they would not see its dissolution as a sign of opportunity for in-
creased aggression given their desire for normal relations with Pakistan, Iran, and Turkey.
(Ibid.)
3 Not found.
approved by Secretary, being airpouched all addressees.) We do not
wish our interest to be misinterpreted and wish avoid any action in in-
terim which might prejudice Secretary’s private discussions with other
Council members at Tehran.4
3. Your views on need to reassess CENTO’s future (reftels and as
expressed during your recent consultation here) are not inconsistent
with Dept’s current thinking. We have no illusions about Pakistanis
dim view of CENTO. Basic fact is that decision whether they stay in
or get out is up to them. We have not lifted a finger to oppose Pak-
istan’s withdrawal from military exercises, its decision not to be rep-
resented by a Minister at annual Council meeting and other actions to
downgrade its membership in Pact. We intend no pressure on Pakistan
to maintain even its minimal participation in CENTO.
4. Agree with you that any decision on modifying CENTO will
have to be weighed in close consultation with our friends. Views of
Turkey and Iran, as well as UK, will have to be taken into careful ac-
count.
5. Seems to us question of Pakistan’s continuing membership in
CENTO need not be decisive in terms military sales policy for South
Asia. As you know, military sales policy now under review on its own
merits in broad context our interest South Asia.5 We appreciate your
views on it as expressed Rawalpindi 3842.6
Rogers
Middle East Region
29
4 The Ministerial Meeting occurred May 26–27 in Tehran. The Objectives Paper was
not found. Documentation on the Tehran meeting is in the National Archives, Nixon
Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 212, Agency Files, CENTO, and ibid., Box 1234,
Saunders Files, CENTO, 1/20/69–12/31/69.
5 A reference to NSSM 26, “Military Supply Policy in South Asia,” February 21; see
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume E–7, Documents on South Asia, 1969–1972, Docu-
ment 10.
6 In telegram 3842 from Rawalpindi, April 16, Ambassador Benjamin H. Oehlert,
Jr., provided a lengthy analysis of the deteriorating Pakistani role in regional alliances,
its difficulties with India, and its growing ties to the Soviet Union and the People’s Re-
public of China. He argued that a strong Soviet presence in Pakistan would add to the
pressures the United States was experiencing throughout the Middle East and Indian
Ocean. He urged a liberalization of U.S. military supply policy to Pakistan as the best
and perhaps only means of maintaining strong bilateral ties and Pakistani ties with the
West. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, DEF 4 CENTO)
9.
Minutes of a Review Group Meeting1
Washington, September 23, 1969, 2:10–3:15 p.m.
SUBJECT
Middle East Water
PARTICIPATION
Chairman—Henry A. Kissinger
State—William I. Cargo
State—Rodger Davies
State—Donald McHenry
Defense—G. Warren Nutter
CIA—Edward Proctor
JCS—LTG F. T. Unger
SUMMARY OF DECISIONS
—Mr. Saunders, in consultation with Mr. Cargo and others, will
draft a memorandum for the President setting forth the four options:
—proceed with the 40 MGD plant;
—proceed with the 100 MGD plant;
—cooperate in building a 15–20 MGD plant (both the 20 and 40
MGD plants would require construction of a small $5 million test mod-
ule either in Israel or in the U.S. to test the new VTE technology);
—do nothing.
The paper will discuss the pros and cons of each option and will
reflect the Review Group discussion.2
Mr. Kissinger opened the meeting, commenting that the paper3
on this subject had grown from a Presidential request related to the
30
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–111, Senior Review Group, SRG Minutes Originals 1969. Se-
cret; Exdis. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room. The minutes were
reviewed and approved by Kissinger. (Memorandum from Davis to Kissinger, Septem-
ber 25; ibid.) Prior to the Review Group meeting, Saunders prepared Talking Points and
a Draft Issues Paper for Kissinger to send to Nixon. Saunders then recommended the Ba-
sic Paper, “Desalting in the Middle East,” to Kissinger. (Memorandum from Saunders to
Kissinger, September 17; ibid., Box H–039, Review Group Mid-East Water 9/23/69)
2 Printed as Document 12.
3 A reference to “Desalting in the Middle East,” undated, referred to as the Basic Pa-
per. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files
(H-Files), Box H–039, Review Group Mid-East Water 9/23/69) It was a summary of two
longer papers: “Proposed 40 Million Gallon Per Day Desalting Plant in Israel” and “The
Potential for Large Scale Desalting in the Middle East.” (Ibid.) Sisco, as acting Chairman
of the Interdepartmental Group, sent it to Kissinger on September 9 (ibid.) and it was trans-
mitted to members of the SRG from Davis under a September 12 covering memorandum.
(Ibid., Box H–141, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 30)
OEP—Haakon Lindjord
USIA—Frank Shakespeare
BOB—James Schlesinger
OST—Warren A. Hall
NSC Staff—Harold H. Saunders
Jeanne W. Davis
Eisenhower–Strauss plan of 1967. However, we now faced an imme-
diate operational problem in the necessity to take an Administration
position on legislation now being marked up in the House Foreign Af-
fairs Committee which would authorize up to $40 million in U.S. funds
to build a 40 million gallon per day (MGD) desalting plant in Israel.4
As an operational problem, it might have been more appropriate for
consideration by the Under Secretaries Committee rather than the Re-
view Group, but he and Under Secretary Richardson had agreed to use
the RG since they had already been convened for this meeting and be-
cause of related preparations for the U.S. visit of Israeli Prime Minis-
ter Golda Meir. Mr. Cargo, who was present at the meeting, could rep-
resent the State Department’s interests from the point of view of the
Under Secretaries Committee.
Mr. Kissinger outlined the four options:
(1) proceed with the 40 MGD plant now before the HFAC;
(2) proceed with a larger (100 MGD) desalting plant studied in
1965–68;
(3) offer to cooperate in building a 15–20 MGD desalting proto-
type plant in Israel using new technology (both the 40 MGD and 20
MGD plants would require first testing a small module using new tech-
nology at a cost of approximately $5 million);
(4) do nothing.
He asked if it were agreed that we could eliminate the fourth al-
ternative and discuss which of the three plans we should consider.
Mr. Nutter and General Unger demurred at eliminating the fourth
alternative.
Mr. Schlesinger commented that the economics of the situation
would not justify any of the plans and the research and development
gains would be the only asset.
Mr. Cargo commented that State preferred the third alternative, al-
though the foreign policy advantages are minimal since Israel puts a
low priority on the desalting plant in relation to other projects. He and
Mr. Davies thought any negative domestic reaction could be contained
in view of this lower priority.
Mr. Kissinger asked if the 15–20 MGD option did not exist at the
time the 40 MGD plant was chosen. He was told that was the case.
Mr. Schlesinger said the 40 MGD option is scaled down from the
100 MGD, Mr. Hall noted that the 15–20 MGD plant would use new
technology, and Mr. Davies added that the 15–20 MGD plant would
start with the small test module.
Middle East Region
31
4 The issue was raised in a memorandum from Hannah to Kissinger, September
18. (Ibid.)
Mr. Kissinger asked why we could not get money for the 40 MGD
plant when we could get it for the 15–20 MGD plant.
Messrs. Hall and Schlesinger pointed out that in fact we had no
money for either project.
Mr. Saunders noted that the 40 MGD plant would be built from
older technology and that the 15–20 MGD plant, which would begin
with the test module, would be built around new technology with some
R&D advantages.
Mr. Kissinger asked if Congress would be more willing to fund for
R&D and why.
Mr. Schlesinger thought they would, since R&D had more pizzazz.
Mr. Kissinger asked which plant would be more useful.
Mr. Cargo thought that there would be a quicker R&D return from
the smaller plant.
Mr. Saunders noted that we were dealing with semi-proved tech-
nology in the larger plant versus new technology in the smaller (15–20
MGD) plant.
Mr. Hall commented that the new technology was probably bet-
ter technology.
Mr. Kissinger asked if that is what the Israelis want.
Mr. Saunders replied that Eshkol had agreed to the 40 MGD 
proposal.
Mr. Schlesinger said if it was a gift, Israel would take it. He noted
two forces at work which had produced the 40 MGD plan: the Water
for Peace program under President Johnson and the Eisenhower–
Strauss plan, which President Nixon had supported during his 
campaign.
Mr. Kissinger asked what the urgency is.
Mr. Saunders replied that Israel faces a serious water problem and
they are interested in desalting per se.
Mr. Shakespeare noted that the two items stressed in the exchange
of letters between Johnson and Eshkol in January 1969 were desalting
and provision of Phantom aircraft.5
Mr. Nutter and General Unger said Defense would prefer to de-
fer any construction of any desalting facility for Israel until the Oak
Ridge and the joint AID/Interior studies are completed, expected in
late 1969.
Mr. Saunders noted that these studies will not contribute to an Is-
raeli desalting activity. They are designed to consider how, if peace
32
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
5 See footnote 3, Document 4.
came to the Middle East, one could design a water system for the area
which could contribute to area development. The only relationship be-
tween that and an Israeli facility would be if it were possible to make
a large Israeli plant a stepping stone toward a broader area system.
Mr. Kissinger asked how much of a commitment exists.
Mr. Davies referred to the Johnson–Eshkol letters, in which Presi-
dent Johnson explicitly stated that he could not commit a successor
Administration, and to the legislation submitted to the Congress em-
bodying the 40 MGD proposal, and the proposed Rosenthal amend-
ment to the Foreign Assistance Act which would authorize a $40 mil-
lion contribution for building the 40 MGD plant.
Mr. Saunders noted that there had been oral exchanges between
the U.S. and Israel prior to the exchange of letters.
Mr. Davies commented that we could explain any delay in the proj-
ect on the basis of other Israeli priorities.
Mr. Kissinger asked if there was a consensus that if we agree to go
ahead we should emphasize the smaller plant, and that any decision
should consider three elements: improvement of technology; foreign
policy reasons; and the nature of our commitment.
Mr. Saunders noted that technological development will proceed
separately from the Middle East question.
Mr. Schlesinger suggested another alternative: that the Interior De-
partment be given $5 million to build the test module in the U.S. He
thought Interior would prefer this course but that the funds had not
been included in the FY 70 budget.
Mr. Hall noted that this step could be used as a basis for deferral
of construction in Israel, with the argument that when the Israeli proj-
ect is implemented, it should be on the basis of the best technology.
Mr. Kissinger asked how many years this would take.
Mr. Hall thought if the test module were funded in FY 71, we
should know in two or three years whether we could do it or not, with
emphasis on the new vertical tube evaporator (VTE) technique.
Mr. Shakespeare said that if it was agreed that desalinization was
important and we could learn something from building at least the $5
million test module, was it not well worth the relatively minor sum of
$5 million?
Mr. Hall said that if we considered this solely in its U.S. context—
as a problem to be solved for the U.S.—we should relate the timing of
the construction and testing of facilities, hence, the provision of funds,
to the expected time of need in the U.S.
Mr. Kissinger noted that the same relation existed if the funds were
spent in Israel.
Middle East Region
33
Mr. Hall agreed that if we build the facility in Israel we will cer-
tainly get some technical advantage from it. The question was whether
it would be worth it in U.S. terms. Was it necessary to proceed now in
budgetary terms? He thought it would take three years from the time
funds are appropriated to completion of the test module.
He was looking ahead ten years to the areas in which the U.S.
might need water produced by desalinization. He could not see such
a requirement in ten years at the present time, but he acknowledged
that the situation could change rapidly.
Mr. Saunders pointed out that Israel has such a requirement now.
Mr. Schlesinger noted that Israel was unwilling to divert water
from agricultural purposes, where the cost of the water as compared
to the agricultural yield was in terms of a factor of 4. He said that Is-
rael needed reallocation of its water to urban and industrial purposes.
Mr. Davies asked if Israel could then be expected to obtain its veg-
etables and other agricultural products from its Arab neighbors.
Mr. Proctor asked if we went ahead with construction of the 20
MGD plant would we be likely to end with a white elephant on our
hands?6
Mr. Hall noted that with the expenditure of $5 million for testing
of the new VTE technique, it might be possible eventually to obtain a
25% or even 50% improvement in the price of desalted water. He briefly
traced the development of the new concept of water provision since
1964, compared the use of distilled water to water produced by the re-
verse osmosis technique, and commented that the relationship of wa-
ter cost to yield in Israel might be reduced to a factor of 2 or 3. He
pointed out that desalted water was an entirely different product from
any agricultural water now in use. In general, he agreed with the Bud-
get Bureau on the present situation.
Mr. Kissinger noted that it appeared completion of the big study
would not add to solution of the Israeli problem.
Mr. Nutter again raised the question of where the plant should be
located, noting Israel’s attacks on the East Ghor Canal. He questioned
the symbolic significance of our helping Israel with its water problem
while Israel attacks water facilities of its neighbors.
34
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
6 According to a September 18 memorandum, the CIA regarded it as “inconceiv-
able [that] the Arabs and Israelis would cooperate on any desalting projects in the Near
East for some time to come.” The CIA therefore thought it was premature to consider
large-scale desalting projects in the Eisenhower–Strauss context, but thought it worth-
while to proceed unilaterally with desalting projects for Israel. (Central Intelligence
Agency, ORR Files, Job 80–T01315A, Box 19)
Mr. Kissinger asked if the Israelis are likely to raise the issue of
the desalting plant during the Golda Meir visit.7
Mr. Saunders replied we didn’t know; that Mrs. Meir has many
other things on her mind.
Mr. Davies noted that the emphasis had been on economic ques-
tions, including extension of credits, etc.
Mr. Kissinger asked how much pressure is behind the legislation.
Mr. Davies replied that the U.S. was committed in the eyes of many
members of the Congress.
Mr. Shakespeare asked where Senator Baker stood on this issue.
Mr. Davies replied that Senator Baker backs the regional approach
and opposes the Israeli plant because it is not demonstrably and di-
rectly linked to the regional approach.8
Mr. Kissinger thought that we should look at the problem on a re-
gional basis and from the point of view of U.S. evenhandedness in the
Arab-Israel situation.
Mr. Saunders commented that the proposed plant would meet con-
siderably less than Israel’s requirement, and that the purpose of the
larger study was to develop a regional scheme and provide evidence
of an evenhanded U.S. policy.
Mr. Davies noted that this could be tied to refugee resettlement,
for example.
General Unger asked if the smaller plant would be nuclear.
Mr. Hall replied no, that it would not be economically feasible.
Mr. Kissinger asked if the 15–20 MGD plant would be nuclear.
Mr. Hall replied no, adding that the source of power has nothing
to do with when or where the plant is built.
Mr. Kissinger asked if Israel would be aided in solving its prob-
lem by completion of the regional study.
Mr. Nutter replied that they would.
General Unger asked if Israel could opt for a nuclear power source.
Mr. Hall replied that they could theoretically, since the source of
power was left to the Israelis to decide.
Mr. Schlesinger pointed out, however, that the U.S. would have to
finance any nuclear power installation.
Middle East Region
35
7 Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir made a two-day official visit to Washington
September 25 and 26, during which time she met privately with Nixon. The issue of de-
salination did not come up in conversations between Rabin with either Rogers or
Kissinger, nor in Meir’s conversation with Rogers. The September 26 memorandum of
conversation and telegram 163837 to Tel Aviv, September 26, are scheduled for publica-
tion in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1969–1972.
8 See footnote 2, Document 4.
Mr. Cargo commented that State would be prepared to go ahead
with construction of the 15–20 MGD plant, preceded by the test mod-
ule. He noted an AID memorandum which opposes the proposed
Rosenthal amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act to provide the $40
million grant to Israel to build the 40 MGD plant, and favors author-
izing Interior to build the small experimental plant in the U.S., with
the collaboration of Israeli and other foreign scientists, and to promise
to help Israel in installing the ultimately improved technology there.
He thought AID would join State in their willingness to go ahead with
the test module in Israel if their concerns about the source of the fi-
nancing could be met.
Mr. Kissinger summarized the pro arguments for the 40 MGD
plant as: (1) the commitment in the Johnson letter; (2) the relationship
to other political objectives (which Mr. Cargo commented would be
minimal); and (3) improved technology, which could be achieved even
more efficiently through construction of the $5 million test module.
Mr. Hall noted that it would still be better if the experimental plant
were built in the U.S.
Mr. Kissinger asked what would happen if we should decide to
do nothing.
Mr. Saunders replied that we would tell the Israelis that we want
to defer further action on this project and would persuade interested
Congressmen not to push the proposed legislation.
Mr. Davies noted it would not be too difficult to turn Congress
around in view of the relatively low priority which Israel placed on
this installation.
Mr. Kissinger thought we should wait and see what Golda Meir
says and see how we might relate this issue to a settlement in the Mid-
dle East.
Mr. Shakespeare agreed that this should only be done as part of a
general settlement, but noted that water had become a highly emo-
tional issue and one that had a good deal of public sex appeal.
Mr. Davies pointed out that the Interior Department considered
the water problem of great concern to the U.S.
Mr. Hall noted, however, that Interior had a very restricted budget
for water problems and he doubted if they would be willing to take
the $5 million required for the test module out of their present budget.
Mr. Hall reviewed the time table: from the time when we perceive
the need in the U.S., it will take five years to develop the capability,
plus three years on the test module to see whether the new technique
will work. The question to be answered is whether we have any spots
in the U.S. where we will need to apply such a capability in the next
ten years. The alternative would be to push ahead with our research
and to try to develop an even better technology.
36
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
Mr. Saunders again noted that the need exists in Israel now, and
that the proposed activity would advance our research.
Mr. Kissinger asked Mr. Saunders, in consultation with Mr. Cargo
and others, to prepare a paper for the President reflecting this discus-
sion. He saw no need to await the results of the general study, since
the President would decide how urgent the matter is on the basis of
this paper. The paper should discuss the pros and cons of the plan, tak-
ing into account the nature of our commitment, the technological as-
sets we would gain, and the things we may ask Israel to do.
Mr. Cargo expressed his view that we should go ahead as fast as
possible in advancing our water technology for basic U.S. foreign pol-
icy purposes. He cited conditions in Pakistan and elsewhere with hun-
dreds of miles of coast line but with very little or no fresh water.
Mr. Kissinger commented that water technology was likely to be
pushed faster in Israel than anywhere else to which Mr. Cargo agreed.
Mr. Schlesinger commented that almost any R&D which would
bring down the cost of water would be an advance.
Mr. Proctor compared a five-year program at $5 million to a more
expensive program which would take 10–15 years.
Mr. Hall noted the relationship between funds and ideas. He said
ideas develop sequentially—one idea suggests the next one. In this con-
text, a large program would be repetitive and might well exceed the
threshold of economic feasibility.
Mr. Kissinger closed the meeting with the comment that we needed
a U.S. national policy on desalting.
Middle East Region
37
10.
Intelligence Note From the Deputy Director of the Bureau of
Intelligence and Research (Denny) to Acting Secretary of
State Richardson1
693
Washington, September 29, 1969.
SUBJECT
Islamic Summit Produces Moderate Consensus and the Makings of a Moslem
Bloc
The Rabat meeting of 25 Moslem nations survived postponement
attempts and internal conflicts to become the first Islamic Summit Con-
ference. Its concluding declaration and resolutions represented a mod-
erate consensus and may have laid the groundwork for a Moslem bloc.
A Major Achievement: Holding the Conference. King Hassan of Mo-
rocco, host of the September 22–25 meeting and one of the original pro-
moters of the Summit, called holding of the conference a “miracle of
God” and a success in itself. We agree that bringing together govern-
ment leaders (including 9 heads of state) representing about 300 mil-
lion Moslems was a major achievement. It took considerable skill on
the part of Hassan and co-initiator King Faisal of Saudi Arabia2 to gain
rapid agreement for early scheduling of a summit and to persuade sus-
picious non-Arab Moslems to participate in an Arab-dominated as-
sembly. Less than a week before opening day, President Nasser
launched a counteroffensive seeking to postpone the summit indefi-
nitely. In the end, his bluff was called and a UAR delegation was dis-
patched to Rabat. Only Iraq and Syria of the “progressive” Arab group
failed to appear. A final crisis occurred in mid-summit, when a belated
invitation to India provoked a stormy Pakistani response and India’s
ouster. Even this turbulent event, which might have broken up any
other conference, only prolonged the meeting an extra day.
A Moderate Consensus. Out of the conference came a moderate con-
sensus, despite radical Arab and Palestinian lobbying (the Palestinian
38
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 13–6. Confidential;
No Foreign Dissem; Controlled Dissem.
2 King Hussein had initially called for an Arab Summit in the aftermath of the 
al-Aqsa fire, but Faisal had insisted on an Islamic Summit, stating “I issued a call to the
Islamic world to declare holy war to liberate Jerusalem from the hands of the oppres-
sors and tyrants who keep no promise.” (Airgram A–254 from Jidda, August 27; ibid.,
POL 27 ARAB–ISR) Faisal’s emotional response to the fire, his determination to be an
active rather than passive participant in the effort to recover Jerusalem, his earnest pur-
suit of jihad, and his desire for a stronger United States role in the Middle East are ar-
ticulated in telegram 2947 from Jidda, August 26. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials,
NSC Files, Box 629, Country Files, Middle East, Saudi Arabia, Vol. I)
Liberation Organization—PLO—was given observer status at the meet-
ing). The official conference declaration, taking the al-Aqsa mosque in-
cident3 as point of departure, called for restoration of Jerusalem’s pre-
June 1967 status and speedy withdrawal of Israeli military forces from
all territories occupied as a result of the 1967 war; it appealed to the
US, UK, USSR, and France to secure compliance with the 1967 Secu-
rity Council resolution. On Palestine, a solitary sentence affirmed “full
support to the Palestinian people for the restitution of their rights” and
in their “struggle for national liberation.”
The moderate Arab organizers can claim full credit for the 
language—a compromise that reiterated basic Arab positions without
offending non-Arab participants, five of whom have diplomatic rela-
tions with Israel. The radical Arabs may regret what might have been
added, but can raise no serious objections to the statements in the fi-
nal declaration.
The Makings of a Moslem Bloc? The moderates undoubtedly hope
that they have strengthened the Arab cause in a potentially permanent
fashion. The conference declaration spoke of regular consultation and
“close cooperation and mutual assistance” among Moslem states. In
addition, the principal resolution set a meeting of Islamic foreign min-
isters for March 1970 at Jidda to review common action undertaken af-
ter the summit and to establish an Islamic permanent secretariat. In
sum, the moderates can claim to have created a Moslem bloc to be for-
mally organized next March.
Arab moderates will use the success of the Islamic Summit to
strengthen their inter-Arab position and to argue against holding an
Arab Summit, to which Faisal is adamantly opposed. He fears it would
be controlled by radical states, who would call for increased financial
contributions from the oil-producers and would push through extreme
resolutions. If Faisal also hopes that the projected Moslem bloc will
provide an effective counter balance to radical domination of the Arab
League, he will probably be disappointed.
A consequence of the moderates’ success was the absence of at-
tack on the US or “imperialism” in the final statements. However, it is
virtually certain that the radical Arab states will continue to agitate for
a more extreme political posture in the Islamic forum; unless Hassan
and Faisal can sustain their achievement the resulting dispute could
cause a short life—or even stillbirth—for the Moslem bloc.
Middle East Region
39
3 The al-Aqsa Mosque, considered the third holiest Islamic site, was partially
burned on August 21. Australian Denis Michael Rohan, a self-styled Christian funda-
mentalist, was formally charged on September 1 with having set fire to the Mosque. He
was found guilty by the Jerusalem District Court on December 30 and was committed
to a mental hospital as a paranoid schizophrenic.
11.
Telegram From the Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization to the Departments of State and Defense1
Brussels, October 2, 1969, 1925Z.
4449. Subj: Soviet Presence in the Mediterranean.
1. During my recent trip through the NATO southern region, which
included extensive conversations with CINCSOUTH, COMSTRIKEFORSOUTH,
COMLANDSOUTHEAST plus our Embassies, MAAG staffs and local officials
in Ankara and Athens, I gained the strong impression that we need to
take a much closer look at the significance of the improved Soviet force
posture in the Mediterranean. As Washington is aware, the present NATO
assessment, dating from June 1968, is that Soviet objectives in the Med
are primarily political and psychological. While this may still be true, I
believe we need to have another look at the politico-military implications
for the Mediterranean area, which to my mind are disturbing.
2. While it is true that Soviet naval units in the Med lack air sup-
port and do not constitute a balanced force, the recent addition of helo
carriers, more submarines and the nucleus of an amphibious capabil-
ity add up to a naval force of important dimensions. The Sixth Fleet
would have to deal with this force initially in the event of hostilities
and this would clearly distract from its primary mission of supporting
the land war on the Mediterranean littoral. The delay might well be
critical, given the lack of operating terrain on the southern flank, par-
ticularly Greek and Turkish Thrace. And the imperative need for timely
[omission in the original].
3. Moreover, while the Soviets have not yet sought to develop an
air support capability in the Med, this is not necessarily precluded for
the future. Also, given political trends in Egypt, Algeria and Libya, it
is not impossible to imagine the Soviets being given turn-around or re-
covery base rights in those countries which would permit land based
air strikes from Bulgaria or the southwestern USSR against NATO
forces in the Med.
4. Secondly not since 1944 have US naval forces had to operate in
a situation like the one presently prevailing in the Med where its units
must operate alongside a potentially hostile naval force of some size.
Among other things, this constitutes an inhibition on the Sixth Fleet’s
capacity to intervene in situations where it may be in our interest to
40
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 275,
Agency Files, President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Vol. II. Secret; Limdis;
Noforn. It was repeated to USDOCOSOUTH, USNMR SHAPE, CINCEUR, Ankara, Athens, 
Rome, Paris, London, the White House, COMSIXTHFLT for Vice Admiral Richardson, and
USDOCOLANDSOUTHEAST for General Harrel.
intervene. Conversely, greater Soviet capability would enable them to
intervene if a situation arose in which they regarded it as safe and ex-
pedient to do so. Moreover, while the Soviets might have been able to
adduce lack of military wherewithal as a reason for inaction during the
1967 War, they could not do so as credibly now and would therefore
lose considerable political mileage with dissatisfied local clients.
5. In sum, it seems to me that the Mediterranean constitutes the
area of greatest relative change in recent years in the NATO–Warsaw
Pact military balance. This is certainly where the current action is as far
as the Soviets are concerned, and I believe some shift of our attention
from the relatively more stable center region of ACE would be desirable.
The problem of Italian-Greek-Turkish relations as it affects NATO
strength in this key area needs particular attention in Washington.
6. Our immediate objective should be to focus attention of NATO
delegations on this general problem and fortunately the Libyan coup2
has already generated considerable local interest. I intend to explore
the matter with Brosio and individually with PermReps from the coun-
tries most directly concerned, i.e. Italy, France, UK, Greece, Turkey. I
would brief them on my impressions, suggest that they themselves visit
NATO commands in the area, utilizing roughly the same sources I
talked to and solicit their opinions on what NATO might do in response
to the whole spectrum of changing military and political factors in the
Mediterranean.
7. I think it essential that these countries themselves take the lead
in addressing the problem, hopefully looking toward a reassessment
we could support either at Ministerial or PermRep level.
8. Where NATO might go after such a reassessment is of course
an open question and one the USG should address before proceeding
as in para 7. USNATO has various options under consideration, both
political and military, open to NATO countries, which may be useful
in a possible next round of measures to cope with the Mediterranean
situation. In the meantime, we would welcome any addressee com-
ments on this telegram and suggestions for any measures that might
be taken.
Ellsworth
Middle East Region
41
2 The Free Officers Movement overthrew Libyan King Idris on September 1. As a
result, Colonel Muammar al-Qadhafi became Commander-in-Chief of the Libyan Armed
Forces and de facto head of state.
12.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1
Washington, October 6, 1969.
SUBJECT
Decisions on Desalting in the Near East
Following your instructions,2 I have launched a comprehensive
study of possibilities for desalting in the Near East.
The overall study is being done at the Oak Ridge National Labo-
ratory where the concept underlying the Eisenhower–Strauss plan was
worked out. It will not be done until the end of the year.
However, decision on a narrower issue is needed sooner. A num-
ber of pro-Israeli Congressmen are pressing a rider to the Foreign As-
sistance Act authorizing $40 million for a desalting plant in Israel. The
Administration should take a position on this legislation since it does
not fall within Administration priorities.
I held an NSC Review Group meeting to discuss this aspect of the
problem.3 What follows is a brief synopsis of that meeting and repre-
sents the consensus. What follows is a brief synopsis.
The legislation now before Congress grows out of a late Johnson
Administration proposal. After four years of joint US-Israeli study of
the feasibility of a large desalting plant in Israel, President Johnson
asked George Woods, who had just stepped down as World Bank pres-
ident, to review the studies and give him a personal recommendation.
This procedure was followed because the bureaucracy was deeply di-
vided and just could not put forward an unbiased analysis. Mr. Woods
recommended a smaller plant than the joint studies contemplated and
suggested that new technology be considered.4
The present options are these:
1. A plant that desalts 100 million gallons per day and produces 200
megawatts of electricity. Everyone but AEC believes this is too big a
technological jump (the largest plant now produces 7 million gallons)
42
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–141, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 30. Confi-
dential; Exdis. Sent for action. A handwritten notation on the memorandum indicates the
President approved it and a stamped notation indicates it was returned on October 23.
2 See Document 5.
3 See Document 9.
4 See Foreign Relations, 1964–1968, volume XXXIV, Energy Diplomacy and Global
Issues, Documents 171–173.
to take all at once even though this plant would use older technology.
This would cost $60–70 million in US grants.
2. A 40 million-gallon-per-day plant. This was Woods’ proposal. It
is a more logical technological step from where we are now, although
there is still one necessary intermediate step—a 5 million gallon test mod-
ule to check out a new method that would increase output substan-
tially. The cost for the water plant (it would be hooked to a power plant
which would provide steam) would be $54–58 million, and Woods felt
the US could justify up to $40 million on research and development
grounds. This is essentially the proposal before Congress.
3. A 15–20 million-gallon plant. When Interior did not get money
in the FY 1970 budget to build its 5 million gallon test module in the
US, it proposed that the module be built in Israel as the core of a small
operational plant. But Interior would prefer to build the test module
in the US and recognizes that the 40 million gallon plant would come
closer to meeting Israel’s real water needs.
The Review Group consensus expressed in the attached memo5 is
that it does not make sense to go ahead with a $40 million Israeli plant
in this tight budget year but that it might make sense to give Interior
$5 million to build in the US the test module that would have to be
built in any case before a larger plant could be built.
Recommendation: Since the latter judgment is a scientific-technical
one outside the competence of the Review Group, I recommend the
following:
1. That you authorize us to tell the Israelis that we cannot justify
a plant in Israel now in the light of our own tight budget and in the
light of Israel’s other requests for substantial help with economic and
military sales credits.6
2. That we ask them to tell their Congressional friends that they
occur in deferral with the hope that their technicians can participate at
some point in any experimental work done in the US that might be a
prelude to a later Israeli project.
Middle East Region
43
5 Memorandum from Kissinger to Nixon, undated; not attached. (National
Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box
H–039, SRG Meeting Files, Review Group Mid-East Water 9/23/69)
6 Attached is an October 16 memorandum from Bryce Harlow, Counselor to the
President, stating that he agreed with Kissinger’s recommendation against investing in
a “large expenditure in Israel.” He also noted that during his campaign President Nixon
had “strongly favored” the Eisenhower–Strauss Plan, that the issue was seen as a “Re-
publican initiative” with strong support in both Houses, and that the location in the
United States of a smaller test facility could be seen as a reward for “a good Congres-
sional friend.” (Ibid., Box H–212, National Security Decision Memoranda, NSDM 32) In
a November 21 memorandum of conversation, Saunders told General Ben Artzi, Repre-
sentative of Israeli Prime Minister on the Desalting Project, of the U.S. decision. (Ibid.,
Box H–141, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 30)
3. That the Administration then take the following position on the
legislation before Congress: The Administration intends to press ahead
with research in desalting technology but does not believe it possible
within present budgetary constraints to proceed with the Israeli proj-
ect this year. It believes that intermediate experience with a test mod-
ule to check new technology will be necessary before any larger plant
can be built anywhere and believes there are advantages in doing this
work in the US, leaving open the possibility of whether to build a plant
in Israel once the technology is tested here.
4. That you ask Lee DuBridge and Bob Mayo for a recommenda-
tion on whether Interior should be authorized $5 million to proceed
with the test module in the US.7
There is one other issue. George Woods also served as a point of
contact with the Israelis on this subject. Prime Minister Eshkol named
a high-ranking individual as the contact on his side. The reason for this
arrangement was to have one person on each side who could draw to-
gether a governmental position on a complex issue where bureaucra-
cies split. The question is whether you would like to keep Woods in
the picture.
The arguments for doing so are that it is useful to have one per-
son carrying the ball on this issue. It is also useful to have a person of
special stature to deal with the Congress on it if special persuasion is
required there.
The arguments against include how you may feel about Woods as
a personal adviser on this subject. Also, there will probably not be much
active discussion with the Israelis if you approve the recommended
course.
Recommendation: That I inform Woods what we are doing as a 
matter of courtesy, says that there will not be much activity with the
Israelis in the near future and leave the door open on whether we re-
involve him at a later stage.8
44
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
7 The President checked the approval option.
8 Of the approval, disapproval, and other options, Nixon initialed on the approval
line. Saunders received authorization from Kissinger on November 6 to go ahead with
the suggested course of action. (Memorandum from Saunders to Kissinger, October 31;
National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files 
(H-Files), Box H–141, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 30) See Document 35.
13.
Letter From the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs
(Johnson) to the Deputy Secretary of Defense (Packard)1
Washington, November 4, 1969.
Dear Dave:
Attached is a slightly expanded version of the paper that I showed
you last Wednesday. It is an effort to reduce to writing some of the more
critical foreign policy assumptions that, in my view, should govern mil-
itary planning in the next several years. We have not tried to be com-
prehensive, but rather to pick out points which we think are particularly
relevant for military planning. We do not intend that this paper substi-
tute for other policy guidance which has emerged from completed NSC
studies, such as the FIDP, or to preempt guidance that may flow from fu-
ture studies. I understand that your staff is working on strategic guid-
ance for the FY–72 budget. This paper should be of some use to them.
I hope that the question of foreign policy assumptions for Defense
planning could be pursued by Ron Spiers and Warren Nutter and their
staffs as we discussed last week. In particular, I want them to discuss
how such guidance might be improved in the future and how State and
Defense can jointly develop the strategic guidance that will form the ba-
sis for future defense budgets. It seems to me this should be a continu-
ing process so that when Defense feels the need of guidance or assess-
ment in a specific area of foreign policy, it can be provided promptly.
I am sending a copy of this letter and the attachment to Henry
Kissinger.
Sincerely,
Alex
Attachment
MIDDLE EAST AND MEDITERRANEAN
A. Despite the absence of formal security treaties with non-NATO
powers in the Mediterranean Basin, four US administrations have made
clear that the US has a special interest in the security of Israel.
Middle East Region
45
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1251,
Saunders Files, Basic Policy—Middle East 1/1/70–12/31/70. Secret. A copy was sent to
Kissinger.
B. In the Persian Gulf, current American oil and other activities
which return some $1.5 billion annually to the US balance of payments,
are likely to expand.
C. The requirement for US forces for this area has never been well
defined, but air and naval forces appear to be considerably more im-
portant, at least from a political standpoint, than ground forces.
D. Restrictions on US base use (e.g., Greece, Turkey, Spain) if not
outright denial (we must regard Wheelus as lost now) will continue to
be a significant factor in any contingency involving the Arabs and Is-
raelis. Soviet involvement in such a contingency may relax these re-
strictions somewhat, but it should not be assumed that they will re-
move them. Ways to reduce dependence on these bases should be
examined.
E. Reopening of the Suez Canal cannot be counted upon for the
next two years, or even longer. Therefore, the importance of Diego Gar-
cia and COMIDEASTFOR increases.
F. Soviet naval presence in the Mediterranean will not diminish
and may expand further. There is a good possibility that the Soviets
will gain access to air bases in the Mediterranean area.
G. With the British departure from Aden and the Persian Gulf, the
Soviets will continue to manifest increasing naval and other activity in
the Arabian Sea region.
H. Any major changes in the Sixth fleet will have important po-
litical implications in the Mediterranean Basin and would have to be
preceded by careful political-military consultations with allied and
friendly governments.
I. While we have no intention of replacing the British in the Per-
sian Gulf area after their withdrawal in 1971, we have no plans to ter-
minate our naval presence there and believe we can maintain our home
porting arrangements on Bahrain over the next few years.
[Omitted here are sections on Europe, East Asia, Weapons System,
and MAP.]
46
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
14.
National Security Decision Memorandum 321
Washington, November 6, 1969.
TO
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of The Interior
The Secretary of Agriculture
The Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission
The Director of Central Intelligence
The Administrator, Agency for International Development
SUBJECT
Water Development and Middle East Policy
With reference to the memorandum of September 9, 1969, from the
Chairman of NSCIG/NEA to the Chairman of the NSC Review Group
entitled “Desalting in the Near East—NSSM 30,”2 the President has
made the following decisions:
1. He has agreed that decisions on broader policy for overall wa-
ter development in the Near East should be deferred until early next
year.
2. He has approved the following Administration position on the
Israeli desalting plant to be used with the Government of Israel and
with appropriate Congressional Committees:
a. Budgetary constraints make it impossible for the Administra-
tion to proceed now with plans to build a desalting plant in Israel.
b. Budgetary considerations apart, the Administration believes
that intermediate experimentation with new technology is necessary
before a large operating plant can be built anywhere. The Administra-
tion believes that there are compelling advantages in doing this work
in the U.S.
c. The Administration is keeping open the possibility of later co-
operation in the Israeli project.
d. The Administration intends to press ahead with research in 
desalting technology and will insure close cooperation with Israeli 
technicians.
Middle East Region
47
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–212, National Security Decision Memoranda, NSDM 32.
Confidential; Exdis. Copies were sent to Mayo and DuBridge.
2 See footnote 3, Document 9.
3. He has asked that the Director, Bureau of the Budget in coop-
eration with the Science Advisor to the President coordinate a recom-
mendation on whether a module to test the new technology should
now be built in the U.S.
The Secretary of State will coordinate appropriate actions to in-
form the Government of Israel and the Congressional Committees 
concerned.
Henry A. Kissinger
15.
Editorial Note
On December 9, 1969, Secretary of State William Rogers delivered
a major speech titled “A Lasting Peace in the Middle East: An Ameri-
can View” at the 1969 Galaxy Conference on Adult Education in Wash-
ington. During this talk, Rogers stated that one of the first decisions of
the new administration had been to play a direct role in solving the
Arab-Israeli crisis. This included U.S. discussions not just with the
United Nations, U.S. allies, and regional states, but with the Soviet
Union as well. These talks brought “a measure of understanding,” but
had highlighted the main roadblocks to useful regional negotiations.
In his concluding statements Rogers reiterated the need for a balanced
U.S. policy, for good diplomatic relations with all nations in the region,
and for U.S. commitment to achieve a just and lasting peace. (Depart-
ment of State Bulletin, January 5, 1970, pages 7–11)
Commenting on his draft of the speech, Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs Joseph J. Sisco wrote that he
had constructed the section of the speech on Soviet involvement “with
great care”:
“My concern is that there is a general feeling in the Arab world
that our preoccupation with Vietnam and the atmosphere which exists
in this country preclude a positive United States role in the area. There
is, of course, a good deal of truth to this, and our efforts in trying to
achieve a settlement are aimed at preventing a situation from devel-
oping which could confront us with the most critical decision of inter-
vening or not intervening militarily. I recognize also that words are
two-edged: by saying too much we can stimulate undue expectations
about American power in the area, and by saying too little we can con-
tribute to the tendency to write us off.”
In his comments, Sisco wrote that he had tried to convey the point
in his draft that “our preoccupation elsewhere does not mean that we
are going to let this area go by default.” He concluded:
48
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
“I am personally convinced that, if the rubric ‘no more Vietnams’
leads the world to believe the United States will close its eyes wher-
ever aggression occurs, then we are in serious trouble all over the
world, and in particular, in the Middle East. I believe the Middle East
will be over the next five years the principal testing point between our-
selves and the Soviet Union. The Soviet probes and brinkmanship will
go as far as they think they can, short of direct confrontation with us,
which I believe they wish to avoid as much as we do. I realize that the
strategy being pursued by the Soviets is primarily political, not mili-
tary, but I am convinced that our strategy in order to be effective po-
litically must have sufficient teeth militarily to make it credible. It must
also have political credibility, however, and this will inevitably require
some degree of confrontation between ourselves and the Israelis.”
(Memorandum from Sisco to Rogers and Johnson, November 19; Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL 1 NEAR E–US)
16.
Airgram From the Department of State to the Embassy in the
Soviet Union1
CA–6701
Washington, December 17, 1969, 7:05 p.m.
SUBJECT
Soviet Policy Toward Middle East
No Fundamental Shift As Yet
The apparent recent upsurge of Soviet maneuvering relating to the
Middle East reflected in reporting from Embassy Moscow and other
posts raises a question as to whether Soviet policy in the area is evolv-
ing toward greater militancy. In the interest of promoting the current
dialogue with posts on this subject, the Department offers the follow-
ing thoughts.2 We are inclined toward the assessment that Soviet pol-
icy has undergone no recent basic shift, vital Soviet interests continue
Middle East Region
49
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1967–69, POL NEAR E–USSR. 
Secret; Limdis. Drafted by G. Norman Anderson (EUR/SOV); cleared in EUR, EUR/SOV,
NEA/IAI, NEA/ARN, NEA/ARP, NEA/UAR, INR/RNA, INR/RSE, and by Sisco; and
approved by Adolph Dubs (EUR/SOV). It was repeated to Algiers, Amman, Beirut,
Kuwait, Paris, Cairo, Khartoum, London, Jidda, Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, Tripoli, USUN, and
the Mission to NATO. 
2 See also INR Memorandum RSE–94 of November 17, 1969—“USSR–Middle East:
Dilemma of Involvement—USSR Maneuvers an Uncertain Course.” [Footnote is in the
original. This memorandum was not found.]
to dictate a large measure of caution for Moscow and, despite recent
intensified propaganda over Middle East developments, the Soviets
still prefer to avoid peaks of tension in the area. In a broader context,
the Kremlin dislikes unpredictability in the Middle East, as in Eastern
Europe, at a time when Communist China promises to remain a ma-
jor headache for the Soviet Union for the foreseeable future.
Immediate Soviet Considerations
While Soviet Middle East policy is motivated by a wide range of
factors, two immediate Soviet considerations emerge as overriding: (a)
perpetuation of friendly radical Arab regimes, above all the Nasser
regime in the UAR, and (b) avoidance of a confrontation with the
United States. These considerations require Soviet caution and in par-
ticular arouse an aversion to the outbreak of another round of Arab-
Israeli hostilities, which would entail a mortal threat to client Arab
regimes and increase the chances of a U.S.–Soviet confrontation.
The Fedayeen Dilemma
In line with these considerations, the Soviets have thus far care-
fully limited their support for the fedayeen, who pose a serious
dilemma for the Kremlin. Growing fedayeen popular appeal and in-
fluence on the Arab governments cannot be ignored by Moscow. On
the other hand, the fedayeen are potential competitors for power with
Nasser and the radical Arab regimes, in whom the USSR has invested
heavily. They are beyond any significant degree of Soviet control and
cannot be trusted by Moscow to take into account Soviet interest in
avoiding a confrontation with the U.S. They also oppose such other So-
viet policies as public endorsement of the November 22 Security Coun-
cil resolution3 and recognition of the legitimacy of the state of Israel.
As in the past, Soviet support is therefore likely to continue to be largely
in the form of inexpensive, although perhaps intensified, propaganda
favoring the “national liberation struggle” to regain Israeli-occupied
Arab territories. Token material assistance may be channelled through
front organizations, but Moscow will, for the most part, probably con-
tinue to prefer indirect arms deliveries via friendly Arab regimes. A
policy shift toward major direct arms deliveries to the fedayeen would
tend to antagonize and encounter opposition from client Arab regimes
and raise Arab-Israeli tension, without, however, necessarily giving
Moscow much additional leverage over fedayeen policies. (See State
192205 for a fuller discussion of Soviet support for the fedayeen.)4
50
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
3 A reference to UN Resolution 242. See footnote 6, Document 3.
4 Telegram 192205 to USUN, November 14, reported that Soviet policy toward the
fedayeen remained the same albeit with tactical variations. (National Archives, RG 59,
Central Files 1967–69, POL 13–10 ARAB)
Risks in the Arms Supply Game
Furthermore, once having rapidly replaced Arab arms losses suf-
fered in the June 1967 war, an action followed by the U.S. decision to
supply Phantom aircraft to Israel,5 the Soviets have refrained from
adding to Arab military capabilities to an extent which might be con-
strued as upsetting the Arab-Israeli military balance, with the result
that the Arabs will hesitate for some time to come to court a full-scale
war against Israel. Limited Arab absorptive capacity is no doubt a fac-
tor in the Soviets’ thinking. They are also certainly aware that a fur-
ther escalation of the Middle East arms race would be costly and dan-
gerous, yet without assured new benefits for the USSR.
The Kremlin would also have little to gain from becoming more
actively involved in Arab war efforts, such as through providing com-
bat pilots to the UAR, except perhaps for such a restricted purpose as
defending the Aswan Dam if the latter should be directly threatened
by Israel. Not only would U.S. reaction to a more active Soviet role be
a deterrent to the Kremlin, but Soviet flexibility in general would be
seriously jeopardized, and the Soviets would in addition bear a greater
onus for any further Arab failures against Israel.
The West, the Mediterranean Squadron, and the “Progressives”
Among longer-term Soviet aims is, of course, the elimination of
Western influence in the area and the increase of Soviet influence.
Moscow has unquestionably benefited from being alert to every target
of opportunity, for example by becoming the major arms supplier to
the radical Arab states when the U.S. was unwilling to enter such com-
petition. The USSR has, however, exploited rather than created in-
digenous trends. It has been acquiring in fact a position of influence to
which it could realistically aspire not only because of its willingness to
embrace the Arab cause but also because of its growing power and its
geographic position. The USSR may still hope to gain even more in-
fluence, but it already has a substantial vested interest which can be a
factor for conservatism in Soviet policy.
The build-up of the Soviet Mediterranean squadron is tangible ev-
idence of another related long-term Soviet goal: strengthening of the
Soviet strategic and military position vis-à-vis the U.S. and its NATO
allies. This squadron has both a political impact on the Arabs and a de-
terrent value against NATO. Nonetheless, it will probably remain in-
ferior militarily to the Sixth Fleet for the predictable future and this in-
feriority imposes due limitations on its use by the Kremlin.
Middle East Region
51
5 The first Phantoms arrived in Israel September 6. Documentation is scheduled
for publication in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1969–
1972.
The “spread of socialism” is still another long-term goal. Moscow
continues to emphasize pragmatism over ideology, however, subordi-
nating the fate of the Arab Communist parties to the requirements of
government-to-government relations. The Soviets encourage “pro-
gressive” political movements such as Nasser’s Arab Socialist Union
and the Syrian Baath, as well as the “socialist path” in economic de-
velopment, so that future Soviet-Arab relations will become more in-
stitutionalized and less dependent on individual Arab leaders. Con-
crete results here have thus far clearly been limited from the Soviet
point of view, however. The USSR hardly expects, nor would it neces-
sarily even welcome, the emergence of an Arab communist regime at
this stage, a development which could bring serious entanglements and
burdens for Moscow. Recent increased Soviet urging of the Arabs to
work on developing their internal political and economic structure is
undoubtedly intended to encourage stability in the UAR and other rad-
ical Arab states, as well as being in effect an effort to deflect them from
excessive zeal against Israel.
Peking Competition
Another concern for the Kremlin is Chinese Communist activity in
the Middle East. The Chinese have, of course, extended minor aid to
Arab extremist groups. They also have had well-advertised government-
to-government contacts with Syria, among others. These contacts could
hardly fail to irritate the Soviets and probably have not induced them to
be more forthcoming vis-à-vis the Syrians. While the Chinese can do lit-
tle in the region at the moment, Moscow may tend to exaggerate both
current and potential Chinese capabilities. Along with other observers,
Moscow probably believes Communist China stands to gain from con-
tinuing chaos in the area, and this could be a factor inclining the Sovi-
ets toward wanting stability there.
“Controlled Tension” or Settlement?
The theory is sometimes advanced that the Soviets prefer “con-
trolled tension” to a genuine peace settlement. The Soviets undoubt-
edly see their choices as lying between the extremes of continuing mil-
itary engagement and genuine peace. The experience of 1967 no doubt
convinced Soviet leaders, however, that tension in the Arab world is
not always subject to adequate control and that, while still falling short
of genuine peace, a more effective accommodation than in 1949 and
1957 is needed.
A political settlement is the only alternative to war whereby the
Soviets can help the Arabs get back Israeli-occupied territories, and
lack of a settlement implies an eventual new round of hostilities.
Moscow, in the major power talks, has stressed that any settlement
should be comprehensive. It is unlikely that the Soviets harbor secret
52
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
hopes for a partial settlement limited mainly to Israeli withdrawal be-
cause they realize that Israeli agreement to such an arrangement is not
in the cards. They also know that if either the Arabs or the Israelis, af-
ter agreeing to a comprehensive settlement, sought only partial or se-
lective implementation, a new war would probably ensue.
If a settlement is in fact viewed favorably by the Soviets, why then
have they thus far considered it a matter of no urgency to exert the
pressure on the UAR and others obviously needed for progress toward
a settlement? The answer may lie in part in differing Soviet and U.S.
perceptions of what is achievable. The Soviets may feel that UAR ac-
ceptance of the November resolution itself represents a major conces-
sion, implying as it does UAR willingness to accept for the first time
the partition of Palestine and the sovereign existence of Israel in that
part of Palestine it has held since 1949. The Soviet settlement plan given
the U.S. on June 17, 1969, supplemented by Soviet agreement to
Rhodes-type negotiations,6 falls short in many basic respects of U.S.
desiderata for a viable settlement. It does, however, represent a distinct
advance over the UAR position toward Israel previous to June 5, 1967,
and the Soviets have said it is acceptable to the UAR, whereas we have
given no comparable assurance that Israel will accept the position set
forth in our July 15, 1969, document as modified by our reformulations
of Sept.–Oct., 1969.7
A Soviet assessment that large-scale Arab-Israeli hostilities are un-
likely in the near future could also underlie the Soviet attitude. The So-
viets can be expected to continue to press for concessions from Israel
and the US and will not wish to expend leverage over the Arabs 
prematurely. Furthermore, the large Soviet investment in the UAR, cou-
pled with the experience of having lost similar investments in In-
donesia and Ghana,8 presents the USSR with the dilemma of not 
wanting to antagonize Nasser while at the same time wanting to save
him. Moscow also seems to defer to Nasser’s view of what is required
of him politically to shore up his weakened position at home and in
the Arab world, tolerating but not encouraging periodic heating up of
the situation along the Suez Canal, “fire-and-blood” speeches, etc.
Whether or not the Kremlin evaluates a settlement as a real pos-
sibility, we would expect the USSR to continue to be interested in 
Middle East Region
53
6 The Rhodes formula refers to the negotiating mechanism used at the January–
March 1949 armistice talks held in Rhodes, Greece. This formula required separate meet-
ings led by UN mediator Ralph Bunche with each delegation discussing substantive
items until they reached the stage where informal meetings could be held.
7 Documentation on these U.S. proposals is scheduled for publication in Foreign Re-
lations, 1969–1976,volume XXIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1969–1972.
8 Reference is to the successful 1966 coups against President Sukarno of Indonesia
and President Kwame Nkrumah of Ghana.
pursuing major-power talks. If the talks permit Moscow to curry favor
with the Arabs and increase pressures on the US and Israel, they also
serve the important purpose for the Kremlin of helping to dampen ten-
sions, although their effectiveness in this regard will diminish in the
absence of demonstrable progress. Even without such progress, how-
ever, the Soviets will think twice about breaking them off for fear of
creating a crisis atmosphere in the area.
Soviet Policy Toward the Moderate Arabs
An example of Soviet priorities in practice can probably be seen
in Soviet policy toward the moderate Arab regimes. The USSR appears
for the present to favor preservation of the Lebanese and Jordanian
governments. The Soviets presumably recognize that radicalization of
these regimes would be at the cost in Lebanon of internal Christian-
Muslim chaos, with possible intervention by Israel and Syria, and an
ultimate risk of US-Soviet confrontation. In Jordan, the cost could be a
fedayeen takeover, with an attendant undesirable higher-risk policy
toward Israel and, again, a likelihood of firm Israeli reaction.
While Soviet propaganda in the recent Lebanese crisis9 was un-
friendly to the U.S. and designed to enhance Soviet prestige as a friend
of the Arabs at the expense of the U.S., it at the same time welcomed
and perhaps even encouraged a negotiated settlement between the
Lebanese government and the fedayeen through UAR mediation. As
in other cases, the Kremlin did not originate propaganda themes but
echoed the radical Arabs, especially Cairo, although in less strident
tones than those used by UAR spokesmen. Also, Soviet diplomacy ap-
parently tried to curb the Syrians and sought to identify the USSR with
the relatively moderate, pro-UAR Lebanese Sunni leader Rashid
Karami. Moscow has, of course, gradually built up a substantial pres-
ence in Lebanon, which provides it with a uniquely free atmosphere
among Arab countries, in the form of a large embassy and extensive
commercial and banking representation. It has also shown a persistent
desire since the 1967 war to increase cooperation with the Jordanian
government in economic, cultural and military fields.
Polarization Along US-Soviet Lines?
Moscow probably recognizes that a complete US-Israel versus 
Soviet-Arab polarization could entail a dangerous rise in tension in the
area, inflate Arab expectations of the USSR, and increase the burden
on the USSR of supporting the Arabs materially. The Soviets might not
necessarily be hostile, for example, to some increase in US or other
54
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
9 A reference to ongoing domestic disturbances in Lebanon and the USSR’s Octo-
ber response warning against any outside intervention.
Western ties with the radical Arab states, should such a possibility
evolve. Any resulting US economic aid to these states could relieve
some of the burden on the USSR (as do current contributions to the
UAR from Libya, Kuwait, and Saudi Arabia), while leaving the arms
monopoly in Soviet hands. US-Arab ties would therefore not infringe
significantly on Soviet influence, particularly as they would not involve
any greater US willingness to support the Arab radicals politically.
In sum, we believe there has been considerable consistency in So-
viet policy toward the Middle East over the years. However, we do not
discount the growing possibility that this policy might take new di-
rections under altered circumstances which could arise unexpectedly.
The Department will, of course, continue to welcome contributions on
this subject.
Rogers
17.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1
Washington, December 23, 1969.
SUBJECT
Actions to Bolster Moderates Before Arab Summit
You asked at the last NSC meeting on the Mid-East2 about actions
that could be taken before the Arab summit (December 20) to bolster
the moderate leaders.
A number of steps have been taken, some of which are familiar to
you:3
—The first shipment of internal defense equipment (3,000 M–14
rifles and other material totaling $1.5 million) has been airlifted to Jor-
dan. King Hussein has also been informed of our readiness to consider
Middle East Region
55
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 644,
Country Files, Middle East, General, Vol. II. Secret. Sent for information. A stamped no-
tation on the memorandum indicates that the President saw it. 
2 The NSC meeting occurred December 10. Minutes of the meeting are scheduled
for publication in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute,
1969–1972.
3 A more detailed account of U.S. actions is included in a December 16 memoran-
dum from Eliot to Kissinger. (National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files,
Box 644, Country Files, Middle East, General, Vol. II)
his anti-aircraft and medium artillery needs. Assistant Secretary Sisco
briefed his personal representative on our diplomatic position.
—For Lebanon, we have completed the sale of equipment neces-
sary to improve the army’s capability to control the fedayeen, and have
offered to help re-equip the Army with M–14 rifles. We are negotiat-
ing credit assistance via the Commodity Credit Corporation.
—State and our ambassadors have briefed each government on our
position on an Arab-Israeli settlement in an effort to blunt distortions.
The Secretary’s speech was designed to clear the record further.4
—For better or worse, the Four Powers are talking in New York.
The closer time has come to the summit, the more our reporting
seems to indicate that the moderate participants will try to avoid clos-
ing any doors. But the dynamics of an Arab meeting can change prior
intentions unpredictably.
4 See Document 15.
18.
Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State for Near
Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Sisco) to Secretary of State
Rogers1
Washington, January 6, 1970.
SUBJECT
Assessment of Rabat Arab Conference—Information Memorandum
The Rabat Arab Summit conference ended December 23 with the
Arab leaders in clear disarray. Participants confirm that no decisions
were taken on the central issue of whether the Arabs should renounce
the continued search for a political settlement. In fact, this potentially
explosive issue was apparently not even discussed by the conferees.
UAR General Fawzi’s estimate that it would require at least three years
and enormous cost for the Arab armies to reach the point where the
56
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, POL 7 ARAB. Secret;
Exdis. Sent for information. Drafted by Wrampelmeier and cleared in NEA, NEA/ARP,
NEA/IAI, NEA/ARN, NEA/UAR, AF/N, and EUR/SOV. It was transmitted to
Kissinger with a January 7 covering memorandum from Eliot.
Israelis are today apparently had a sobering effect on the Arab leaders.
As a result, their assessment of the military situation was realistic and
the advocates of an early military solution were largely by-passed. The
door to a peaceful settlement was therefore tacitly left open. In partic-
ular, the UAR emerged with greater freedom of action—if Nasser
chooses to exercise it.
Reactions to the outcome of the Summit can be summarized as 
follows:
1. Eastern Arab Moderates (Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Lebanon)—The
moderates were relieved a decision for war was not taken. More im-
portantly, perhaps, the oil-rich states were also able to avoid making
substantial new financial commitments to the front-line Arabs. Saudi
sources assert that Faisal made no new commitments to the UAR, Jor-
dan, or the fedayeen. The Kuwaitis have announced a one-time pay-
ment of $28 million to the UAR in addition to their regular Khartoum
subsidy payment and have promised an unspecified contribution to
the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
2. Jordan—The Jordanians are pleased that the more bellicose
Arabs were neutralized at Rabat. They feel that Jordan and the UAR
now have greater freedom of action to search for a peace settlement
and Ambassador Sharaf expressed to me the view that the efforts of
the Summit will therefore be beneficial. Jordanian leaders have ex-
pressed some disappointment that the conference ended without pos-
itive decisions taken and without firm pledges of additional financial
or military aid to Jordan. Some further assistance may yet be forth-
coming, however, from the Saudis. Jordan will be consulting shortly
with the UAR and other so-called “confrontation” states to assess fu-
ture courses of action.
3. The Militants (Syria, Iraq, Southern Yemen)—These states found
no support for their calls for renunciation of the search for political set-
tlement, for adoption of an Arab plan for “total liberation” of Pales-
tine, and for creation of a fund from which the “confrontation” states
could meet their arms purchase needs. These three, together with Libya
and Sudan, publicly blame Arab conservative leaders for the indeci-
sive outcome of the conference.
4. The Maghreb—The Moroccans and Tunisians share with the
Eastern moderates a sense of relief that the confrontation with the mil-
itants at Rabat did not end with a victory for the latter. Both Tunisia
and Morocco avoided definite commitments to the Arab front-line
countries, although Morocco has agreed to levy a special tax for the
benefit of the PLO. A significant development at the conference was
the alignment of Algeria with its moderate neighbors, as well as Saudi
Arabia. President Boumediene is clearly concerned about UAR in-
fluence on the new Libyan revolutionary regime, and some tension 
Middle East Region
57
between him and Libya’s Qadhaafi was reported. Libya promised ad-
ditional aid ($48 million) to the UAR plus some unspecified assistance
to the PLO.
5. Fedayeen—There is general agreement that the principal benefi-
ciary of the conference was the PLO. PLO/Fatah leader Arafat emerged
from the meeting with enhanced prestige. Details of reported financial
pledges of $36 million plus some arms, however, remain to be negoti-
ated on a country-by-country basis. The belief that any settlement by
the Arab states must also have Palestinian concurrence seems to have
gained ground, particularly among the North Africans and Kuwait.
The Lebanese and Jordanians anticipate increased difficulties with the
fedayeen whom they fear will now be encouraged to assert even greater
independence in those two countries.
6. UAR—Nasser clearly lost his bid to rally the Arabs behind his
leadership. He did, however, emerge from the conference with his ba-
sic options still open to continue the search for a political settlement,
as well as the promise of a modest increase in cash support from the
Libyans and Kuwaitis. There are those, in fact, who suspect that Nasser
wanted General Fawzi’s military plan to be rejected in order that he
might be left free to seek additional military and economic aid while
remaining open to possibilities for a political settlement. In any event,
if Nasser is preparing the ground for an Egyptian-first policy it may
be a while before clear evidences of it appear. For the present, he has
carefully avoided labelling the conference a failure or blaming the con-
servatives directly, while at the same time encouraging formation of
close Cairo–Tripoli–Khartoum ties. His intentions to continue the
search for a political settlement may become clearer following the pro-
posed meeting in Cairo later this month of the “confrontation” states
(UAR, Syria, Iraq, Jordan, plus probably Libya and Sudan). The mili-
tant radicals will, however, be in the majority at that meeting and
Nasser may not want, or feel that for tactical reasons he cannot appear
actively to seek, a political solution.
7. The Soviets—The Soviets appear relieved that the conference
ended without a decision for war. However, the evident disunity in the
Arab ranks and the resulting diminution of Nasser’s prestige and his
claim to Arab leadership must have been disappointing to Moscow.
The Soviets may wish to defer further progress in either the Two-Power
or Four-Power contexts until Nasser makes up his mind where he
wishes to go from here.
8. Israel—Despite some initial gloating in the Israeli press at the
evidence of Nasser’s inability to unite the Arabs behind him, the out-
come of the Summit Conference is not necessarily seen in Tel Aviv as
beneficial to Israel. The fedayeen have obviously emerged with new
prestige and at least some new Arab support. In particular, however,
58
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
the Israelis are likely to view with dismay the probability that the USG
will be encouraged by the apparently favorable effect its recent Mid-
dle East initiatives have had on the Arab moderates to continue press-
ing its proposals despite strong, adverse Israeli reaction.
Implications for the US—The US came out as well as possible at the
Summit. Proposals by the radicals to take further measures against US
interests in the Arab world did not materialize. Not only was Nasser’s
bid to rally the moderate as well as the radical Arabs behind his leader-
ship a failure, but the moderates were able to resist, for the most part, de-
mands for substantial further financial contributions to the Arab military
effort. Above all, our Arab moderate friends appear generally pleased by
your December 9 speech and by our October 28 and December 18 pro-
posals.2 Although these were not formally discussed at the Summit, they
apparently strengthened the hands of the moderates and thus helped to
keep the door to a political settlement open. While most of the Arabs con-
tinue to have strong reservations about the details of our proposals on
both the UAR and the Jordanian aspects of a settlement, the assessment
of most of our Arab posts—as well as the Jordanians—is that the US
should continue to stand on these proposals as a balanced basis for a
peace settlement which we should continue to encourage.
2 For Rogers’s December 9 speech, see Document 15. Documentation on the Octo-
ber 28 and December 18 U.S. proposals is scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations,
1969–1976, volume XXIII, Arab-Israeli Dispute, 1969–1972.
19.
National Security Study Memorandum 901
Washington, February 26, 1970.
TO
The Secretary of State
The Secretary of Defense
The Director of Central Intelligence
SUBJECT
US Interests in and Policy Toward the Mediterranean Area
Middle East Region
59
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–170, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 90. Secret;
Nodis. A copy was sent to the Chairman of the JCS. The date is handwritten at the top
of the first page.
The President wishes to expand NSC consideration of Mediter-
ranean problems beyond those issues cited in NSSM 87 (North Africa)
and in NSSM 88 (Northern Mediterranean).2
Accordingly, he directs that the NSSMs 87 and 88 studies be placed
in the context of political developments in the Mediterranean basin as
a whole, including the Eastern Mediterranean. Particular emphasis
should be given to how US interests in this area will be affected over
the next several years.
The study should include considerations of Soviet objectives, poli-
cies and prospects and how they affect our interests, and French ob-
jectives, policies and prospects and how they affect our interests.
The President wishes to discuss the feasibility of developing pol-
icy options with respect to our interests in the area as a whole or in ap-
propriate segments of it. He wishes to examine ways of improving the
interrelationship of our programs and policies in individual countries
in the Mediterranean area. Policy options should take account of po-
litical, economic and military considerations.
The President has directed that this study be prepared by an ad
hoc group chaired by a representative of the Secretary of State and in-
cluding representatives of the addressees of this memorandum and the
NSC staff. Work already completed or underway in response to NSSM
88 may be incorporated in the study requested by the present NSSM.
The completed study should be submitted to the NSC Review
Group by Monday, March 16, 1970.
Henry A. Kissinger
60
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
2 NSSM 87, January 22, asked for a review of trends and U.S. options in North
Africa. It is published in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume E–5, Part 2, Documents on
North Africa, 1969–1972, Document 5. NSSM 88, February 12, asking for a study on U.S.
policy toward Italy and the Northern Mediterranean, is scheduled for publication ibid.,
volume XLI, Western Europe; NATO, 1969–1972.
20.
National Intelligence Estimate1
NIE 11–6–70
Washington, March 5, 1970.
SOVIET POLICIES IN THE MIDDLE EAST 
AND MEDITERRANEAN AREA
[Omitted here are a cover sheet, table of contents, and map.]
Summary
ummary
A. Over the last 15 years, the USSR has established itself as a ma-
jor power factor in the Mediterranean world. By exploiting postcolo-
nial resentments and especially the Arab-Israeli conflict, the Soviets
have sought to deny the area to Western interests and influence. Their
calculation has been that the displacement of Western with Soviet in-
fluence would constitute a broad strategic reversal for the West and a
considerable gain for themselves. Nevertheless, they have not seen the
area as one which engaged their most vital national interests; these re-
main focused on their relations with the US in general, on Eastern and
Central Europe, and on their conflict with Communist China.
B. The Arab-Israeli conflict provides the Soviets with their great-
est means of leverage in the Middle East, but it also faces them with
the most severe complications. They have extended enough military
aid to the radical Arabs to become thoroughly involved in the latters’
cause, but their efforts have not created an effective Arab defense. Is-
raeli military attacks, particularly against Egypt, intensify this Soviet
dilemma. They wish to provide Egypt with effective defense, but seek
also to minimize the risks of direct involvement; yet if they sought to
defuse the situation by pressing the Arabs to make concessions to Is-
rael, they would jeopardize their influence in the Arab world. Barring
a de-escalation of the Arab-Israeli conflict, the Soviets will probably
step up their aid to the Egyptians, and they may provide new weapons
systems and additional personnel to improve Egyptian air defenses.
C. Despite the Soviet support for the Arab cause in the Arab-
Israeli conflict, Moscow’s relations with the radical Arab states are sub-
ject to occasionally serious strains; none of these countries is entirely
Middle East Region
61
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–044, Senior Review Group Meetings, Review Group NSSM
90 5/21/70. Secret. The Central Intelligence Agency and the intelligence organizations
of the Departments of State, Defense, and NSA participated in the preparation of this
estimate. The Director of the CIA submitted this estimate with the concurrence of all
members of the USIB with the exception of the representatives of the AEC and FBI who
abstained on the grounds that it was outside their jurisdiction. This NIE is partially based
on the undated paper, “DIA Assessment of the Soviet Threat in the Mediterranean.”
(Ibid., Box H–170, National Security Study Memoranda, NSSM 90)
responsive to Soviet pressures, and each is jealous and suspicious of
the others. The still more uncontrollable fedayeen movement is a prob-
lem for Moscow, chiefly because any direct Soviet support for it in-
volves embarrassment in Moscow’s relations with established govern-
ments; nevertheless, we think the Soviets will continue to develop
relations with the fedayeen discreetly.
D. The Soviets have aspirations to establish themselves in the west-
ern Mediterranean as well, but Tunisia and Morocco remain generally
wary of the USSR and retain strong ties with the West. Algeria has ac-
cepted Soviet assistance, but more recently it has been drawing nearer to
its immediate neighbors and to France. Although the new regime in Libya
has close ties with Egypt, it shows no signs of welcoming a Soviet pres-
ence, and Nasser is probably not anxious to encourage Soviet influence
there. Among European states with interests in the area, Moscow must
be concerned to avoid provoking alarm by its activities in the Mediter-
ranean lest this compromise its policies in Western Europe; France, in par-
ticular, has ambitions to enlarge its role in the Mediterranean.
E. Since the June War in 1967, the Soviet military presence has
grown in the area: roughly 5,000 Soviet military advisers are now sta-
tioned in several area countries; the Soviet naval squadron in the
Mediterranean has been strengthened, and is supported by air and port
facilities in Egypt. How the USSR might use its military strength in the
Mediterranean area in times of crisis and war is examined in this pa-
per in four major contingencies: (1) Arab-Israeli hostilities short of all-
out war (paragraphs 41–48); (2) full-scale Arab-Israeli war (paragraphs
49–51); (3) other disputes in the area in which Soviet interests were in-
volved (paragraphs 52–53); and (4) East-West hostilities involving both
the US and the USSR (paragraphs 54–55).
F. The Soviet presence in the Mediterranean region is likely to
prove durable. Radical nationalist forces will continue to work against
Western interests and will continue to receive Soviet support. Thus the
rivalry between the US and USSR in the area is likely to persist at least
so long as it continues in the world at large.
Discussion
I. The Strategic Setting: Broad Soviet Considerations and Objectives
1. Soviet power first moved into the Mediterranean in the mid-
1950s. Seizing on the opportunities for influence offered by Arab-
Israeli antagonisms and by increasingly militant and anti-Western
forms of Arab nationalism, and leap-frogging over the Middle Eastern
members of the newly formed Baghdad Pact (Turkey, Iran, and Iraq),
the USSR eased its way into both Cairo and Damascus with offers of
arms, economic aid, and political support. During the 1960s, through
the use of these and other conventional instruments of influence and
62
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
power, the USSR became the primary backer of the radical Arab states.
Today the Soviet Union is a major factor in the Middle East, with a
number of client states in varying degrees of dependency and with 
elements of its own armed forces now present in the area. The Soviet
leadership almost certainly sees its gains here as the most extensive
and successful of all its efforts to expand Soviet influence in areas of
the world once dominated by the West.
2. Clearly, the Soviets have in this period looked upon the Mid-
dle East as an area of strategic importance. A part of this attitude no
doubt was inherited from their predecessors; Czarist planners tradi-
tionally viewed this part of the world as a special Russian sphere of
interest and periodically sought to expand Russian power southwards.
In modern times, especially since the death of Stalin, this geopolitical
emphasis has been accompanied by an ideologically inspired hope that
the anticolonialist attitudes of the Third World could be made to work
for social change and for the emergence of local power elites sympa-
thetic to communism. And this has been joined with the view that the
Middle East has become one of the main arenas of the Soviet struggle
with the West and the US. The Soviets may see the area as more com-
plicated and the opportunities less immediate than they did in 1955
when they first undertook a military supply program for Egypt. But
they evidently still hope to bring the states of the region into an anti-
Western alignment and ultimately to establish their own hegemony
there. Finally, the area is seen in Moscow as a strategic military zone:
in hostile hands, it could pose a threat to the USSR and block Soviet
access to the Mediterranean; in friendly hands, it protects the USSR’s
southwestern border and permits Moscow to move its influence into
the Mediterranean world and beyond. The Middle East and much of
the non-European Mediterranean world are thus, in the Soviet world
view, proximate, important, and vulnerable.
3. This is not to say that the Soviets attach the same weight to their
problems and objectives in the Middle East and Mediterranean basin
as they do to their prime concerns elsewhere. Their stake there is less
critical to their interests than their relations with the US in general,
their concerns in Eastern and Central Europe, and their conflict with
Communist China. It is in these areas and with these countries that the
most vital of Soviet national interests are directly engaged. There are
in addition certain self-imposed limitations on Soviet policies in the
Mediterranean area and the Middle East. The preservation of the
USSR’s position in the Middle East would not be worth the serious risk
of nuclear war with the US, whereas its presence in, say, East Germany,
might be. But at least until recently Moscow has been able to base its
approach in the Mediterranean area on calculations of opportunity and
risk within the area concerned without serious conflicts with its objec-
tives elsewhere.
Middle East Region
63
4. Inevitably, as the degree of its involvement in the area has
grown and the level of its commitment risen, the USSR has found it-
self faced with mounting costs and risks. It has exhibited some anxi-
ety to control these risks and to curb the excessive enthusiasms of
some of its clients. But it has also chosen to live with danger, and its
position is now potentially vulnerable to the pressures and perils of
events over which it may have little or no control—the actions of the
Arab states, of Israel, and even of the US. Broadly speaking, Moscow
has behaved as if it wishes the Middle East to remain an area of at
least some tension. It apparently believes that the risks attending this
are manageable, and that continued polarization in the area will make
it increasingly difficult for the conservative Arab states to maintain
their ties with the US, thus decreasing US influence throughout the
area. But the Soviets clearly recognize that in the event of another ex-
plosion in the Middle East they would be faced with some very hard
choices.
[Omitted here are Sections II–V, on Instruments of Soviet Power
in the Area, Policies in the Middle East, Policies in the Western Mediter-
ranean, and Soviet Capabilities and Intentions in Certain Contingen-
cies, respectively.]
VI. Long Term Prospects
56. Some aspects of the Soviet position in the Mediterranean area
are of course susceptible to direct Soviet control. The strength of the
USSR’s naval squadron, the size of its military and economic assistance
programs, and the degree of its political support for radical Arab ob-
jectives all are dependent on decisions made in Moscow. But many of
the basic circumstances which shape Soviet policy in the area are de-
termined in the main by decisions made elsewhere—in Tel Aviv, in
Cairo, in Washington. In the totality, then, the USSR is only one of sev-
eral principal actors in the area and it is always possible that—as dur-
ing the June War of 1967—it will find itself playing a part not entirely
of its own devising.
57. It is true nonetheless that Moscow’s assumption of a leading
role in the area is a significant and probably durable accomplishment.
It does not now appear that the USSR will again be content to play a
minor role in the Middle East and the Mediterranean. Even in the event
of another Arab-Israeli war and another defeat for major Soviet clients,
the Soviets would almost certainly retain some sort of position in the
area—though it would probably for a time be reduced—and would
continue to have a voice in the shaping of postwar configurations. With
or without such a war, the political climate of the region is likely to re-
main generally turbulent. Radical nationalist forces will continue to
work against Western interests in the area and in their endeavors will
no doubt continue to find Soviet support.
64
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
58. It seems entirely plausible that Soviet estimates of the USSR’s
prospects in the Mediterranean basin do not depart substantially from
the general picture sketched above. In any case the Soviets must be op-
timistic about their ability to remain among the major movers of the
area. Still, over a decade of close involvement with their mercurial
clients has probably persuaded them to be fairly cautious in their as-
sessments. Certainly they can have few illusions about the military ca-
pabilities of the Arab states. And just as certainly they cannot believe
that the problems of the more immediate future will always resolve
themselves to the benefit of Soviet interests. By the same token, how-
ever, occasional setbacks and miscalculations will probably not seri-
ously discourage them or deflect them from their course. In any case,
the rivalry between the US and the USSR in the Mediterranean is likely
to persist at least so long as the contest between them continues in the
world at large.
21.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, May 14, 1970, 3–4:15 p.m.
SUBJECT
Meeting of CENTO Ministers with the President
PARTICIPANTS
The President
The Secretary of State, William Rogers
Assistant to the President, Henry A. Kissinger
Assistant Secretary of State, Joseph J. Sisco
NSC Staff Member, Harold H. Saunders
Multilateral Organization Advisor, William Helseth
Foreign Minister Michael Stewart (UK)
Ambassador (to Washington) John Freeman (UK)
Foreign Minister Ihsan Sabri Caglayangil (Turkey)
Ambassador (to Washington) Melhi Esenbel (Turkey)
Foreign Minister Ardeshir Zahedi (Iran)
Middle East Region
65
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, CENTO 3 US (WA). Se-
cret. The meeting occurred in the White House Cabinet Room. Background information
on the meeting, biographical information, lists of attendees, and Talking Points are in a
May 13 memorandum from Rogers to Nixon (ibid.), and in a May 14 memorandum from
Kissinger to Nixon. (Ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 212, Agency Files,
CENTO)
Ambassador (to Washington) Aslan Afshar (Iran)
Ambassador (to Washington) Agha Hilaly (Pakistan)
Ambassador (to Turkey) Iftikar Ali (Pakistan)
Secretary-General, CENTO, Turgut Menemencioglu
After a brief picture taking session, Secretary Rogers told the Pres-
ident that the group had dealt in its morning session with CENTO or-
ganizational issues. He was happy to report that there are no major prob-
lems. Bilateral discussions among members of the group would begin
after the meeting with the President, and the group would review the
general international situation in its formal session the following morn-
ing as well as continuing bilateral meetings later in the day.
The President spoke briefly on three issues—the Middle East, Viet-
nam and U.S.-Soviet relations.
On the Middle East, he noted that the Soviets are now there in a
deeper and more potentially dangerous role. They have their own in-
terests to pursue, and the U.S. is watching them with some concern.
The U.S. continues its dedication to trying to help the nations on the
ground find the way to peace. As he had said on previous occasions,
the U.S. is “neither pro-Arab nor pro-Israel but pro-peace.” Unfortu-
nately, he could not report his hope for an early breakthrough.
In Southeast Asia, the U.S. is attempting to find a stability for the
situation there. In some senses, the U.S. purpose there is the same as
it is in the area of the CENTO nations—stabilizing a dangerous situa-
tion so that all the nations of that region can find security and an op-
portunity to move ahead with their own development.
On U.S.-Soviet relations, the President began by commenting that
the U.S. is “very far” from the Soviet Union on Vietnam. The U.S. can
understand the reasons for the Soviet position since the USSR must, in
the context of the world communist movement, compete with the Com-
munist Chinese. We understand, though we do not welcome, the So-
viet position. In the Middle East, the Soviet Union has its own inter-
ests to pursue. There is a tendency among many people to see the entire
Middle East situation as a confrontation between the U.S. and the So-
viet Union. The President said he hoped that this was a belief that
would never become widely held. However, he could unhappily see
no change soon in the Soviet position there. He turned then to what
he said he regarded as perhaps the overriding issue between the U.S.
and the USSR—the strategic arms limitation talks in Vienna. He said
that while he could be described as pessimistic about the situations 
in Southeast Asia and the Middle East, he could be described as 
optimistic—for somewhat negative and pessimistic reasons—about the
negotiations in Vienna. Whereas on the first two issues the U.S. and
USSR have their very different interests to pursue, on the strategic arms
question both sides have their own very strong reasons for wanting an
66
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
agreement. Each has enough weapons to blow up each other and a
good bit of the world besides, and the weapons are a major financial
drain.
The President said, however, that he did want to assure his friends
as he had our NATO allies that the U.S. does not intend to take a po-
sition that would weaken it vis-à-vis the USSR. This is not just a ques-
tion of national prestige or the United States wanting to be the first
power in the world. He thought it crucial that the leading power who
wants nothing more than to defend its friends and its own interests
should not be in a weak position in relation to that leading world power
which for reasons of its own ideology has as its objective the expan-
sion of its own influence.
The President said that he was aware that a lot of critics feel that this
U.S. Administration has over-used the word “consultation.” But he takes
“consultation” very seriously. What he means by it is that there will be
no effort by the U.S. to achieve a “cynical condominium” whereby the
U.S. and the Soviet Union attempt to reach accords for their own sakes
without reference to the interests of their friends. The President, in com-
pleting his comments on the Vienna talks, noted as evidence of the So-
viet interest in an agreement the fact that Chairman Kosygin had in de-
nouncing U.S. action in Cambodia not broken off the Vienna talks. We
expected that the Soviet Union would criticize us for Cambodia just as
the U.S. had criticized the USSR for its action in Czechoslovakia.
The President concluded by saying that he would like to hear the
views of his visitors.
Secretary Rogers said in passing that there were of course differ-
ences between the situation in Czechoslovakia and in Cambodia. The
U.S. in Southeast Asia would welcome the attention of an international
body to go and see what is going on there, whereas the Soviet Union
had rejected that sort of effort in Czechoslovakia. The Secretary then
asked the Secretary General if he had a few comments to make.
Ambassador Menemencioglu noted that CENTO is very “loose”
in its status, not like NATO. The association is based on a series of sep-
arate agreements and some bilateral arrangements which the U.S. has
with each of its members. The strength of the organization has not been
in its legal framework but has rather been in the common interests
which the members share.
The Ambassador concluded his remarks by saying that he appre-
ciated the recognition by the President of the importance of the Mid-
dle East. The Soviet fleet has become just the latest evidence of a strong
Soviet play for influence in this area.
The President interjected to agree that the real contest is not over
Israel but for Soviet influence in the Mediterranean, in Africa and in
the seas beyond the Suez Canal.
Middle East Region
67
Foreign Minister Zahedi noted that the situation in the Middle East
had become worse over the past year. He particularly noted the dete-
rioration of the situation in Jordan where the extremist elements had
become more powerful. He felt that the members of CENTO could help
nations like Jordan, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia if they themselves were
strong. The Foreign Minister then noted the dangerous situation in the
Persian Gulf where the Soviets backed the Iraqis and were potentially
a source of trouble. He said that the CENTO members wanted to do
what they could themselves to preserve the stability of this area. He
noted the importance of the oil which transits this area not only for the
economic progress of the nations on the Gulf but also for the financial
position of the UK and the oil supply of Western Europe. In this con-
nection, he noted that the Iranian Government had just reached a sat-
isfactory agreement with the oil consortium.
There was a brief jocular exchange alluding to the fact that Iranian
bargainers are never satisfied, and then the Secretary of State asked the
Turkish Foreign Minister whether he had any general comments to make.
Foreign Minister Caglayangil said he agreed with the general point
of view expressed by Foreign Minister Zahedi. He felt that the central
question as far as the Arab-Israeli conflict is concerned is whether there
will simply be a solution to the war of 1967 or whether there will be a
solution to the Palestine problem. He felt that international organs—
the Four Power talks or the UN Security Council—were not likely to
find a solution. Meanwhile, the conflict is turning into a war of na-
tional liberation and therefore becoming much more difficult to solve.
He felt that the situation in a country like Jordan could not go on much
longer as it is, and that a drastic change in the balance of forces within
Jordan could not help but have an effect in Saudi Arabia and other
parts of the area. He felt that it was important at this time to come to
the assistance of such countries as Jordan.
In the Persian Gulf, he continued, perhaps the best forum for deal-
ing with those problems there is CENTO.
The President interjected to ask whether he was referring to a 
military agreement among the CENTO partners for this purpose, and
the Foreign Minister of Turkey replied that he would think in terms of 
consultation.
The President asked how such a consultative group would deal
with revolutionary forces and a revolutionary situation in the Gulf. For-
eign Minister Zahedi, picking up the tenor of his earlier remarks, said
that the advantage of having the nations on the ground strong enough
to deal with the situation was that they could move quickly and deal
with the situation before outside powers such as the Soviet Union be-
came involved and the problem was escalated to the Great Power level.
In response to a direct question from the President, Zahedi said Iran
68
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
could and would “gladly” act in this manner if it possessed the requi-
site military strength.
In respect to the President’s request for his comments, Ambassador
Hilaly said that he shared the concern of his colleagues about the Mid-
dle East. On the one hand, military power rests on one side, but on the
other hand 100 million Arabs will not forever stand aside for that power.
Israel’s present policy will not be in its best interest because Israel can
only survive by reaching an accommodation with its neighbors. For the
moment, however, he felt that the situation could only worsen.
Ambassador Hilaly continued that the nations of the area—each of
them in its own way—must be helped to be strong. Pakistan, which has
its own problem with the arms balance being upset in India’s favor in
the subcontinent, cannot do its share in the Alliance because it is weak
and badly in need of arms supply. For the sake of stability, Pakistan
should not feel weak. All Pakistan asks is that its Allies help it with mil-
itary aid so that Pakistan can be a loyal and strong ally in return.
The President interjected that the arms question has been a terri-
bly difficult one for us. We recall the days—“they were good days”—
when the U.S. had a close relationship with Pakistan in the 1950s, and
“we are trying to work our way back to a similarly close relationship.
We have been looking very closely at the arms situation.”
The President continued by saying that he wanted the group to
know that the U.S. had also been considering very carefully what it
can do to help Jordan. The question is whether or not Jordan can sur-
vive. Foreign Minister Zahedi said he thought it could.
The President said that he had asked about how to deal with the
problem of revolutionary forces in the Persian Gulf but he wondered
about revolutionary forces in each of the countries. For instance, he
asked Foreign Minister Caglayangil what he could say about revolu-
tionary forces in Turkey. “Are they ready to blow?”
Foreign Minister Caglayangil said that of course leftist forces in
Turkey have freedom of expression in the press and politically. They
therefore appear to be stronger than they are. He felt, however, that
the leftist forces had reached a high point and would now decline in
influence. In any case, Turkey was prepared to cope with them.
Foreign Minister Zahedi said that Iran felt that the only answer was
to stay one step ahead of the revolutionary forces in thinking of the things
they were pressing for before they themselves started pressing. He noted
smilingly that the situation in Iran was not like that in the United States;
people there did not yet have everything they needed.
In closing, the President asked Ambassador Hilaly how things
were in East Pakistan. The Ambassador replied that they had become
a little better. The President thanked him for the good reception that
our astronauts had had in Dacca.
Middle East Region
69
The meeting closed with the President jokingly saying that he did
not have any very formal gifts for the group such as he had often re-
ceived on his travels abroad. He did recall, however, that there had
been a bill signing in the Cabinet Room that morning and that it was
his custom at such occasions to hand out pens with his signature on
them. He gave each of the visitors one of these pens saying that it was
“a little something that they could take home to their children.”
Harold H. Saunders2
2 Printed from a copy with this typed signature.
22.
Minutes of a Review Group Meeting1
Washington, May 21, 1970, 2:35–3:40 p.m.
SUBJECT
U.S. Policy Toward the Mediterranean Area (NSSM 90)
PARTICIPATION
Chairman—Henry A. Kissinger
State—
William I. Cargo
Donald McHenry
Thomas Thornton
Defense—
Richard A. Ware
Robert Pranger
CIA—R. Jack Smith
SUMMARY OF DECISIONS
It was agreed that:
1. The Joint Staff would prepare an analysis of the nature of the
Soviet threat and our comparative capabilities in time for the NSC
meeting on the Middle East tentatively scheduled for June 3;2
70
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–111, Senior Review Group, SRG Minutes Originals 1970. Se-
cret. The meeting took place in the White House Situation Room.
2 See Document 26.
JCS—MG Albert J. Bowley
OEP—Haakon Lindjord
USIA—Frank Shakespeare
NSC Staff—
Harold H. Saunders
Helmut Sonnenfeldt
Richard Kennedy
Jeanne W. Davis
2. The Working Group would revise the Cargo paper3 along the
lines of the restatement of the approaches done by the NSC staff;
3. The response to NSSM 88 on Italy would be reviewed and a pa-
per on Greece would be prepared as the basis for a brief discussion of
the two countries at an NSC meeting on the Mediterranean.
Mr. Kissinger referred to the comprehensive paper for the meet-
ing and mentioned two problems: (1) how to discuss the substance of
the paper and (2) how we could meet the President’s desire to talk
about Greece and Italy in an NSC meeting on the Mediterranean. With
regard to the paper, he asked if it made any sense to talk about the
Mediterranean as an area or if it would be better to break it up into
component parts.
Mr. Cargo said that geographic influences do exist but that polit-
ical issues can probably be broken out into separate areas with one 
exception—that of the US strategic position and force levels. He re-
ferred to an INR study which had concluded that the features of 
disunity and the lack of commonality in the area were more distinc-
tive than the unifying features.4 He thought, however, there was some
educational and orientational value in looking at the Mediterranean as
a whole.
Mr. Kissinger said there appeared to be a number of related but
separable issues: e.g., Italy was not particularly influenced by Arab-
Israeli developments except insofar as Italy might feel isolated by in-
creasing Soviet influence in the area.
Mr. Ware commented that the question of the Soviet military and
political role in the Mediterranean is a unifying factor.
Mr. Kissinger agreed that the Soviet strategic role should be 
discussed.
Mr. Cargo commented that the area appeared more separable than
not. He noted the Arab-Israeli question was being considered in a 
separate group; Greece was being discussed by the Under Secretaries
Committee; Italy and North Africa were the subjects of separate NSSMs.
Mr. Kissinger suggested we consider this paper as a general in-
troduction to a specific examination of issues as was done in the case
Middle East Region
71
3 The Cargo paper refers to the March 23 “U.S. Interests in and Policy Toward the
Mediterranean,” prepared in response to NSSM 90 by an ad hoc group chaired by William
I. Cargo. (Ibid., Box H–044, Senior Review Group Meetings, Review Group NSSM 90) It
was to be discussed at the April 24 meeting, which did not take place. The Analytical
Summary of the paper, prepared for the June 17 NSC meeting, is Document 24. NSSM
90 is Document 19.
4 “The Mediterranean Basin: A Poor Prospect for Regionalism,” January 30. (Na-
tional Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files),
Box H–044, Senior Review Group Meetings, Review Group NSSM 90)
of Latin America. We might first take a general conceptual approach
which would be followed by a more politically oriented approach.
Mr. Lindjord commented that we might make the case that the
Mediterranean had not had any strategic unity since 1945 when British
influence was removed.
General Bowley said it was necessary to establish an overall pol-
icy for the Mediterranean before one can study the specific issues. He
argued that the Joint Staff had not had an opportunity to insert their
views into the Cargo paper.
Mr. Cargo replied there had been as much exchange as possible
with Defense and JCS within the brief time allowed for the production
of the paper.
Mr. Ware said that Defense had not seen the issues and options chap-
ter before the paper came to the NSC staff and that they had serious
problems with the paper. He believed that, if this paper were to become
an introduction for consideration of specific problems, it would be nec-
essary to take a second look at its basic concepts. He added that the pa-
per recently produced by the NATO group also raised serious issues.
Mr. Shakespeare asked the nature of the fundamental disagree-
ment between Defense and State.
Mr. Ware replied it related to the reason for the decline of the US
role in the Mediterranean. Was it based on the success of our policy, as
the Cargo paper implied, or have we reversed our policy of working
with at least the moderate Arab states? He thought we should pay more
attention to the political/military aspects of the area, and that the USSR
was very successful in weaving together its political and military roles.
He considered that the problem of the Soviet threat and of force struc-
tures had not been covered adequately in the Cargo paper. He agreed
that the JCS had not had a chance to make their views known in the
short time period allotted.
Mr. Kissinger said he saw no sense in discussing the Arab-Israeli
question in this group since it was already under consideration in an-
other group and would then move to the NSC.
Mr. Pranger referred to the NATO paper, saying that the issue of
the Soviet threat was being discussed in the North Atlantic Council if
not in Washington.
Mr. Cargo agreed there was no reason to go into the Arab-Israeli
question in this group. With regard to force levels, he agreed that the
paper did not discuss them in any detail. He referred, however, to the
section on the long-range US role in the area (page 64) and the three
options discussed, with their implications of different force levels. With
regard to strategic comparability in the area, he believed there was a
fairly thorough-going statement of Soviet and US objectives (page 11,
page 16 and following).
72
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
Mr. Shakespeare asked if the JCS had not participated in the draft-
ing of the paper.
General Bowley said JCS had been a member of the Working
Group but had merely read the paper, did not like it, but had no op-
portunity to change it. He recommended, therefore, that the paper not
go forward, and distributed a specific recommendation for a new study
to “look at the Mediterranean properly.”
Mr. Kissinger, referring to the JCS recommendation, asked if they
were suggesting that the present paper took an “undisciplined and un-
systematic approach” to the paper.
General Bowley said yes—that the JCS had found the paper gen-
eralized and unspecific. He thought we would have to get into the var-
ious regions in order to be specific. The paper lacked a comparative
analysis of our interests with those of others. It contained no range of
threats with matching strategies and did not adequately discuss the in-
creasing Soviet threat in relation to the decreasing US capability. The
paper contained four issues: (1) what is the threat; (2) should the Eu-
ropeans do more; (3) the relation of the Arab states; (4) the relation of
the North African states. He thought the last three questions could not
be answered without an answer to the first question, and an answer to
the first question would automatically provide answers to the other
three. He thought the paper did not meet the requirements of the NSSM
and that we needed a new start.
Mr. Cargo did not agree with General Bowley. The paper raised
the essential questions, and the Soviet interest and threat was the cen-
tral issue. He thought the JCS suggestions were additive and would
provide more detail but he did not consider them essentially a substi-
tute for the existing paper.
Mr. Kissinger asked if we could not add the military analysis and
a comparative analysis to the section in the existing paper on the So-
viet threat. He asked if we had not done a study of the Soviet threat
in the Mediterranean in an earlier WSAG exercise.5
Mr. Saunders agreed that such a study had been done but was not
as thorough as that now envisaged by the JCS.
Mr. Cargo agreed that we should have an analysis of the Soviet
threat but commented that he was reluctant to lose the broader con-
text of the existing paper.
Mr. Kissinger agreed with JCS that, whatever stance we take, we
need a clearer idea of what we are taking a stance toward. He asked if
Middle East Region
73
5 Presumably a reference to NSSM 33, March 21, 1969, and subsequent studies.
Scheduled for publication in Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XXIII, Arab-Israeli Dis-
pute, 1969–1972.
we could not try to incorporate a military and strategic analysis of the
nature of the threat and our comparative capabilities.
Mr. Pranger questioned the tone of the paper, saying that it im-
plies a fresh approach in viewing the Mediterranean in terms of “the
interaction of outside forces on the one hand and subregional prob-
lems on the other.” He believed the area had always been viewed in
that way and that the existing paper does not add much that is new.
Mr. Kissinger commented that we could distinguish between what is
historically true and what has been historically done in the bureaucracy.
Mr. Cargo agreed that we have not looked at the Mediterranean
as a whole.
Mr. Shakespeare asked if the JCS wished to analyze various likely
Soviet objectives and interests.
General Bowley replied that they wished to examine the nature of
the threat in the Mediterranean.
Mr. Kissinger commented that we could agree on the threat with-
out agreeing on what to do about it. He thought we could have an
analysis of the threat. However, deciding whether to confront the So-
viet Union, let national forces play it out, or a combination of the two—
is a political judgment. We need the analysis first. He noted that hereto-
fore he had considered the Mediterranean as an American logistics area,
but that he had learned in a WSAG exercise that we probably could
not physically move our forces today as we had at the time of the
Lebanon exercise.
Mr. Ware said we should not look at the threat as only a military
one since the Soviets had integrated the military, political and economic
aspects quite well.
General Bowley thought we must make some assumptions as to
what the Soviets will do and then consider our options in terms of these
various assumptions.
Mr. Shakespeare reminded Mr. Kissinger of the comment by Ad-
miral Moorer at an earlier meeting that next year’s budget would in-
volve substantial reductions in US forces in the Mediterranean and that
Mr. Kissinger had thought that unacceptable.
Mr. Kissinger asked what sort of comparative projection we would
need.
Mr. Ware asked about the timing of the exercise.
Mr. Kissinger replied that the Arab-Israeli situation would proba-
bly be discussed in the NSC in about two weeks.6 He thought the threat
74
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
6 Presumably a reference to the June 17 NSC meeting; see Document 26.
portion of the Mediterranean paper should be ready by then. He
thought we had a little more time on the rest of the paper but noted
that the President was anxious to discuss Greece and Italy. Since the
Italian elections were so close, he suggested we might delay this NSC
discussion until after those elections.
Mr. Ware said the Working Group had not been able to function
because of the deadlines imposed and suggested that we let the Work-
ing Group revise the basic paper.
Mr. Kissinger agreed, except for the threat study which would be
useful for the NSC discussion of the Middle East.
Mr. Saunders agreed that the threat study would be useful back-
ground and asked how elaborate it would be. He assumed that work
had already been done on the Soviet threat in the area and that some-
one could collect existing material and summarize it in usable form.
General Bowley said the study could be completed in two weeks.
Mr. Smith asked how we could separate the Soviet threat in the
Mediterranean from the Arab-Israeli problem. He thought it would be
extremely difficult to define except in those terms.
Mr. Kissinger asked if he meant that you could not separate the
SA–3’s and Soviet aircraft in Egypt from the Soviet threat in a larger
area. He asked what would be the effect if Soviet aircraft in Egypt were
used against the Sixth Fleet.
Mr. Saunders said there were two questions: the Soviet naval threat
and what would a Soviet air system operated out of Egypt do.
General Bowley commented that it was larger than this, noting
possible extension to Wheelus. He said we were watching Soviet in-
fluence build and should ask where it is leading.
Mr. Kissinger asked why it would be so difficult to estimate the
importance of Soviet air bases on US Mediterranean operations.
Mr. Ware referred to the implications in a Soviet use of Malta.
Mr. Smith explained that he meant a study of the threat must in-
clude Egypt.
Mr. Cargo saw no problem in expanding this discussion. He noted,
however, that the existing paper was interlarded with references to So-
viet power in the Mediterranean, citing pages 20 and 23.
Mr. Shakespeare agreed, however, that the paper does not lay out
clear estimates of probable Soviet moves and how we should be pre-
pared to meet them.
Mr. Smith agreed. He noted, however, that just as we have diffi-
culty in treating the Mediterranean as an area, the Soviets have also
found it difficult. He referred in this connection to their Syrian fiasco.
He repeated that we would find it hard to agree on the nature of the
threat.
Middle East Region
75
Mr. Cargo cited the estimate of Soviet objectives in the area (page
24) which concluded that the Soviet threat to the littoral states is now
mainly psychological and political. However, the security of Europe
would be seriously threatened if the North African coast and the
Mediterranean Sea should come under hostile domination.
Mr. Kissinger remarked that one of the JCS concerns had been with
hardware, but that the extent of Soviet political influence was more dif-
ficult to measure. He said the paper raised the issue of whether we
should deal with the area in terms of a US-Soviet confrontation or to
what extent we should rely on regional forces. He asked if this was a
real issue—must it be one or the other? Does anyone want a straight
military confrontation with the USSR? Does anyone think a military
confrontation plays no role? He thought the issue must be a mixture
and was, in fact, a question of emphasis. He wondered if it was pos-
sible to decide in the abstract where the emphasis should be placed at
any given moment in any given situation. He asked to what extent the
countries concerned have an interest in reducing Soviet influence in
the area.
Mr. Cargo agreed the sense of nationalism is a positive element in-
sofar as the US is concerned, but that it was one factor and must be re-
lated to other factors.
Mr. Kissinger commented that, by putting it in the “either/or” con-
text, it was not a live option. He thought an attempt to expel the So-
viets by military power alone was simply not in the cards and that
there must be a political component. He wondered if we would be more
likely to reduce Soviet influence by relying on national forces or by cre-
ating a balance of power so that those who want to resist the Soviets
will know that they have a friend.
General Bowley agreed this was very important, particularly with
regard to Turkey and Greece.
Mr. Cargo said they had tried to get at this question in discussion
of the long-range US role in the area. He referred to the options (pages
66–68), saying that Option A was weighted on the military side; Op-
tion B saw a shifting of the balance to the Europeans without severing
our ties; and C envisaged retrenchment.
Mr. Ware cited the US withdrawal of 1600 troops from Leghorn,
ostensibly for budgetary reasons. He said the Italians simply did not
believe that a nation such as the US would withdraw 1600 troops for
budgetary reasons alone. They assumed other reasons. Then, when
they saw the Soviets moving more and more ships into the Mediter-
ranean they would feel they had to decide which way to turn. This
would have an impact on the US posture.
Mr. Shakespeare suggested that the novelty of Soviet influence in
the Mediterranean has focused attention on Soviet power as opposed
76
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
to the acceptance of the established Western presence in the Mediter-
ranean. He thought any unexpected development now, such as the
downfall of Hussein in Jordan or a strong leftist election victory in Italy,
could have serious psychological effects. It would add to the momen-
tum, would make people in the area exceedingly nervous, and would
affect our ability to maneuver. They favored enhancing a NATO capa-
bility in the Mediterranean as a counter to Soviet power.
Mr. Kissinger referred to the discussion of the long-range US role
in the Mediterranean and a possible division between the US and the
Europeans. We can say we should not take a forward role, but this
might have different meanings in different areas. We might look to the
French in the Mahgreb, but in the Arab-Israeli dispute no other Euro-
pean country was able or willing to play a role comparable to that of
the US. We could use this paper to state general propositions and out-
line a basic stance. He commended Mr. Cargo on an “amazing per-
formance” in producing the paper, given the nature of the assignment
and the time allowed in which to complete it.
Mr. Cargo commented that the basic difficulty in producing the
paper lay in the fact that the common elements in the area are not all
that many.
Mr. Kissinger said that we should look at the balance of US and
European interests. With regard to the long-range US role in the
Mediterranean, no one would consider increasing our military posture,
as such, as a solution. It would be consistent with the Nixon doctrine
that wherever possible we should rely on national forces. They may
not be enough in some parts of the Mediterranean and we may have
to reach conscious decisions to go in or go out. We could state the gen-
eral propositions and try to relate them to specifics. He referred to the
restatement of the Cargo options done by the NSC staff (pages 7–8 of
HAK’s talking points)7 which were not mutually exclusive. He thought
we might go through a period of containment to reach equilibrium. He
thought this restatement of the propositions might provide an approach
to a general stance.
Middle East Region
77
7 These pages summarized alternative strategies for dealing with an enhanced So-
viet role, the balance of U.S. and European interests and responsibilities, and assessment
of long-range U.S. interests in the Arab countries and Mediterranean. According to the
Talking Points, the alternative strategies were not presented in the Cargo paper, and were
broad rather than tactical. The alternative strategies were to offset Soviet military power
through establishing a regional balance of power, competition with the Soviets coupled
with disarmament, limitation of Soviet influence through regional nationalisms, a low-
ered U.S. profile without disengagement, and alignment with “progressive” forces in the
area. (Talking Points, undated; National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC
Files, NSC Institutional Files (H-Files), Box H–044, Senior Review Group Meetings, Re-
view Group NSSM 90) 
General Bowley, Mr. Smith and Mr. Thornton all agreed with Saun-
ders’ approach.
Mr. Ware asked if the Working Group could meet on the paper
rather than merely comment on a paper circulated for comment.
Mr. Cargo agreed.
Mr. Shakespeare noted French construction of a radio transmitter
on Cyprus which would provide a much stronger signal in the Mediter-
ranean than that of the Voice. He saw this as evidence that the French
must care a great deal about talking to the Arabs.
Mr. Kissinger asked how we can best handle Italy and Greece. He
thought the President’s major concern was to get a feel for the impact
of the domestic situations in these countries on their foreign policy and
the possible impact of the US on their domestic situations.
Mr. Cargo noted that the Greek situation had been discussed in
the arms supply context and said he would talk to the Department to
see what type of paper might be useful on Greece. With regard to Italy,
he noted that they had already prepared a response to NSSM 88.
Mr. Kissinger asked that the Italian paper be reviewed and that a
paper on Greece be considered, with a view to a 15 minute discussion
in the NSC on these two countries.
Mr. Smith suggested we might throw in Turkey and consider the
three countries with relation to NATO.
Mr. Kissinger agreed that this might be helpful but said the Pres-
ident had not asked for this approach. He was primarily concerned
about the domestic policies in Greece and Italy, the problems of the Al-
liance, their future orientation, and the degree to which these could be
influenced by the US.
78
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
23.
Memorandum of Conversation1
Washington, June 5, 1970.
President’s Meeting with his Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board
PARTICIPANTS
The President
Admiral George Anderson
Dr. William Baker
Mr. Gordon Gray
Mr. Franklin Murphy
Mr. Robert Murphy
Governor Nelson Rockefeller
Mr. J. Patrick Coyne
Mr. Henry A. Kissinger
Brigadier General A.M. Haig, Jr.
The President convened the meeting at 12:05. He introduced the
meeting by pointing out that he was to have a National Security Coun-
cil meeting sometime in the following week.2 He made the following
points to the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board:
—Escalation by the Soviets has put the heat on the United States
and the recent action by 73 Senators outlining support for the Presi-
dent in this crisis underlines the importance of the event.3
—The President pointed out that the Board should be aware that
Arab moderates could be inclined to lean in the direction of the United
States due to the Soviet aggressiveness.
—The Arab moderates obviously do not want the balance of power
to shift them.
—It is difficult to maintain a balance in the Middle East with the
introduction of Soviet combat personnel into Egypt. The President
pointed out that some maintained position that we should do nothing.
But if we do nothing the Israelis may be forced to act. Also, it is ap-
parent that there will be no settlement without U.S. and Soviet agree-
ment. This may be possible sooner or later. If we wait for later, then
the President visualizes some flash point with great dangers which
might then ultimately result in agreement. The Soviets on the other
hand probably are delighted with a status quo since they are exploit-
ing it with greatly increased influence.
Middle East Region
79
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 276,
Agency Files, President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Vol. IV. Top Secret; Sen-
sitive. The meeting took place in the White House Cabinet Room.
2 See Document 26.
3 A copy of the Senators’ May 26 letter to Rogers is in the National Archives, Nixon
Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1251, Saunders Files, Basic Policy—Middle East
1/1/70–12/31/70. The letter stated that the appearance of Soviet pilots flying missions
over Egypt in April was “a significant change and a challenge to American strategic in-
terests and a growing threat to world peace. Recent Soviet moves have encouraged Arab
belligerence, and are creating a growing military imbalance in favor of the Arab states.”
The Senators urged Nixon to provide additional jet aircraft to Israel in response to this
Soviet “escalation.”
The President also pointed out that the Soviets fear the fedayeen
just as does Nasser. However, on balance, to the degree that we line
up solidly with Israel, the Soviets acquire support from the other ele-
ments by default. Finally, the President emphasized that the main dan-
ger today is that Israel may move militarily and that we will be look-
ing down the barrels with the Soviet Union again. On balance, the
President believes that if there is to be a settlement, it must be imposed.
It would be a settlement which would be not to the liking of either Is-
rael or the Arabs. It is really a question of the degree of dissatisfaction
shared by both. For this reason, the U.S. and the Soviets must talk, but
at a time and under circumstances in which the Soviets feel it is in their
interest to do so. They do not feel this way at present. So we must keep
them worried about the Middle East. The President emphasized that
he had no domestic political problem on this issue and it would be in-
fluenced only by the national interests. At present, he feels that it is
necessary that we put Israel in a position that they can be a serious
worry to the Soviets. The President added that the U.S. has no illusions
about Four Power or Israeli/Nasser talks. The only solution would be
one imposed by both the United States and the Soviet Union.
Franklin Murphy stated that the Arabs feel that the loss of oil is a
deterrent to the United States and its actions with respect to Israel. He
wondered whether or not we were studying the implications of what
it would mean to lose Middle East oil. The President replied that this
would be a serious turn of events, especially from Europe’s point. On
the other hand, the President pointed out the Arab oil producers can-
not drink their oil and must have a market. This was the issue in Iran
some years ago.
Franklin Murphy then added: Isn’t there a wheel within a wheel.
Without the benefits and revenues from the oil in Kuwait and Saudi
Arabia, Egypt and the fedayeen movement would collapse. Dr.
Kissinger added that the fedayeen movement was fundamentally sub-
sidized by the moderate Arabs, as well as some Soviet support.
Robert Murphy stated if we examine the Middle East issue in depth,
I feel that what you have said will be largely verified. The President
replied: Yes, this indicates that the oil problem is not quite so bad as fre-
quently depicted, and that in any event the Arabs must sell their oil.
Admiral Anderson stated that it is also important that we, the
United States, do not get isolated on this issue and that we keep our
moderate Arab friends with us. The President agreed that this is nec-
essary on the surface at any rate.
Governor Rockefeller stated that as we look down the road, we
can see the Soviets behind all the problems in the Middle East and he
wondered whether or not they could absorb all of the Middle East’s
oil.
80
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
Franklin Murphy stated that while these are the realities of the
Middle East situation, the evidence is that the Soviets’ role in the Mid-
dle East is not understood in the Moslem world and they view it as
strictly an anti-Israeli problem. Dr. Kissinger stated that the Moslems
worry about the Soviet Union on entirely different grounds. Robert
Murphy stated that he believed that on balance the Soviets do not en-
joy that much prestige in the Middle East among the Arab nations. The
President interrupted, nevertheless the wheels continue to turn. He
wants to consider this issue on the 16th of June4 with the view of de-
ciding where we go from here.
[Omitted here is discussion unrelated to the Middle East.]
4 See Document 25.
24.
Paper Prepared by the National Security Council Staff1
Washington, June 12, 1970.
ANALYTICAL SUMMARY
A U.S. APPROACH TO THE GREATER 
MEDITERRANEAN REGION
Note: This is not a decision paper. It is an exercise to find a broader
conceptual approach to policy in this area. Policy formulation is now
handled in more than half a dozen bureaucratic compartments, and
real issues are often obscured.
I. The Area Under Study
A. Definition. Some would say that the states bordering the
Mediterranean are too diverse to be thought of as a coherent region.
The forces and relationships that play across this area, however, are
Middle East Region
81
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 1248,
Saunders Files, NSSM 90—Mediterranean Policy. Secret. This paper is an analytical sum-
mary of the response to NSSM 90, Document 19. The response to NSSM 90, originally
dated March 23 and referred to as the Cargo paper, was discussed at the May 21 SRG
meeting. See Document 22 and footnote 3 thereto.
significant enough to suggest that a slightly broader definition would iden-
tify an area of serious policy concerns. For instance:
—The arena of increased Soviet activity defines an area including
Iran, Turkey, Greece, Italy, Algeria, perhaps Libya, UAR, Somalia, Su-
dan, South Yemen, Yemen, Jordan, Iraq, Syria, potentially the Persian
Gulf and the Mediterranean Sea itself.
—As a platform for NATO–U.S. strategic response, the area has con-
tracted from one including SAC, transit, missile or training bases in the
NATO countries, Morocco, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Iran, Spain, to one in-
volving only the NATO members, Spain, and the Sea itself. Even on
the Sea, the strategic role of the Sixth Fleet has changed somewhat with
the threat of Soviet air or naval bases on the southern or eastern shore.
—The area defined economically would start with the Common Mar-
ket nucleus and first reach out to include those nations associating with
the Market or having a special relationship with one of its members—
Greece, Turkey, Israel, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Spain, with more to
come. This area might also be broadened to include the principal sup-
pliers of oil to Western Europe—Iran, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Libya—
because the oil is a major factor in the area’s strategic as well as its eco-
nomic importance.
—Areas of special U.S. interest include, in addition to the NATO
countries, Iran, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Tunisia, 
Israel.
—Definition of the area should also take into account the princi-
pal relationships of nations within the area in addition to those above:
France–Arab nations
France–Spain–Morocco–Tunisia–Algeria–Libya
Maghreb
Arab nations
Israel–Turkey–Iran (recognized common interests and cooperation)
Libya–UAR–Sudan (new association)
UAR–Iraq–Jordan–Syria–Lebanon (confrontation states)
Greece, Turkey, Cyprus, UK (guarantor powers, Cyprus)
Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Libya, UAR, Jordan (Khartoum Fund eco-
nomic assistance)
Conclusion: These interrelationships seem to define a geographical
area of intensified activity which includes the states bordering on the
Mediterranean plus the mainly Western European, Arab and Persian
Gulf states behind them. Beyond that area the criss-cross of interrela-
tionships falls off sharply, though Pakistan and to a lesser extent India
as well as the Indian Ocean play a role on one side and sub-Saharan
African associations on the other.
B. Advantages from this kind of treatment. While it would be artifi-
cial to try to formulate detailed policy for an area as diverse as this,
82
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
there are advantages in looking at the area’s major problems in rela-
tionship to each other. For instance:
—Arab-Israel. The more narrowly this problem is viewed, the fewer
the U.S. options seems to be. Viewed in the context of the broader area,
there is greater choice since the U.S.-Soviet contest appears as but one
of the forces at work; the dangers of working via proxies become more
apparent because the limits on outsiders are seen as a more general
phenomenon; ways of strengthening our position elsewhere in the area
while riding out the absence of an Arab-Israeli settlement become more
apparent.
—Greece and Spain. There is substantial pressure to keep each at
arms length because of their present non-democratic forms of govern-
ment. It is only when these countries are seen in light of the fact that
they are two of the few points the U.S. can count on for staging into
other parts of the Mediterranean that the counter-argument becomes
compelling. Also, their influence could add to the number of con-
structive forces at work in the area.
—Trade policy worldwide dictates that the U.S. oppose preferential
trade agreements, and preferential arrangements between the Common
Market and the Mediterranean countries are not necessarily compo-
nents of closer relations between them. However, the U.S. may have a
strong political interest in evolution of closer economic relationships
between the countries of this region and preferential arrangements
would speed that process.
—The Sixth Fleet was established principally to fulfill a general
war mission in connection with NATO forces. Increasingly the contin-
gencies the Fleet is most likely to be called on to deal with are less gen-
eral war contingencies and more contingencies within the region itself.
—The Persian Gulf is sufficiently remote and yet dependent on
Western European petroleum markets that the U.S. is tempted to stand
back and let the stronger powers around it organize its security and
stability. It is only when it is related to broader forces at work in the
area as a whole—Arab radicalism, Soviet naval interest, Arab-Iranian
rivalry, the drive for modernization—that one becomes less easy about
leaving it to its own devices.
II. Analytical Bases for Policy and the Issues
Disagreement over policies in this area often grows out of differ-
ent judgments over what really are the significant developments there.
The annex to this paper2 discusses in detail the major actors, their in-
terrelations, and the operational issues flowing therefrom.
Middle East Region
83
2 Attached but not printed.
There are two broad views of the dynamics of the area:
—One view is that the main factor is that this area has become the
major new arena in the global U.S.–Soviet contest. This approach empha-
sizes that, with a stand-off long established on the NATO central front,
the East-West conflict has now spilled over to the south of NATO and
the Warsaw Pact. This bases U.S. policy on the judgment that this is
the main thing going on in the area.
—A second view does not dismiss the fact that this is the major new
area for Soviet–U.S. competition, but tends to place this more in the
context of other new forces at work there. It asks whether there is ad-
vantage in thinking of the area this way: This area is in a period of ad-
justment to a new configuration of international influences. After years
when major powers provided the dominant external influence, now no
single external influence is likely to dominate. In the future, a collec-
tion of external and internal influences will seek a balance.
The fundamental question for the policy-maker is what blend of the
above attitudes to adopt as a touchstone for policy judgments:
—What degree of direct U.S. control and involvement are neces-
sary to counter expansion of Soviet influence throughout the area or
to encourage indigenous forces that will?
—Conversely, to what extent can the U.S. take a secondary role,
relying on indigenous forces to deny Soviet control?
Whichever view of the area one holds, limiting Soviet influence is a ma-
jor U.S. interest. The question for argument, in short, is: What is the best way
to limit that influence, given the forces now at work in the area?
The answer depends initially on the answers to questions like
these:
—How important are our interests in the greater Mediterranean
and how much direct U.S. support do they require?
—How great is the Soviet military and political threat and what
are its goals?
—What capabilities do the regional states have for preserving the
security and independence of the region?
But the basic issue is:
With what combination should the U.S. contest the extension of Soviet
influence: mainly by means of military containment—either directly or
through proxies like Israel—or mainly by trying to subordinate military con-
tainment to a pluralistic strategy based on indigenous political containment?
—Some argue that a strong military posture is the only position
that Moscow understands and will respect. The Soviets apparently see
a large enough interest in the UAR to accept the risks of operating
84
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
weapons systems to counter Israeli attacks. The U.S. risks appearing
to have backed down in the face of Soviet pressure if it does not seem
prepared to respond directly to protect its friends.
—These would argue that the U.S. has no choice but to bolster the
position of its effective friends and allies—NATO members, Israel,
Iran—to withstand encroachment by Soviet forces and proxies. If
strengthening our friends has the effect of looking like a challenge to
the USSR, that may be beneficial. Since U.S. friends tend to be more ef-
fective than Soviet proxies, the lesson might be learned that it pays to
deal with the U.S.
—Others contend the U.S. has no interest in a direct confrontation
with the USSR over the area unless that confrontation becomes an ad-
junct to a larger confrontation over Europe. If the U.S. does not wish
to go to war over any part of this area for its own sake, the U.S. should
avoid wherever possible escalating this contest into a direct U.S.-
Soviet confrontation.
—The contest is primarily a long-term one for political influence,
not mainly for current military position. Neither U.S. nor probable So-
viet strategy requires military control over specific territory in the area.
Military forces and position will be used mainly to enhance political
influence, not vice versa.
—A policy of military containment and confrontation will not be
supported by interested European states in the area.
There are two related questions:
1. To what extent is Soviet-U.S. interaction likely to influence the po-
litical complexion of this area over the next decade?
—Some believe that, however much the U.S. and USSR may wish
to limit their involvement, their interests are such that their rivalry will
be a significant influence on the area. This rivalry cannot help but shape
political developments. If, for instance, the USSR forces the U.S. more
and more into Israel’s corner, this will increase the political pressure
from the radical side on moderate regimes in the area. Thus the pos-
ture of the Great Powers—and their global relationship—will at least
indirectly affect the turn of political events in the area. They contend
that the U.S. cannot afford to underrate the capacity of the USSR to ex-
ploit radical movements to enhance its own position.
—Others argue that the day is over when outside powers will set
the direction of events in this area. Local forces are now strong enough
not only to limit the involvement of outside powers but to influence
their posture. Local forces have brought an end to British and French
predominance and, outside NATO and Europe, to U.S. military bases.
These forces have shown wariness of too close a relationship, outside
Middle East Region
85
NATO, with both the U.S. and the USSR. They have demonstrated, es-
pecially in the Arab-Israeli area, that the major outside powers do not
have the capability to prevent the outbreak of war or make peace.
—They believe that to assume that the great powers can play out
their contest while minimizing the role of local forces is to base policy
on an erroneous appraisal of the strength of these forces. There is no
question that these local forces will try to exploit the great powers’ ri-
valry and will in turn be exploited by them to some degree. But the
balance is fine enough so that either of the great powers risks being
drawn into local conflict against its will if it banks too heavily on its
ability to shape the future by manipulating local forces.
2. To what extent are regional forces likely to work in favor of the U.S.
or in favor of the Soviet Union?
—Some contend that the more prominent political forces are those
that work against Western interests: Arab radical movements are di-
rected at traditional governments and Western oil interests; they also
create an atmosphere in which it is difficult for the Western approach
to economic development to operate. The Palestinian movements will
have the effect first of keeping the Middle Eastern pot boiling; even if
the Arab-Israeli issue were defused, they would seem likely to turn
against established pro-Western regimes.
—Certainly as long as there is no Arab-Israeli settlement, the U.S.
cannot hope to improve its position in the Arab parts of this area.
Whether or not the radical forces turned loose work in Moscow’s fa-
vor, the fact that they work against the U.S. is a step in the right di-
rection as far as Moscow is concerned.
—Even some of the Europeans will pursue interests which diverge
from the U.S. In this way they tend to operate as a separate force in
the area, and the Soviets will be able to exploit these divergencies.
—Others argue that the Soviets have shown themselves wary of
close alignment with the more militant movements such as the Pales-
tinian movement. Moscow has kept the door open to them, but Moscow
has felt it more prudent to deal primarily with established govern-
ments. The more radical movements may attack the foundation of
Western interests but they do not necessarily offer a commensurate gain
to the USSR. At worst, the USSR has to be concerned that such move-
ments in its own backyard will eventually assume more a pro-Chinese
than a pro-Soviet complexion.
—In any case the Europeans involved may decide to concert their
approach, independent of the U.S.
—Finally, events outside the area may influence Europeans 
such as the French to oppose any policy directed openly against the
USSR.
86
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
—One cannot dismiss the strength of constructive forces in the
area. There are extensive wealth-producing resources and a large group
of people and institutions who could be engaged in the process of turn-
ing that wealth into economic progress. The elites and technocrats of
the area know well that it is Western technology and development doc-
trine that will produce these results and not Soviet. This understand-
ing is certainly apparent in Turkey, Iran, Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia,
Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Lebanon and the Persian Gulf, but it is also preva-
lent even in a place like the UAR.
—Even leaders like Nasser would prefer to balance the great pow-
ers off against each other rather than to be beholden to one. On the
whole the Europeans offer an alternative to Great Power alignment and
thus help to defuse tensions.
III. Possible U.S. Strategies
A. Introduction
For the sake of discussion, it is useful to start by posing two dif-
ferent views toward this area. Neither by itself would represent a vi-
able strategy, but they isolate the elements that must be married in a
workable strategy.
1. The first is the view that U.S. interests and the situation in the
Mediterranean require a large measure of U.S. control in the region. The
Soviet thrust requires a forceful military and political response; only
the U.S. has the power and the concern to protect Western interests.
The U.S. must, therefore, preserve an independent position in the area
and sufficient capacity to influence events so that it is a power to be
reckoned with.
2. The second is the view that local nationalism and other indige-
nous forces are now strong enough to deny Soviet predominance and that
denial is sufficient to create a pluralistic framework in which U.S. inter-
ests can be pursued. This does not mean that the U.S. can back off en-
tirely but that the U.S. has the freedom of maneuver to take a few losses.
3. The issue is not to choose between these two views but to draw
a line on range of intermediate positions between them. The question
is: What strategy provides the degree of influence the U.S. needs in a situa-
tion it cannot control?
B. One way of posing possible strategies. The strategies outlined below
are distinguished from each other mainly to identify general differences
of approach and emphasis. Elements of several may actually be woven
together in working out a realistic course of action toward any given prob-
lem. In this conceptual framework there are five basic strategies:
1. Direct containment of Soviet influence.
2. Agreed limitation of U.S.–Soviet involvement.
Middle East Region
87
3. Long-run reliance on an equilibrium of a number of forces in
the area.
4. Passing prime responsibility to the Europeans.
5. Aligning ourselves more closely with the “Progressive” forces
in the area.
Following the discussion of these strategies below, their applica-
tion to specific problems is illustrated in the next section of this ana-
lytical summary.
[Omitted here are sections outlining individual strategies for deal-
ing with the Soviet threat and the application of those strategies.]
25.
Memorandum From the President’s Assistant for National
Security Affairs (Kissinger) to President Nixon1
Washington, June 15, 1970.
SUBJECT
Your Meeting with Messrs. Lincoln, Anderson and Murphy (Foreign Intelligence
Advisory Board)—11 a.m., Tuesday, June 16
Background: You will recall last fall having requested that Messrs.
Franklin Lincoln, George Anderson and Robert Murphy visit selected
countries from Morocco to Iran for the purpose of providing you with
some extra-bureaucratic insights on the role of the United States in this
area in conjunction with your thinking about a possible “Mediterranean
policy.”2 They are meeting with you today to report their findings per-
sonally. Each gentleman can be expected to describe his impression of
the particular area visited. From preliminary reports from two, you can
expect the following:
Franklin Lincoln [Reports at Tab B]:3 Mr. Lincoln travelled to the Per-
sian Gulf, Saudi Arabia (he saw King Faisal) and Beirut (he saw Pres-
ident Helou). Overall impressions include:
88
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 276,
Agency Files, President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Vol. IV. Secret; Exdis. Sent
for information. A notation on the memorandum indicates the President saw it. A hand-
written notation at the end of the memorandum says: “No press photo.” According to
Nixon’s Daily Diary for June 16, he met with members of PFIAB from 11:20 a.m. to 12:06
p.m. (Ibid., White House Central Files) No other record of the meeting has been found.
2 Documentation on the trips of PFIAB members is in ibid., NSC Files, Box 275,
Agency Files, President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Vols. II and III.
3 Tab B, March 10, is attached but not printed. All brackets are in the original.
—U.S. policy is pro-Israel and anti-Arab.
—The Soviet threat is real; close U.S. identification with Israel de-
prives the moderates of an alternative.
—Further sale of Phantoms to Israel would be disastrous.
—The Gulf States are alarmed at the lack of U.S. appreciation of
its own national interest—$3.5 billion investment and $2 billion in oil
and trade revenues.
—The U.S. must begin a dialogue with the Palestinians.
—The U.S. could compel Israel to a settlement in the Arab view.
—The U.S., in the Arab view, has a role to play in settling the Arab-
Israeli dispute which would bring peace and nullify Russian attempts
to dominate.
—Lebanon needs U.S. arms to keep the loyalty of its citizenry (es-
pecially in Southern Lebanon where fedayeen subversion is strong).
Lebanon facing increasing difficulty in avowing its traditional close ties
with the U.S.
Admiral Anderson [Report at Tab A]:4 George Anderson visited Italy,
Spain, Malta, Greece, Turkey and Cyprus. General impressions include:
—A general trend in all of those countries to be more friendly to
the Arabs.
—The reality of the increasing Soviet naval presence as a threat to
NATO’s southern flank and our Sixth Fleet. (We should resume mili-
tary aid to Greece and enhance the Fleet.)
—The plausibility of greater U.S. reliance on European familiarity
with North Africa to uphold the free world position there. (Our clan-
destine work is especially weak.) [He may elaborate on his private
knowledge of a possible Morocco–Spain–Portugal defensive arrange-
ment which Morocco is suggesting.]
—Evidence that the “lid” is being kept on Cyprus due to greater
cooperation by the Greeks and the possibility of greater Greek, Turk,
U.S. and UK efforts to move Cyprus toward a Western-oriented rather
than just neutral position.
—Evidence of good intentions on the part of the Greeks to be a
friendly NATO member. As they feel secure, they will move toward
parliamentary government; we can resume military aid while observ-
ing their performance.
—Indications that the left-wing anti-NATO opposition in Malta
may come to power in 1971. Greater U.S. cooperation with the British
(they have the economic foothold there) would stem this, thus pro-
tecting our NATO command presence.
Middle East Region
89
4 Tab A, January 15, is attached but not printed.
—The need for more U.S. clandestine work in the Italian situation
where the communists pose a threat—not as winners but—as a strong
opposition force working to improve ties with the Soviet bloc.
Robert Murphy went to North Africa and to Italy, arranging his own
schedule, and will report to you personally today.
Discussion Points: As you know, Wednesday’s NSC discussion5 will
concentrate on the Mediterranean, Greece and Italy—a first effort in
looking at the possibility of a U.S. policy for the broader Mediterranean.
It has long been thought that the many states surrounding the Mediter-
ranean were so diverse as to preclude any broad conceptual approach
to this area. However, an examination of the various local and inter-
national forces that play across the area suggest now the plausibility
of a less compartmentalized policy than in the past.
These three trips were conceived with that idea of providing you
with some extra insights into this possibility of a broader Mediter-
ranean policy. In this context, you may wish to:
1. Ask each of these gentlemen to report on his personal reflections.
2. Then ask what thoughts they have about a broad U.S. approach
to the entire area:
—What do they feel is the main U.S. policy problem across this
area?
—What are the possibilities for an increased U.S. presence in the
area outside the context of the Arab-Israeli dispute?
5 See Document 26.
26.
Minutes of a National Security Council Meeting1
Washington, June 17, 1970, 3 p.m.
MEDITERRANEAN, GREECE, ITALY: NSSM 90
President: The Mediterranean is a subject that has been under con-
sideration for some time.
90
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–109, NSC Meeting Minutes, NSC Minutes Originals 1970.
Secret. The meeting took place in the White House Cabinet Room.
Let’s start with a briefing from Director Helms. Dick?
Mr. Helms: I propose to focus on the significance of the area as a
whole. The American security interest is recent. For 30 years we have
maintained a strong presence there. Our interests are: the southern
flank of Southern Europe; the security of Israel; and the security of oil
shipments for Europe from the Middle East.
We have seen a fundamental change in the strategic situation. Af-
ter the Second World War the Soviet Union soon established itself. In
the mid-1950’s it began its arms aid to the radical Arab states. By the
mid-60’s it had established a Mediterranean squadron. They have al-
ways viewed the Mediterranean in geo-political terms, as a strategic
military zone that protects the Southwestern border of the USSR and
provides a path for projecting southward into Africa. The Soviets’ naval
objective is principally political and psychological. Militarily, they
shadow the Sixth Fleet. It is clear they plan to stay in the Mediterranean
area.
Recently they have made striking gains:
—Their role and presence in providing the air defense in Egypt
represents a major upping of their stakes and risks in the area.
—In Italy they have been steady. The Communists did not make
gains in the elections—they dropped marginally—but the Party is 1.5
million strong. It is definitely not autonomous; the Soviets have used
pressure, for example, backing the old guard faction. The elections have
given Rumor a boost.
—In Greece and Turkey—Turkey is firmly committed to its NATO
ties and is almost certain to remain in NATO. But while they will ex-
ert more vigorous influence in the Alliance, they will probably con-
tinue to expand their relations with the USSR, particularly in the eco-
nomic field.
Moscow has played up to both sides in the Cyprus situation.
President: Thank you, Dick. Henry?
Kissinger: We made an intensive examination of American policy
toward the whole area, but we also made several special studies of our
policy toward specific areas. The discussion today on the operational
side will be confined primarily to Greece and Italy.
We have tried to develop conceptual approaches.
There have been substantial changes in recent years.
President: All bad.
Kissinger: There is the increased Soviet military presence (which
has its effects in the Israel/Arab context), the fleet, and NATO. There
is political unrest in Greece and Italy. There is the relation with NATO—
at a time when for Greece the only point of access is the United States.
In Italy there is political uncertainty.
Middle East Region
91
The countries of the area can be divided into four types: the NATO
countries; friendly countries like Spain and Israel; moderate littoral
countries like Morocco and Tunisia; and radical governments like Al-
geria and Syria.
There are three types of struggles going on: the Arab-Israel con-
flict; parallel groups of outsiders; and the great power confrontation of
the U.S. and the USSR.
Several policies could be conducted, and are being conducted:
—In the NATO area, the policy is still basically containment of So-
viet power.
—There are efforts for peace in the Arab-Israeli conflict.
—There is an attempt to let the local balances of forces work them-
selves out.
—There is a future possibility of a greater influence and role for
the Europeans.
Generalizations about the area are difficult. It is clearly a tricky
area for U.S. policy.
The questions we face are the following:
—To the extent that we continue to seek containment of Soviet
power, can we afford not to have firm relations with Greece and not
to look at it from the security point of view?
—To what extent must the Soviet military presence on the south-
ern flank of NATO be contained? If we decide to contain it, how do
we do it? It is related to the whole question of NATO force levels.
—Can we afford to reduce the Sixth Fleet?
—What is the role of the Fleet in the new situation?
—What is the relationship of the Arab-Israel dispute to and what
is the role of Spain and others in the containment policy?
—To what extent should we try to line up the moderate states?
What is the U.S. interest to shore up the moderates?
—To what extent can the U.S. rely on Western Europe to play a
role in the area? What kind of role can or should Europe play?
President: I expected this would take several meetings. The ques-
tion of the usefulness of the Sixth Fleet has been directly raised. Let me
ask, what kind of military force does Spain have?
Moorer: A good one. It has a problem in technical back-up, but it
will be more influential in the future.
Rogers: There are not many encouraging things there, but the
Spanish Government at lower levels is good; they’re oriented to closer
ties with NATO. With Algeria and Tunisia our relations are closer. Our
relations with Algeria are improving. They should have some concern
about Libya.
92
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
President: There are no Soviets in Libya.
Helms: No.
Rogers: Probably there will be later, but not yet. We seem to have
neglected the area. We should strengthen our position there.
President: How could this fall down? Many things are not con-
trollable, but how could we let it go? Both we and NATO need to take
a stronger view.
Rogers: But they haven’t helped on Malta.
Moorer: Spain could be helpful in the Western Mediterranean.
President: I’ve been in Spain twice before 1968. The younger peo-
ple are good, and the military too.
Moorer: Yes.
Rogers: The new Spanish Ambassador is very capable. The For-
eign Minister may take Franco’s place.
[Omitted here is discussion of NATO and possible Greek with-
drawal.]
President: We’ve got to take a hard look at our military posture.
Let us suppose late in the summer we get a request from Lebanon or
Jordan for assistance, or something happens in Lebanon. What can we
do?
Kissinger: We could put a division—10,000 marines and forces
from Europe. The problem is what would the Soviets do if we do it.
President: It’s different from 1958. The issue is the fedayeen now.
We must have ready a plan. There comes a time when the U.S. is go-
ing to be tested as to its credibility in the area. The real questions will
be, will we act? Our action has to be considered in that light. We must
be ready.
Rogers: If our friends in Lebanon asked for U.S. troops—if the Syr-
ians move in—what do we do?
Sisco: I lean toward an affirmative decision.
President: Is the question really a military one or is it our credi-
bility as a power in the area? Congress seems to care only about Israel.
Many in the Mediterranean area don’t think this is right.
Sisco: I would rather say to the NATO allies: “Would you be pre-
pared to move in multilaterally?” But the NATO allies won’t do it. We
then hold back.
President: What about the French?
Tasca: If the French thought we would go in, they’d stay out.
[Omitted here is discussion of Greece.]
Middle East Region
93
27.
Telegram From the Embassy in Kuwait to the Department of
State1
Kuwait, September 18, 1970, 1045Z.
835. For Asst Secretary Sisco.
1. As you are aware, we expect PFLP spectaculars here. We are in
close liaison with the government and the oil companies and are en-
deavoring tighten security posture to optimum degree. We have no il-
lusions, however, about vulnerability industrial units and Embassy in
face of determined and skillful enemies. PLO has called for general
strike tomorrow and students will attempt to drum up mass meeting
with possible objective of march on Jordanians or US. Police should be
able to control them. PFLP, however, may prove different proposition.
2. We simply recognize life as it is, and we anticipate it will get
tougher. Our best bet, in my opinion, is the continuation of your effort
to get the Arabs and Israelis talking under Jarring’s umbrella.2 I speak
very clearly to the Arabs about their feckless stupidity and viciousness
in respect to the missiles and the hijacking.3 They agree, but they are,
weakly, what they are. This does not mean, however, that the Israelis
are innocent lambs in respect to the present mess or that we should be
caught up in their inhibitions and objectives. I urge that we stay very
true to our own objectives, which happen to be a legitimate peace. The
enormous emotional gains in the Arab world resulting from our peace
initiative are beginning to wash away as we respond to Israeli requests
and emotionalism which are being given quite a free run as a result of
Arab stupidity and chicanery. I believe that we should keep the Arabs
focused on their own mess and not permit them to slip it off on the
emotional basis that we are in the Israeli camp. In every way we can
we should keep their nose in what they have done and, if physically
possible, their eye on what they so desperately need—peace. If we say,
or do, much more which can be construed in this region as pro-Israeli,
we are going to pay some bitter prices.
Walsh
94
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, POL 23 KUW. Secret; Pri-
ority; Nodis.
2 For information on the Jarring Mission, see footnote 9, Document 3.
3 For documentation on the hijackings, see Documents 199 ff.
28.
Telegram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Turkey, the United Kingdom, Pakistan, and Iran1
Washington, October 30, 1970, 0407Z.
178786. Subject: US–UK Talks on CENTO.
1. Summary: US/UK discussions on CENTO revealed close simi-
larity of views. Both agreed should continue present support of CENTO
even though CENTO has only limited value. UK hopes continue pres-
ent level CENTO economic support but urges US increase its declin-
ing (due completion capital projects) CENTO financial support either
via increased CENTO labelling or as actual increase. US noted (a) rel-
atively high level of US aid if both bilateral assistance and CENTO as-
sistance considered; (b) lack evidence Regionals want increased
CENTO labelling and (c) failure Regionals suggest capital projects
which meet our criteria. UK proposed creation CENTO Multilateral In-
dustrial Fund to assist in industrial development. We agreed consider
carefully. Both agreed we should not approach RCD but should be pre-
pared consider RCD request for assistance. Since Pakistani intentions
re CENTO uncertain now, both agreed take look later. If Pakistan opts
out, UK supports idea of truncated CENTO primarily because UK has
no other treaty arrangement with Iran. We reserved our position stat-
ing that we would wish consider all options at time. (End Summary)
2. Talks with UK on CENTO held Washington October 27. British
side consisted of Minister Millard, First Secretary Melhuish and Over-
seas Development Authority representative McKenzie-Johnson. US
represented by DepAsstSec Van Hollen, Schiff, Helseth and Wampler
(AID).2
3. UK stated its review stimulated by very gloomy report on
CENTO submitted early 1970 by former UK Ambassador in Ankara
Allen, who inter alia suggested converting CENTO into ANZUS-type
organization without permanent staff. On basis FCO review, UK how-
ever had concluded that CENTO: (a) puts USSR on notice against ad-
ventures in ME; (b) provides framework for UK alliance with Iran
(which UK values) and amongst three Regionals; (c) gives Shah entree
into Western councils; and (d) serves useful function in coordinating
Middle East Region
95
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, DEF 4 CENTO. Confi-
dential. Drafted by William A. Helseth (NEA/RA) on October 29; cleared in NEA/RA,
AID/NESA, NEA/IRN, NEA/PAF, NEA/TUR, and EUR/BMI; and approved by Van
Hollen.
2 Stanley D. Schiff, Director of Regional Affairs, NEA; William A. Helseth, Multi-
lateral Organizations Adviser, Directorate of Regional Affairs, NEA; and Mary Wampler,
AID.
Regionals’ interests. UK believes economic program is of most impor-
tance and is, in fact key to CENTO’s future. Demise of CENTO would
be to disadvantage of West, especially in view UK withdrawal from
Persian Gulf and USSR expansion there. UK had considered its role in
CENTO in this light. Various possibilities had been examined includ-
ing possible shift to observer status; however, UK has decided its main
interest is “to soldier on” and continue its current role.
4. US stated our reviews of 1969 and 1970 had raised essentially
same questions and had reached same conclusion: CENTO, even if only
of limited value, serves useful purpose at small cost. We therefore in-
tend stay on course and gratified UK anticipates no diminution its role.
5. UK hopes maintain its role at roughly present level including
economic assistance of about $2.4 million per year. UK believes CENTO
could be plausible cover for increased naval presence in Persian Gulf
(visits and joint maneuvers, not a semi-permanent presence) but care
must be exercised not to make Shah think we expanding CENTO mil-
itary activity. UK noted no decision yet taken so that it remains an op-
tion dependent upon number of events, especially stability in Gulf. We
said our views not yet crystallized, and we would give UK considered
reaction.
6. Brits urged US provide more aid through CENTO either via in-
creased CENTO labelling or as actual increase. Brits argued capital proj-
ects spending nearing end, and US support of CENTO would register
drop to one half million dollars annually. Brits urged we seek main-
tain our total CENTO support at roughly $5 million annually. Discus-
sion revealed Brits prompted mainly by internal UK presentation prob-
lems with some within HMG contrasting British CENTO contribution
of about $2.4 million unfavorably with US contribution of about one-
half million. We gave no ground on this suggestion. We noted a) no
felt need or desire on part Regionals for increased CENTO labelling;
b) US had indicated willingness consider support for projects meeting
our criteria but Regionals have not presented additional projects for
consideration in recent years; and c) US FY 70 aid of all types to CENTO
countries totals over $300 million even if only one-half million dollars
slugged “CENTO.” Of this, $11.7 million is Technical Assistance to
CENTO countries.
7. UK floated suggestion for establishment of a CENTO Multilat-
eral Industrial Fund (CMIF) with an initial capital of $250,000 to be
contributed by members on basis CENTO cost sharing formula and to
be replenished on an as needed basis. Objective would be further de-
velopment of industrial projects having multinational value, training
of industrial managers and provision of consultants. Might also un-
dertake feasibility studies for those projects which meet criteria. Brits
pointed out this idea, which not yet cleared with their own Treasury
96
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
people, might be useful in heading off regional proposals of more
grandiose nature. They are openminded on terms of reference for fund.
Brits suggested US and UK might make joint proposal to January Eco-
nomic Experts meeting, but agreed prior report from Industrial De-
velopment Advisor might be helpful in reaching decision. We agreed
study proposal and consider carefully both substance of idea and tim-
ing of unveiling to others, if we come out affirmatively.
8. Both we and Brits agreed Secretariat could be made more ef-
fective and efficient but also agreed inadvisable to push for major
changes now. Brits stated no intention reduce their current level of per-
sonnel assigned to CENTO. We noted it might be desirable to take hard
look at structure of organization, possibly next year, if Pakistan con-
tinues its membership.
9. UK proposed switch of Special Assistant and DSYG/Economic
positions between US and UK in 1971. We undertook to give them
prompt reaction since they need to know soon for assignment purposes.
10. Brits presentation on relationship CENTO and RCD closely
corresponded our own views. Consensus was that we should not ap-
proach RCD now but should be prepared consider request for assist-
ance by RCD. UK indicated that RCD had approached Hungarians and
UNIDO for assistance. We asked for more information re reported ap-
proach to Hungary, of which we unaware. We noted question Pakistan
remaining in CENTO highly uncertain and suggested we take further
look after formation new Pakistani Government. We expressed hope
that recent US decision on one-time military sale to Pakistan would
help encourage Pakistan to take more positive attitude toward CENTO
as well as strengthen regional ties by slowing Pakistani drift toward
Chicoms. Brits agreed complete reassessment CENTO necessary if 
Pakistan opts out. Partly because only formal tie UK has with Iran is
via CENTO, Brits urged that CENTO be maintained even without 
Pakistan; but stated UK might then have to reduce its economic aid to
CENTO. If any Regional withdrew from CENTO, UK believes that
rapid action including public statement on part remaining members
necessary in effort limit danger. UK apparently has in mind example
of 1958 London declaration.3
12. We stated US bilateral agreement with Regionals would not
automatically expire with CENTO demise. We also expressed belief
Middle East Region
97
3 Reference is to the communiqué issued July 28, 1958, after the Baghdad Pact Min-
isterial meeting in London, which welcomed the U.S. agreement to cooperate with mem-
ber states (Iran, Pakistan, Turkey, United Kingdom) for their security and defense. The
Foreign Ministers agreed to maintain collective security and to strengthen their ability
to resist direct or indirect aggression and to strengthen their united defense posture. The
meeting followed a coup in member state Iraq and the deployment of U.S. troops to
Lebanon.
Turkey and Iran unlikely withdraw from CENTO in foreseeable future.
We not sure Pakistanis prepared make final decision by next Ministe-
rial meeting and suggested UK and US keep in close touch and possi-
bly confer with Turkey and Iran, when new Pakistani Government ex-
presses its intentions toward CENTO. In response specific questions,
US stated could foresee continuation of some type truncated CENTO
in event Pakistan opts out, but that we would wish take careful look
at that time and study all options.
13. Would appreciate addressee comments, especially on British
proposals paras 6, 7 and 9.4
14. Addressees should not discuss with regional representatives.
Irwin
4 The Embassy in Ankara responded in telegram 7348, November 20, that the
United States should not wait for a Pakistani withdrawal but explore a transformation
of CENTO, although not a truncated version. (National Archives, RG 59, Central Files
1970–73, DEF 4 CENTO) The Embassy in London responded in telegram 9452, Novem-
ber 16, noting the intense pressure Treasury placed on the British Government to cut ex-
penditures, such as those associated with CENTO, and the possible defense against this
pressure provided by U.S. confirmation of support. (Ibid.) The Embassy in London again
responded in telegram 9664, November 20, which noted that the British regarded their
CENTO review to be complete following the bilateral talks, and the only major question
left was how the British CENTO policy would mesh with their policy in the Persian Gulf.
(Ibid.) The Embassy in Tehran responded in telegram 4883, November 9, that no real po-
litical gains could be accrued from increased usage of CENTO labeling. (Ibid.) The Em-
bassy in Rawalpindi responded in telegram 8611, November 5, that the U.S. attitude ex-
pressed in the bilateral talks closely paralleled those held in the Embassy. (Ibid.)
29.
Editorial Note
Between December 1970 and May 1971, as Pakistan’s ongoing con-
stitutional and electoral crisis devolved into civil war, its ability to main-
tain its membership in CENTO emerged as a critical issue in the consid-
erations of the alliance. On December 16, 1970, CENTO Secretary General
Turgut Menemencioglu informed the United Kingdom’s Embassy in
Ankara that a potential Pakistani withdrawal in 1971 would mean the
end of CENTO. The British responded that, given the recent success of
bilateral meetings between Iran and Turkey, perhaps those countries
could convince Pakistan to stay. If Pakistan’s withdrawal was imminent,
it should be encouraged to leave “gracefully,” and CENTO could make
the appropriate structural adjustments to continue without it. (Telegram
207252 to Ankara, London, Islamabad, and Tehran, December 21; Na-
tional Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, CENTO 6–2 PAK)
98
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
The Department of State, anxious that Britain not push too rap-
idly in this regard, presented four alternatives for CENTO’s future
premised on Pakistan’s withdrawal. (Telegram 828 to Ankara, January
5, 1971; ibid.) Alternative A continued CENTO in its present form with-
out Pakistan; Alternative B eliminated CENTO, abolishing the civilian
secretariat and the Combined Military Planning Staff; Alternative C
maintained CENTO, but abolished the Secretariat and Military Staff,
making it more closely resemble the ANZUS arrangement; Alternative
D maintained the treaty but streamlined the Secretariat and Military
Staff. The Department rejected Alternatives A and B, and stated its pref-
erence for C. (Telegram 18946 to Ankara and Tehran, February 3; ibid.,
DEF 4 CENTO)
In a February 12 memorandum, however, Stanley Schiff, Director
of Regional Affairs, NEA, wrote Assistant Secretary of State for Near
Eastern and South Asian Affairs Joseph J. Sisco that opinions within
the Department had shifted in favor of Alternative D, given the oppo-
sition of Turkey, Iran, and the Department of Defense. (Telegram 638
from Tehran, February 3; ibid., CENTO 3; and telegram 863 from
Ankara, February 8; ibid., DEF 4 CENTO). The JCS, particularly, had
“strong reservations about dismantling the military side of CENTO.”
(Memorandum from Schiff to Sisco, February 12; ibid., CENTO 3) Sub-
sequent talks with the British in February 1971 brought the United
States and Britain to a general agreement on Alternative D, and on the
necessity of Iran and Turkey bearing the responsibility of talking to
Pakistan. These talks revealed that the United States was less inclined
than Britain to predict Pakistani withdrawal or to take an activist stance
toward reordering CENTO before conditions inside Pakistan became
clearer. (Telegram 32549 to Ankara, Islamabad, London, and Tehran,
Feburary 25; ibid., DEF 4 CENTO)
Menemencioglu visited Washington March 1–5, having recently vis-
ited Pakistan, and relayed the information that Pakistani withdrawal was
not imminent and that no changes to CENTO should be undertaken un-
til the situation clarified. He also urged the United States to help Pak-
istan “psychologically and materially” and to maintain a “spirit of co-
operation” with the United Kingdom, Iran, and Turkey should Pakistan
eventually determine to leave. Department officials reiterated the posi-
tions taken at the bilateral meetings with Britain. (Telegram 38929 to
Ankara, Islamabad, London, and Tehran, March 5; ibid.) During his con-
versation with President Nixon, Menemencioglu said that “CENTO’s
value lay not in its military commitments or the various meetings but
rather in the atmosphere of close association and the umbrella effect
which developed within CENTO.” For example, the Shah had told Men-
emencioglu that he “considered CENTO useful in the context of the
British withdrawal from the Persian Gulf. After the British go, it would
be possible to continue multi-national naval exercises in the Gulf under
Middle East Region
99
a CENTO label.” The President confirmed his personal support for and
commitment to outgoing Secretary General Menemencioglu. (Memo-
randum of conversation, March 2; ibid., Nixon Presidential Materials,
NSC Files, Box 212, Agency Files, CENTO)
As part of a longer tour of the Middle East (April 29–May 8), Secre-
tary of State William Rogers attended the CENTO Council of Ministers
meeting in Ankara at which he reiterated the need to adapt to the British
withdrawal from the Persian Gulf and to maintain CENTO in view of the
larger Soviet threat, as evidenced in the recent domestic insurgency in
Ceylon. Rogers reported to President Nixon that the decisions to main-
tain MIDEASTFOR and to establish a U.S. presence in Diego Garcia in the
Indian Ocean had been sound. Moreover, CENTO maintained commu-
nication and development programs among the member states and pro-
vided a necessary military umbrella. (Telegram Secto 65/3073 from
Ankara, May 1; ibid., RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, ORG 7 S)
30.
Memorandum From the Vice Director of the Joint Staff
(Freeman) to Secretary of Defense Laird1
JCSM–206–71
Washington, May 1, 1971.
SUBJECT
The Suez Canal (U)
1. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff have conducted a review of the strate-
gic, economic, and political implications of a reopened Suez Canal.
2. (S) Strategically, a reopened canal, operating as an international
waterway, would provide the naval forces of all nations with a short,
direct line of communications between the Mediterranean Sea and the
Red Sea/Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf.
a. The Soviet Union has demonstrated interest in the Indian Ocean
area since 1967, when a Soviet Pacific Fleet naval task force made its
first deployment to the area. The continuous presence of a Soviet naval
force, averaging three to four naval combatants, in the Indian Ocean,
coupled with the fact that this force periodically visits various ports on
the Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf littoral, indicates that the area is of
100
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: Washington National Records Center, OSD Files: FRC 330–76–0197, Box
70, Middle East. Secret.
strategic interest to the USSR. With the Suez Canal open, the Indian
Ocean would be more readily accessible to the Soviets. Soviet Pacific
coast ports, from which most of the Soviet naval deployments to the
Indian Ocean originate, are handicapped severely by fog in spring and
fall and by ice in winter. Furthermore, the south coast of Arabia is over
6,100 nm from the nearest Soviet Pacific port. From Soviet ports in the
more favorable Black Sea environment, the same destination is nearly
11,500 nm via Gibraltar and around the southern tip of Africa. How-
ever, if the Suez Canal were open, Soviet ships sailing from the Black
Sea would steam only 3,200 nm to reach the same point. This shorter
line of communication would facilitate Soviet economic and military
activities in the Indian Ocean area.
b. The principal strategic impact of a reopened canal would be to
make possible more rapid increases in Soviet military presence
throughout the Red Sea/Indian Ocean/Persian Gulf area and to reduce
the cost of Soviet resupply, repair, and military/economic aid actions.
These factors could combine to enhance Soviet influence in the littoral
countries and might encourage the USSR to undertake greater politi-
cal and military risks.
c. Access to the Suez Canal would also permit more rapid rein-
forcement of US naval forces stationed in the Persian Gulf and could en-
hance US political influence in the littoral countries of the area. How-
ever, the strategic value of the Suez Canal to the United States is reduced
by the constraints on operation of NATO-committed forces outside the
NATO area and the fact that the larger aircraft carriers cannot transit it.
On balance, the strategic value of a reopened canal favors the USSR.
3. (S) In view of the interests and strategic advantages to the So-
viets of a reopened canal and the fact that the Soviets have established
a considerable military presence in the United Arab Republic (UAR),
it appears prudent for the United States to explore the possibility of
using US support for the reopening of the Suez Canal as a lever in seek-
ing UAR agreement to reduce the Soviet presence in the UAR. This
course may also offer potential for easing Israeli reluctance for move-
ment on this intermediate step toward peace.
4. (S) The primary significance of the Suez Canal, at present, is its
importance as an essential element in ongoing efforts to reduce regional
tensions and create movement toward a viable Middle East peace
agreement. With the continued, substantial Soviet presence in the UAR
and the US commitment to the survival of Israel, the danger of great
power confrontation in the Middle East is clear. It is equally clear that
this threat to world peace requires that the United States continue to
pursue initiatives which could lead to a peaceful solution to the Arab-
Israeli conflict. An interim agreement to reopen the Suez Canal could
demonstrate good faith and facilitate further negotiations to achieve a
Middle East Region
101
final settlement. However, there is the possibility that reopening the
Suez Canal without resolution of other substantive issues might reduce
pressures for continued meaningful negotiations and, with a contin-
ued extensive Soviet presence in the UAR, could serve to perpetuate
Middle East tensions and instability.
5. (S) Economically, a reopened Suez Canal probably would ben-
efit US NATO Allies, Japan, and countries which produce primary
products along the Indian Ocean littoral. This economic impact could
be beneficial to the United States. For the Soviets, a reopened canal
would provide some economic benefit, but its principal consequence
would be strategic.
6. (C) The US Government has traditionally held that international
waterways should be open to all international shipping. Therefore, any
contrary position regarding the reopening of the Suez Canal would be
at odds with the traditional US position and could hinder US initia-
tives to obtain international agreement regarding territorial seas and
fishing areas.
7. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff conclude that:
a. A reopened Suez Canal offers a greater strategic advantage to
the Soviets than to the United States.
b. On balance, the relative disadvantage of an open canal should
be accepted in the interest of promoting peace and regional stability.
If, as a part of reopening the canal, Soviet presence in the UAR were
reduced, this relative disadvantage to the United States would tend to
be offset.
c. The US Government should support a diplomatic initiative
which might seek an understanding for a significant reduction of So-
viet military presence within the UAR in return for US support for a
canal reopening.
d. The primary significance of the canal, at present, is its impor-
tance as an element in Middle East peace initiatives.
e. The reopening of the Suez Canal, as part of a viable agreement
between the UAR and Israel providing for equal access to the Suez
Canal by all nations, would be in the best interest of the United States.
8. (S) The Joint Chiefs of Staff will introduce background infor-
mation used in the development of the above conclusions to the Na-
tional Security Council Interdepartmental Group, Near East and South
Asia, for review.
For the Joint Chiefs of Staff:
Mason Freeman
Rear Admiral, USN
102
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
31.
Memorandum From Richard Kennedy of the National
Security Council Staff to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1
Washington, August 28, 1971.
SUBJECT
CIA Analysis of Soviet Covert Activity in Mideast
Two weeks ago Al Haig sent CIA some questions (Tab A)2 about
possible Soviet covert involvement in recent events in various parts of
the Middle East—such as the upheavals in Morocco and the Sudan,
Libya’s efforts to buy off Malta, Soviet pressure on Ethiopia via threats
of increased aid to Somalia and the Sudan, and the Cyprus situation.
Our staff seemed skeptical about the degree of Soviet involvement, and
Al wanted an independent judgment. He also wanted to know if the
Russians have stepped up their covert action program lately.
CIA has come back with its answers (Tab B),3 which boil down to
the following:
—Soviet covert operations increased in the first year after the 1967
war. But events since Nasser’s death “are all manifestations of trends
in the Arab world that are not only not stimulated by Moscow but in
general add up to a set-back for the Soviet covert action capacity” in
the area.
—Specifically, CIAsees the Moroccan and Sudanese upheavals and
Libyan actions as internally generated, with no evidence of Soviet col-
lusion.4 “There is no evidence” that Soviet military aid to Sudan and
Middle East Region
103
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 647,
Country Files, Middle East, Middle East General, Vol. VIII. Secret. Sent for information.
Drafted by Rodman. Printed from an uninitialed copy.
2 Attached but not printed at Tab A is an August 12 memorandum from Tom La-
timer, White House Staff, to Cord Meyer, Acting Deputy Director for Plans, CIA.
3 Attached but not printed at Tab B is an August 19 memorandum from Meyer to
Latimer, which enclosed an August 18 report. An attached note reads, “File—White
House side of street only.”
4 References are to a failed coup in Morocco and a successful mid-July coup in Su-
dan. The August 18 CIA report enclosed at Tab B concluded that the Soviets may have
had insight and been supportive of the coups but were not involved. There was no ev-
idence that Libya and the USSR were working “hand-in-glove in the Mediterranean.”
The report also noted that Qadhafi’s offer to Malta of $10 million annually for 10 years,
and an offer to import skilled Maltese labor and technicians in return for eliminating
British military bases on Malta was consistent with Qadhafi’s stated intentions to elim-
inate all foreign military bases from the Mediterranean. This ran counter to Soviet re-
jection of the idea that both the United States and the USSR leave the Mediterranean.
Somalia is “designed to intimidate Haile Selassie,” although it does
“serve to put pressures on him” (a subtle distinction!). And Moscow
has been cautious on Cyprus, for fear of upsetting the Greeks and par-
ticularly the Turks.
—CIA believes that “in the past year the Soviets have, for the first
time in more than a decade, been forced by events into a defensive
covert action posture.” The Soviets sustained an offensive over the pre-
vious decade that was generally successful, but their capability has now
suffered serious setbacks—Sadat’s move in May against the pro-
Moscow elite in Cairo; extensive damage to the influence of the pro-
Soviet WFTU in the Egyptian and Sudanese labor movements. In gen-
eral, “the political tide is running against the USSR” in Egypt, Libya,
and Sudan, and the Soviets are encountering “other problems” (un-
specified) in the Persian Gulf and Arabian peninsula.
—In conclusion, CIA believes that the situation in the Mediter-
ranean and Mideast is, “from a U.S. viewpoint, now more favorable
for covert action as a means of achieving limited U.S. objectives than
it has been for some years.”
32.
Memorandum for the President’s Files by the President’s
Deputy Assistant for National Security Affairs (Haig)1
Washington, March 14, 1972, 11:45 a.m.
SUBJECT
Meeting with His Excellency Nassir Assar, Secretary-General of CENTO, 
on March 14, 1972 at 11:45 a.m., The Oval Office
PARTICIPANTS
President Nixon
His Excellency Nassir Assar, Secretary-General of CENTO
Ambassador Mosbacher
Major General A. M. Haig, Jr.
Following press photographs, President Nixon welcomed Secretary-
General Nassir Assar to Washington noting that while he was cognizant
104
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, Box 998,
Alexander M. Haig Chronological Files, Haig MemCons, Jan–Dec 1972. Secret. Drafted
on March 18.
of the Secretary-General’s international hat, he also wished to express
to the Secretary-General his warm regards to the Shah of Iran on whose
staff the Secretary-General was previously assigned.
Secretary-General Assar expressed his deepest appreciations to
President Nixon for his willingness to receive him and to thereby man-
ifest his support for the CENTO Organization. Secretary-General As-
sar noted that he had long admired President Nixon’s leadership but
that as a result of recent events, he had now concluded that President
Nixon was indeed the inspirational and intellectual leader of the West-
ern world. He commented that the recent successful trip to Peking and
all that it represented for mankind constituted one of the most signif-
icant achievements in modern times and that this accomplishment was
proof positive of President Nixon’s role as a world leader.
President Nixon thanked the Secretary-General for his comments
and pointed out that he had long supported the CENTO concept rec-
ognizing that many of its original military objectives had changed and
that its cooperative effort in functional areas such as trade, communi-
cations, etc. had become more important aspects of the role CENTO
would play in the future. The President pointed out that in the months
ahead the CENTO membership should give particular attention to
strengthening the spirit and morale of Pakistan which had suffered
grievously in a real and psychological sense in recent months.
The Secretary-General stated that he agreed completely with Pres-
ident Nixon’s comments and noted that he would strive to assist the
Government of Pakistan through cooperative efforts by the CENTO
membership. He also noted that it would be very important in the
months ahead for the United States to continue to provide assistance
to the CENTO membership and President Nixon agreed that the United
States would make every effort to do so.
As the meeting concluded, President Nixon informed Secretary-
General Assar that he would be visiting Iran in conjunction with the
forthcoming visit to the Soviet Union cautioning him that this infor-
mation had not yet been made public.2
Secretary-General Assar stated that he had now realized three ma-
jor accomplishments as a result of his visit to Washington. First, he had
had an opportunity to visit personally with the greatest leader of the
Western world. Secondly, that leader had promised continuing support
for the CENTO Organization and thirdly, as an Iranian, he was moved
and pleased beyond expectations as a result of his knowledge that the
President would soon be visiting his homeland.
Middle East Region
105
2 Nixon visited Iran May 30–31, as he returned from a European trip that included
the Summit in Moscow May 22–30.
33.
Action Memorandum From the Assistant Secretary of State
for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs (Sisco) to Acting
Secretary of State Irwin1
Washington, May 4, 1972.
Proposed Reply to Admiral Moorer re CENTO Political Guidance
There is attached at Tab B Admiral Moorer’s letter of April 182 to
the Secretary alerting us to new efforts on the part of the CENTO re-
gional members (Iran, Pakistan and Turkey) to revise the political guid-
ance for military planning to permit planning for regional contingen-
cies. At present, the guidance limits planning to countering aggression
by Communist nations in the context of a global nuclear war.
For years, we and the British have resisted periodic attempts at
this type of revision of the standing guidance, both to avoid involve-
ment in regional squabbles and to avoid accusations of assisting in
planning military action against such “friendly” countries as India and
certain Arab nations. Surprisingly, we are told that in this latest renewal
of the effort (relatively dormant since 1969), the United Kingdom mil-
itary delegate is siding with the regional states and will recommend
change in the UK position to the Foreign Secretary.3
A proposed reply to Admiral Moorer is at Tab A.4
Recommendation:
That you sign the attached letter to Admiral Moorer.5
106
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, CENTO 3. Confidential.
Drafted by Robert W. Chase (NEA/RA) on May 2 and cleared in NEA, EUR/BMI, and
PM/ISP and by Van Hollen.
2 Attached but not printed.
3 The issue arose at the June 1–2 CENTO Ministerial meeting held in London. Pak-
istan, backed by Iran, Turkey, and Secretary General Assar, pushed for a revision of the
political guidance. Rogers convinced the members to drop their demands and settle for
a reassessment of the threat to CENTO. (Telegram 5306 from London, June 8; National
Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, CENTO 3) The threat assessment is printed as
Document 36.
4 Attached but not printed at Tab A is the proposed letter in which Irwin assured
Moorer that Sisco and his staff would consult with the JCS before the June CENTO
meeting.
5 Irwin signed the attached letter.
34.
Airgram From the Embassy in the United Arab Emirates to
the Department of State1
A–31
Abu Dhabi, October 26, 1972.
SUBJECT
Bank of Credit and Commerce International S.A. Comes to Town
T. Marvin Hancock, an employee of the Bank of America who ar-
rived in Abu Dhabi recently to participate in the establishment of the
Bank of Credit and Commerce (BCC), has provided the Embassy with
the following information about the bank, its background and plans.
Background: Approximately ten months ago, the Bank of America
was approached by Mr. Agha Hassain Abedi, President of the United
Bank Ltd. Mr. Abedi, who is favorably known to the Bank of America,
explained that the United Bank, now the largest bank in Pakistan, had
lost more than one hundred branches as a result of the formation of
Bangladesh and found itself with a surfeit of trained officers and em-
ployees. According to Mr. Abedi, there is also a strong likelihood that
private banks in Pakistan will be nationalized and a significant per-
centage of United Bank personnel have become interested in promot-
ing an international banking institution into which they could trans-
fer. The Bank of America agreed to participate in the proposed venture.
Mr. Abedi had reportedly made a similar proposition to American Ex-
press, but the effort did not work out.
Nature of the BCC: The Bank of Credit and Commerce International
S.A. was incorporated in Luxembourg about one month ago and prem-
ises have been selected in that city for an office. Luxembourg was cho-
sen because it offered advantages in incorporation and taxes while at
the same time being recognized as maintaining high standards of su-
pervision over financial ventures, a qualification on which Mr. Abedi
reportedly insisted. The head office of the Bank will be located nomi-
nally in Luxembourg, but the actual operations will be run by the Gen-
eral Manager, Gulf Region who will be based in Abu Dhabi. This po-
sition will be filled by Mr. Naqvi, who resigned from the United Bank
at the time of the BCC incorporation and is now setting up the Abu
Dhabi operation. Mr. Hancock will serve as his deputy in Abu Dhabi.
Middle East Region
107
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, POL6 UAE. Confiden-
tial. Drafted on October 10 by W. Nathaniel Howell, Jr., Economic and Commercial 
Officer, and approved by Philip J. Griffin, Chargé. Passed to Commerce and Treasury. 
It was repeated to London, Luxembourg, Kuwait, Manama, Muscat, Tehran, Beirut,
Karachi, Islamabad, and Dacca.
The BCC is capitalized at $5 million, of which one half is paid in.
It is expected that this ratio will be maintained as the capitalization
rises to an anticipated $10 million in the next five years. The venture
is fully subscribed with Bank of America holding a 25 per cent inter-
est and the remaining 75 per cent being controlled by local investors.
Mr. Hancock promised to provide a complete list of the approximately
20 investors but gave the following tentative breakdown: Shaikh Za-
yid, President of the UAE and Ruler of Abu Dhabi, $1 million; Shaikh
Rasid, Vice President of the UAE and Ruler of Dubai, $300,000; and
Shaikh Hamdan of the Abu Dhabi ruling family and an unnamed Dubai
merchant an undisclosed amount. He added that some private Egypt-
ian money is involved. At present, there is no Pakistani participation,
but senior Pakistani officials of the BCC will have options to take over
at least a portion of the Abu Dhabi share.
Mr. Abedi plans to leave his position as President of the United
Bank in about two months to become President of the BCC. He is a fi-
nancial and investment advisor to Shaikh Zayid and possesses good
local contacts. It is felt that Shaikh Zayid and perhaps other Gulf in-
vestors have taken shares to accommodate Mr. Abedi who will become
a major shareholder of the bank. Other officials and staff of the United
Bank will likewise shift to the BCC, once it is a going concern.
Present Plans: The Regional Office is scheduled to open in Abu
Dhabi on or about October 30, 1972. Branches will also be opened in
the market place, on one of the main commercial streets (across from
the FNCB branch), and at Al Ain in the interior of the Emirate. A branch
is under construction in Dubai and should be completed within 30
days, and small, three-man facilities are projected for Sharjah and Umm
Al-Qaiwain in the immediate future and for all the Emirates of the UAE
within the next year.
Outside of the UAE, negotiations are underway for the opening
of branches in Bahrain and Qatar. The BCC plans to function in Mus-
cat but faces some organizational difficulties which are now being
worked out. Operations in the Sultanate must be in the hands of a sub-
sidiary which will be capitalized at about $1 million. This subsidiary
will be owned 30% by BCC, 20% by Bank of America, and 50% by a
local firm, Towel. The Bank of America will decide in the next ten days
whether or not to pick up the 20% offered as its share.
The BCC intends to offer a full range of commercial banking serv-
ices at the outset. Eventually, trust services will be added. Bank of
America, through the BCC, is taking extreme care that the new ven-
ture not raid the accounts currently held by the United Bank. Mr. Han-
cock emphasized that when the United Bank personnel change over to
the BCC, they will scrupulously avoid bringing accounts with them.
In this connection, the Bank of America’s concern is that its association
108
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
with former United Bank personnel in this new venture might work
to the detriment of Bank of America branches in Pakistan. Rather, the
new bank will concentrate on garnering the accounts of the Muslim
merchants in the Gulf. One exception to the policy vis-à-vis United
Bank, however, is that some of the services which that institution has
traditionally provided to Shaikh Zayid will be transferred to BCC. For
example, a United Bank representative always travels in Shaikh Za-
yid’s entourage when he leaves the country. This representative serves
as banking advisor and carries the party’s bankroll in the form of trav-
eller’s checks. BCC will now provide this service.
Comment: While it has been publicly announced that BCC will be
opening in the near future and it is no secret that Mr. Hancock is in
town, he provided much of the information contained in this airgram
in confidence. In particular, the BCC does not want details of its plans
widely known until it can officially inform the shareholders of its open-
ing. Apprised by the Embassy of some interest in the venture expressed
by the Pakistani Ambassador to the UAE, Hancock said for the pro-
tection of the Pakistani citizens involved, it was thought best not to
mention anything about the new bank to Pakistani officials, here, al-
though apparently Mr. Abedi has informed President Bhutto of his
plans.
Stoltzfus
Middle East Region
109
35.
Memorandum From the Executive Secretary of the
Department of State (Eliot) to the President’s Assistant for
National Security Affairs (Kissinger)1
Washington, December 6, 1972.
SUBJECT
Proposal for a Joint US/Israeli Desalination Development Program
Summary
At National Security Council direction a study was undertaken in
1969 on the desirability of U.S. participation in a large-scale desalting
plant in Israel. The study concluded that further research was needed
and, therefore, the U.S. should not participate in the project. This rec-
ommendation was endorsed by the President and in turn conveyed to
the Government of Israel. Since then, Israel has made progress in de-
salting technology and its overall program has reached a stage where
a joint development program including construction of a large-scale
desalting facility could be mutually beneficial. This memorandum rec-
ommends that such a joint program be undertaken to be funded from
the appropriation provided for this purpose under Section 219 of the
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 as amended.
Background
National Security Study Memorandum 30 of March 19, 1969,2 re-
quested a study of the economic and technological aspects of large-
scale desalting in the Middle East and of proceeding with the con-
struction of a 40 million gallon per day (mgd) desalting plant in Israel.
This proposal involved the application of then existing technology to
a much larger scale facility than had ever been built before. The re-
sponse to NSSM 303 pointed out the risks in such a significant scale-
up, the unlikelihood that such a project would lead to a significant re-
duction in the cost of water, and that new technology being developed
110
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, Nixon Presidential Materials, NSC Files, NSC Institu-
tional Files (H-Files), Box H–212, National Security Decision Memoranda, NSDM 32. No
classification marking. Attachments not printed. In an October 6 telephone conversation,
Kissinger told Morton that a $10 million project was “symbolically of great interest” to
the Israelis and that he should meet with Rabin. (Ibid., Kissinger Telephone Conversa-
tions, Box 16, Chronological Files) On October 18, Morton notified Kissinger that he had
met with Rabin regarding Israeli plans for desalination and their request for a U.S. com-
mitment of $10 million in support of this program. He included a timeline of significant
decisions regarding desalination in Israel. (Ibid.)
2 Document 5.
3 See footnote 3, Document 9.
by the Department of the Interior, Office of Saline Water (OSW) could
lead to a significant reduction in the cost of desalting water.
National Security Decision Memorandum 32 of November 6,
1969,4 advised that the President had decided that: “Budgetary con-
siderations apart, the Administration believes that intermediate ex-
perimentation with new technology is necessary before a large oper-
ating plant can be built anywhere. The Administration believes that
there are compelling advantages to doing this work in the U.S.” How-
ever, “The Administration is keeping open the possibility of later co-
operation in the Israeli project.”
Concurrent with this Administration action, the Congress added
Section 219 to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 as amended (Attach-
ment A) and pursuant thereto authorized and appropriated $20 mil-
lion to finance U.S. participation in an Israeli desalting project. The
funds were provided “for the purpose of improving existing and de-
veloping and advancing new, technology and experience in the design,
construction, and operation of large-scale desalting plants of advanced
concepts which will contribute materially to low-cost desalination in
all countries . . .” and, if it is determined to be feasible, to participate
in the development of a large-scale desalting prototype plant to be con-
structed in Israel. The legislation contained safeguards to insure the
full availability to the U.S. of any research and development findings.
Congress also stipulated that no part of the appropriated funds could
be used for construction until the proposed project had been reviewed
by the appropriate Congressional committees.
In accordance with NSDM 32, the Government of Israel and the ap-
propriate Congressional committees were advised that the Administra-
tion did not intend to go ahead with an Israeli project at that time. Nev-
ertheless, Israeli and Congressional interest remained high and each year
Section 219 has been carried forward and the funds reappropriated.5
Discussion
In February 1971, the Government of Israel presented to A.I.D. a
proposal to establish a partnership venture between the U.S. and Is-
rael to construct a prototype dual-purpose power generating and de-
salting plant at Ashdod, Israel, with a capacity of 11 mgd. The plant
was to employ a horizontal tube, multiple effect process (HTME) tech-
nology being developed by Israel Desalination Engineering, Limited,
Middle East Region
111
4 Document 14.
5 The funds have been carried forward through FY 72. However, they are not in-
cluded in the current modified Continuing Resolution under which A.I.D. now operates.
With passage of a regular FY 1973 A.I.D. appropriation, it is expected that funds will
again be reappropriated. No obligation for the proposed project can be made until this
occurs. [Footnote is in the original.]
a wholly-owned government corporation. It is a well-known and tested
process and by itself not a significant technological advancement.
However, Israel proposed using aluminum tubing in the plant, and the
application of this low-cost material did hold promise of significantly
reducing the cost of desalted water.
A.I.D., utilizing the expertise of OSW, has reviewed the Israeli pro-
posal. A team of A.I.D. and OSW engineers went to Israel in July 1972
to examine the Israeli facilities and its research program in detail, and
further technical discussions were held in Washington during late Oc-
tober 1972. The understanding reached by the technical staffs which
participated in these discussions is attached (B).
In summary: The Israelis sought U.S. financing for the one mgd pi-
lot plant at Elat now under construction. If operating results from this
point are satisfactory, the Government of Israel proposed to proceed di-
rectly to design and construction of the 11 mgd prototype plant. An ad-
vance commitment to this plant was also sought. OSW representatives
have been concerned with the limited amount of operating experience
in aluminum tubing and also maintained that, due to the large scaling-
up involved in going from a 1 mgd to an 11 mgd plant, there should be
an intermediate testing phase. Agreement was finally reached at the re-
cent Washington meetings by staff representatives that there would be
an intermediate stage involving the construction of a two-effect test mod-
ule at the OSW test facility in San Diego, California. OSW considers that,
with an expansion of the Israeli program to include module construc-
tion at San Diego, sufficient data would become available on scale-up to
confirm design assumptions for an 11 mgd plant and, thus, allow its con-
struction withour major risks. Furthermore, as many of the ancillary fa-
cilities are already present at San Diego, it is expected that construction
of the module there will involve cost-savings over construction in Israel.
Israeli engineers tentatively estimate the total cost of the full pro-
gram at $32 million (including the test module in San Diego). The U.S.
share would be approximately $15 million. Of this, we estimate that
approximately $2 million would be expended during USFY 1973 and
USFY 1974.
The program provisionally agreed to by the U.S. and Israel techni-
cal representatives generally complements work being undertaken by
OSW. OSW has done some work with aluminum tubing, but the em-
phasis in the OSW program has been on the vertical tube evaporation/
multi-stage flash (VTE/MSF) process, which is believed to represent a
significant advance in process technology over the Israeli process.6
112
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
6 At this stage, the OSW VTE/MSF program is ahead of the Israeli program as a four-
effect module of a 12.5 mgd plant is scheduled to begin operations in mid–CY 1973, which 
OSW does not, however, use aluminum tubing, but more costly copper-
nickel due to its corrosion resistance. The Israeli development program
has taken a different approach. It has refined existing horizontal tube
technology within established limits of temperatures, pressures and
other design parameters and concentrated its efforts on the develop-
ment of a design suitable for the use of cheaper aluminum tubing.
Participation in the joint program would provide the U.S., and
through it, U.S. industry which would be involved in module con-
struction, with access to the Israeli technology and operating experi-
ence in the design and use of aluminum tubing, the development of
an alternative competitive desalting technology, and, most importantly,
through the two-effect module program at San Diego, an opportunity
to test Israeli equipment extensively over a wide range of conditions
and, thereby, explore the possible blending of Israeli materials devel-
opments with U.S. process advancements.
Based on the experience gained in the past three years by the Is-
raelis with their process and desalting technology development in the
U.S., we believe that it is in our interest to embark with the GOI on the
cooperative research and development program proposed by the GOI.
We believe that with the inclusion of the intermediate testing phase 
at San Diego the design technology will be sufficiently developed to
justify participation. Through this joint effort we expect to obtain 
technical and operating experience which complements current U.S.
programs and which could significantly advance the realization of 
a process for the production of low-cost desalted water. We would 
be acting in accord with the expressed intent of the Congress as set
forth in Section 219 of the Foreign Assistance Act. We would be keep-
ing faith with our repeated pledge to Israel to work closely with it in
this field.
Therefore, we, together with A.I.D. and the Department of the In-
terior, recommend approval of our proceeding to conclude a formal
agreement with the Government of Israel and, subject to Congressional
consultations, to commit funds under Section 219 of the Foreign Assis-
tance Act to finance the U.S. share of the joint development program out-
lined in the Memorandum of Understanding signed November 3, 1972.
RH Miller7
Middle East Region
113
is at least 18 months sooner than the two-effect module proposed in the joint program.
[Footnote is in the original.]
7 R.H. Miller signed above Eliot’s typed signature.
36.
Airgram From the Department of State to the Embassies in
Turkey, Pakistan, the United Kingdom, and Iran1
A–12456
Washington, December 28, 1972, 1:32 p.m.
SUBJECT
Assessment of the Situation in the CENTO Area
Enclosed are copies of papers prepared in response to the decision
of the CENTO Council of Ministers in London last June for an “as-
sessment of the situation” in the CENTO area.2
Embassy Ankara may submit the paper to the CENTO Secretariat
as the United States’ contribution to the proposed study.
Johnson
Attachment3
Assessment of the Situation in the CENTO Area
[Omitted here are sections dealing with Syria and Iraq.]
The Persian Gulf
Saudi Arabia is committed to an ambitious program of modern-
izing its defense and internal security forces although it will remain
heavily dependent upon outside military advice and technical assist-
ance for some years. To block further Soviet encroachment into the
Peninsula the Saudis are providing economic and some military aid to
Yemen and have under consideration requests for similar aid to Oman.
The Saudis have also continued to provide arms and money to the Na-
tional Unity Front and to Southern Yemeni tribal dissidents in their bid
to topple the extreme leftist regime in Aden. The Saudi leadership is
also aware of the need for closer cooperation with Iran and with the
Lower Gulf states if stability in the Gulf is to be preserved. Closer re-
114
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
1 Source: National Archives, RG 59, Central Files 1970–73, DEF 4 CENTO. Limited
Official Use. Drafted by Chase (NEA/RA); cleared in NEA/IRN, NEA/PAB, NEA/TUR,
EUR/NE; and approved in NEA/RA. 
2 See footnote 3, Document 33. In a December 9 memorandum to Moorer, Colonel
J. Angus MacDonald, member of the JCS Staff Group, wrote that “judging from the qual-
ity of the drafts, I suspect that the UK version will be more acceptable as the matrix for
the final report than would the U.S. version. That, however, will be a matter for the SYG
to decide.” (National Archives, RG 218, Records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Records of
Admiral Thomas Moorer, Box 125, Misc. File, CENTO Minutes, April 1972)
3 CENTO; Secret.
lations with the UAE will have to await, however, resolution of the lin-
gering Saudi territorial dispute with Abu Dhabi.
The overall stability in the area has not been greatly affected since
the nine formerly British-protected shaykhdoms of the Lower Gulf
gained independence in 1971. The immediate effect of the British re-
linquishment of their treaty obligations to manage the defense and for-
eign relations of the shaykhdoms has been small, aside from the with-
drawal of British troops from their former bases in Sharjah and Bahrain.
Many British officers, on contract or secondment, have remained be-
hind to assist the new states, particularly in defense and internal se-
curity matters. Except for occasional visits by Soviet naval units to Iraq
and Iran and the special relationship they have established with Iraq,
Soviet presence in the Gulf remains restricted. The Soviets (as do other
communist countries including China) have an embassy in Kuwait.
Following an approach to the UAE early in 1972, they have an agree-
ment in principle to open an embassy in Abu Dhabi but this has not
to date been implemented. Similar approaches to Oman, Qatar and
Bahrain have been turned down.
Kuwait
Kuwait’s relative calm belies the many external and internal desta-
bilizing forces in the country. Internally, more than half the population
is non-Kuwaiti and is in the country on sufferance—its continued pres-
ence is predicated upon periodic renewal of residence and working
permits. Many in this group are Palestinian white collar workers, who,
in their deep-rooted opposition to Israel, would like to see Kuwait more
firmly committed to the anti-Western camp of radical Arab national-
ism. Externally, Kuwait faces the hostility of Iraq, which from time to
time has pressed its claim that Kuwait, formerly a part of the Ottoman
Sanjak of Basrah, is Iraqi Territory. So far, at least, Kuwait has been able
to counter these pressures by liberal wages for its workers (at least by
regional standards) and by including potential opponents among the
Arab states which receive generous Kuwaiti development loans and
subsidies. As a result, many of these states—including Iraq—have too
great a stake in the continued largesse of Kuwait to initiate or counte-
nance moves against it.
Bahrain
Of the nine Lower Gulf shaykhdoms, Bahrain has the largest, most
sophisticated population and also the greatest potential for dissidence.
About a half dozen dissident groups have been organized in Bahrain, in-
cluding the Marxist National Liberation Front–Bahrain (NLF–B), the Arab
Nationalist Movement (ANM), Ba’thi groups of both the Syrian and Iraqi
brands, and elements of the Popular Front for the Liberation of the Oc-
cupied Arab Gulf (PFLOAG). In addition, various Palestinian fedayeen
Middle East Region
115
groups are also active in Bahrain. Further growth of its small (by Gulf
standards) oil industry is not to be expected, making the need for eco-
nomic diversification more pressing in Bahrain than in the other oil ex-
porting states of the area. Over the longer run, if employment opportu-
nities decrease there may be considerable unrest. However, in spite of a
rash of labor protest demonstrations in March 1972, Bahraini security
forces currently appear to have internal security reasonably well in hand.
Qatar
Although there has already been a coup since independence last
year, the political stability of Qatar does not seem to have been adversely
affected. In February 1972, Shaykh Khalifa bin Hamid al-Thani ousted
his cousin Shaykh Ahmad bin Ali al-Thani and took over as Head of
State. The coup was a family affair; however, most residents of Qatar
consider the enlightened Khalifa to be a much more competent ruler
than his predecessor. The coup has thus increased the popularity of the
ruling family in Qatar which like Kuwait, Abu Dhabi and Dubai, has
a large alien population. The growing oil wealth of the country is a sta-
bilizing factor, and an efficient police security force remains alert to
counter any subversive activities, particularly any which might be un-
dertaken by the former ruler or his supporters.
The UAE
The seven shaykhdoms of the UAE appear to be relatively stable
for the short term. A long-standing border dispute between Abu Dhabi
and Saudi Arabia remains unresolved and continues to becloud rela-
tions between Saudi Arabia and the UAE. However, the Central Gov-
ernment under UAE President Shaykh Zayid has recently moved to es-
tablish diplomatic relations with Iran. In the poorer shaykhdoms,
population is too limited and political awareness still too restricted to
pose a threat. In the two oil-rich shaykhdoms, Abu Dhabi and Dubai,
comparatively good wages and competent security forces appear ade-
quate for the present to maintain stability. The failure of a coup attempt
in Sharjah in January 1972, which cost the life of the Ruler, can be viewed
as an example of the stabilizing forces at work within the UAE. Shaykh
Zayid immediately dispatched troops from his Abu Dhabi Defense
Force who, in cooperation with the Union Defense Force (formerly the
Trucial Oman Scouts), quickly put down the coup. This suggests that
the various UAE member states can cooperate if the need arises.
Over the long run, the Lower Gulf shaykhdoms will have to be
able to maintain their own security without British or other major
power assistance. Like Kuwait, they face serious problems—fluctuating
relations with much larger neighbors, a large alien population, in-
cluding numerous Palestinians, and radical Arab groups supported
from the outside.
116
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
Saudi Arabia has a major interest in maintaining Gulf stability, as
well as in finding a solution to its territorial dispute with Abu Dhabi.
The latter also involves the question of accessibility to the Lower Gulf
of Saudi oil discovered in the Empty Quarter. On balance, however,
Saudi Arabia has been slow to show the concern with Gulf affairs that
its interests would seem to indicate; it is more preoccupied with its op-
position to the People’s Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY).
The interest of outside powers in the Gulf is derived largely from
its position as the world’s major petroleum exporting region. While
Gulf oil is of great strategic interest to the West, and will probably be-
come increasingly important to the Soviets, there does not presently
appear to be any significant external military threat to the area states.
The greatest present challenge to Gulf stability is from dissident and
subversive activities generated in the Gulf states themselves and from
their increased exposure to the political and nationalist cross-currents
of the Arab world which independence has brought them.
The main political objective of the Soviets in the area is to increase
their influence at the expense of the West. It is extremely doubtful that,
in the pursuit of this objective, they would intervene overtly in the pol-
itics of the area, whether through military action or through support
of a military adventure by an Arab radical regime. The political costs
of such tactics would be very high in terms of the adverse reaction of
the other regional states with which the Soviets are trying to increase
their influence. The use of force by the USSR, for example, in support
of Iraq or a radical group trying to seize power in a lower Gulf state,
would probably so frighten local leaders that they would move closer
to the West for support.
In the regional context, Iraq’s ambitions to play a leading role in the
Gulf are opposed by the conservative Arab littoral states and by Iran.
Oman
All indications are that Sultan Qaboos is succeeding in curbing the
rebellion in his Western province of Dhofar, which is supported by
South Yemen with some Chinese assistance. The Sultan’s armed forces
are stretched thin but are effective in interdicting rebel supply lines
from neighboring South Yemen. Rebel defections continue. However,
the war remains a costly burden, especially since the Sultan has em-
barked on an ambitious development program for his country, which
only recently opened its doors to the outside world. Although unful-
filled Omani expectations have led to some criticism, Sultan Qaboos
appears to have widespread support and to be firmly in control.
The Yemens
In September–October 1972, the two Yemens came as close to full-
scale war as they had at any time since the People’s Democratic 
Middle East Region
117
Republic of the Yemen (PDRY) became independent in 1967, but they
quickly did an about-face and announced plans for unifying the PDRY
and the Yemen Arab Republic (YAR). In fact, neither effective unity nor
all-out war seems very likely at present. Unity has always been the
avowed aim of both Yemens, but the obstacles are great. The ruling
group in each country sees in union a means of extending its sway over
the other rather than establishing a true collaboration. Also, the pres-
ent leadership of the YAR has become cooler toward the Soviet Union
and leans slightly toward the West. The PDRY regime, by contrast, has
its antecedents in the radical Arab Nationalist Movement (ANM), is
militantly Marxist and relies on close cooperation with the USSR.
Despite their basic mutual hostility, however, both sides probably
realize that a prolonged war would strengthen the always potentially
dissident tribal elements in both countries and greatly overtax their
threadbare economies.
The unity talks thus provide a welcome respite for both sides and
have served to defuse the border situation. However, Saudi Arabia,
deeply worried about the radical orientation of the PDRY regime, has
continued to support PDRY exile groups which are based in the YAR.
These groups, collectively called the National Unity Front (NUF),
sparked the recent fighting through border incursions during Septem-
ber, and they may again be instrumental in provoking armed conflict.
For the time being, at least, both sides will probably try to keep bor-
der incidents from escalating, but the situation in the southwest part
of the Arabian Peninsula remains far from stable.
The Soviets and Arab radical groups will probably rely on politi-
cal subversion in the lower Persian Gulf rather than on direct inter-
vention. Even so, the Soviets are likely to be cautious in the manner in
which they participate in subversive activities and in their support of
subversive groups, in an effort to avoid an anti-Soviet reaction among
the local leaders.
Attachment4
SITUATION IN THE INDIAN OCEAN
SOVIET NAVAL PRESENCE
The Soviet Naval Presence
Over the past five years the Soviets have developed a virtually
continuous naval presence in the Indian Ocean. Soviet naval auxiliaries
118
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
4 CENTO; Secret.
and specially equipped merchant vessels began operating in the Indian
Ocean on a more or less continuous basis in August 1967 in connec-
tion with the Soviet space program. Soviet combatants, a cruiser and
two destroyers, appeared for the first time in the spring of 1968. The
combatants were in the Indian Ocean almost four months although
they spent about half their time visiting ports in India, Somalia, Iraq,
Iran, Pakistan, the UAR, Yemen and Ceylon. Submarines were added
to the next deployment of surface combatants in November 1968. Since
then, except for one week in the spring of 1968, there has always been
at least one Soviet combatant in the Indian Ocean.
Soviet naval presence increased slowly from 1968 through 1970.
There was an upsurge during the Indo-Pakistani war in December 1971
but the current Soviet naval presence appears to be approximately at
the pre-December 1971 level if Soviet ships engaged in harbor-clearing
operations in Chittagong, Bangladesh, are excluded from calculations.
While Soviet naval deployment varies from time to time a typical
group at present could include some or all of the following:
2 surface combatants, 1 of which might be missile armed
1 amphibious ship
1 diesel powered attack submarine
1–2 repair ships
2 or 3 oilers
1 ocean rescue tug or salvage rescue vessel
1 small refrigerator cargo vessel
3 space vehicle recovery ships and 1 oceanographic research vessel
In addition the Soviets have about 10 ships presently engaged in
the Chittagong operation including a varying number of minesweepers.
The combatant presence is augmented by the large Soviet fishing
and merchant fleet operating in the Ocean which can provide emer-
gency support and supply to Soviet naval vessels and perform intelli-
gence functions.
Airpower: Soviet airpower in the Indian Ocean is limited by the ab-
sence of shore-base or aircraft carrier capability but the Soviets have
flown naval TU–95 reconnaissance aircraft over the Arabian Sea from
bases in southern USSR since August 1968 in support of space vehicle
recovery operations.
Logistics: The Soviet naval presence is designed to be self-sustaining.
Necessary minor repairs and supply operations are conducted pri-
marily in international water at anchorages established near Socotra;
Cargados Carajos, about 200 nautical miles north/northeast of Mauri-
tius; Fortune Bank and in the area of the northeast Seychelles. The So-
viets also make port calls which are not essential for logistic purposes
but do lighten the burden. They have access to a number of ports in
which supply and repair operations could be conducted and appar-
ently have made limited logistic use of some of these, for example, in
Middle East Region
119
Somalia, Mauritius and Singapore. Despite reports of Soviet interest in
acquiring port facilities in various countries of the area there is no ev-
idence that Moscow has acquired or pressed for formal base rights.
Current Soviet Naval Operations
Soviet development of a naval presence in the Indian Ocean is re-
lated to both Soviet global naval policy and to Soviet political interest
in the region. The Soviets desire a naval capability in all oceans as an
appropriate element of great power status, seeking parity with west-
ern naval power. Great power strategic naval competition is not pres-
ent in the Indian Ocean and the Soviets have not seen it necessary to
develop a major strategic force. Nevertheless, they apparently take the
view that because they are a great power, and a prominent maritime
power in the Indian Ocean with large shipping and fishing interests, a
naval force to protect their sea lanes is required. The naval force also
performs space program support functions. At the same time the In-
dian Ocean operations offer an opportunity to enhance on-going So-
viet naval capability in the area by providing oceanographic and other
scientific research data, intelligence collection, training and familiar-
ization benefits for Soviet ships and crews and opportunities to “show
the flag.”
The Soviets have played their naval presence in low-key to the re-
gional powers. Port visits have remained at roughly the same level
since 1969 despite the gradual increase in Soviet naval operations in
the Ocean. The Soviets have avoided implying any potential regional
interventionist mission for the Indian Ocean force. This stance can be
explained merely as good politics but it also is consistent with an evolv-
ing status quo Soviet policy in Asia, a desire to avoid creating anti-
Soviet fears among littorals which might be exploited by the Chinese
and a fear that any image of gun-boat displomacy would erode rather
than enhance Soviet influence. On two occasions the Soviets did go be-
yond the mere “presence” function. A Soviet naval visit to Somalia co-
inciding with the April 1970 threatened coup was extended apparently
as a gesture of solidarity with the incumbent regime. There is no evi-
dence, however, that the Soviets considered naval intervention. Dur-
ing the Indo-Pakistan war of December 1971 the Soviets temporarily
built up their Indian Ocean force but some elements appeared pri-
marily assigned to track the movements of US ships.
Prospects for Expansion of Soviet Naval Strength
A major expansion of the Soviet naval presence is limited in the
first instance by the logistical problems inherent in operations far from
home ports. Assuming that the Soviets continue to expand their over-
all logistical strength they could sustain a steadily increasing combat-
ant presence if their priorities dictate. Reopening the Suez Canal would
120
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
reduce logistical problems and allow for expanded self-sustained op-
erations, but the Soviets do not seem to assign a high priority to this.
Beyond logistic restraints on major Soviet naval expansion there
are political constraints. Rapid expansion of Soviet naval power would
risk reaction among regional countries against potential Soviet impe-
rialism, a theme which the Chinese have already delighted in playing.
Littoral sensitivity to Great Power naval presence is real. For example,
the Indian Chief of Naval Staff on July 24, 1972 cited the Soviet ship
presence along with that of the Japanese, Americans and Chinese as
an object of concern for the Indians. Littoral powers, particularly Sri
Lanka who are pressing for an Indian Ocean zone of peace would vo-
cally oppose a Soviet (or western) buildup.
Furthermore, the Soviets may calculate that a rapid Soviet buildup
would lead to a naval arms race with western powers in the region
and there is no present indication that they would want to take this
risk. In this regard, twice in the past 18 months the question of avoid-
ing military competition in the Indian Ocean has been briefly touched
upon in US/Soviet talks, but not seriously pursued. The last occasion
was in July 1971 and the subject has not since been raised by either
country.5
Although a major expansion of the Soviet naval presence is not
likely under present circumstances, the limited Soviet fleet could serve
as a nucleus for a larger strategic force, should the USSR consider an
expanded presence desirable because of a perceived threat to Soviet in-
terests in the region or possibly if the Soviets were presented with an
unusual opportunity to advance their interests.
The Soviets have built assets for such a contingency. They have
gained experience in Indian Ocean operations, established a visible
presence and have cultivated friendly access to a number of ports in
the region. This has permitted their personnel to familiarize themselves
with port facilities in a region which for a long time was barely visited
by Russian men-of-war. In addition, the Soviets have provided assist-
ance in building or expanding port facilities at Berbera, Somalia;
Hodeyda, Yemen Arab Republic; Umm Qasr, Iraq; and Vizakhapatnam,
India. They are helping to clear war debris from Chittagong, and the
port of Aden has a Soviet harbor master among several foreigners so
employed. These activities not only help the familiarization process,
but also build up good will and get the population used to at least in-
termittent presence of Soviet ships and/or naval personnel.
Middle East Region
121
5 For documentation on these talks, see Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, volume XIII,
Soviet Union, October 1970–October 1971.
Impact on Free World Interests
Soviet naval influence on Free World interests in the Indian Ocean
appears to be potential rather than a clear and present danger whether
viewed in terms of Soviet forces in being or of Soviet priorities. Soviet
appreciation of regional sensitivity to gun-boat diplomacy makes So-
viet naval intervention in the region a likely contingency only in the
case of developments which the Soviets would consider as a threat to
their vital interests or possibly if they were presented with an unusual
opportunity to expand their influence. Under present circumstances
the Soviets are likely to continue to rely primarily on economic and
military assistance and diplomacy to advance their interests in the area.
Soviet successes in expanding their political influence in the re-
gion will, however, serve to enhance their naval capability by allow-
ing greater and more useful access to regional ports. Soviet access to
littoral airfields for reconnaissance operations likewise would enhance
their naval capability.
Furthermore, the Soviet naval presence offers psychological if not
tangible support to various littoral powers and may encourage them
to increase efforts to undermine neighboring regimes.
In conclusion, it appears prudent to maintain a careful watch on
Soviet naval facilities in the Indian Ocean to assure that the current
limited use of this force remains limited. Special attention must be paid
to any indications that Soviet policy has begun to focus on developing
naval-oriented assets in the Indian Ocean as a primary rather than an-
cillary goal of Soviet activities in the region.6
122
Foreign Relations, 1969–1976, Volume XXIV
6 Another attached paper dealing with India is not printed.
