INEEL/CON-01-00907 
PREPRINT
Monitoring Moisture Content In Surface Barriers 
Using A Passive Sensor Platform 
Dennis C. Kunerth 
John M. Svoboda 
John M. Slater 
James E. Lee 
September 6, 2001 
Subsurface Science Symposium 
This is a preprint of a paper intended for publication in a 
journal or proceedings. Since changes may be made  
before publication, this preprint should not be cited or 
reproduced without permission of the author. 
This document was prepared as an account of work 
sponsored by an agency of the United States Government. 
Neither the United States Government nor any agency 
thereof, or any of their employees, makes any warranty, 
expressed or implied, or assumes any legal liability or 
responsibility for any third party's use, or the results  
of such use, of any information, apparatus, product or 
process disclosed in this report, or represents that its  
use by such third party would not infringe privately  
owned rights. The views expressed in this paper are  
not necessarily those of the U.S. Government or the 
sponsoring agency. 
Monitoring Moisture Content In Surface Barriers Using A Passive Sensor Platform 
Dennis C. Kunerth, John M. Svoboda, John M. Slater, and James E. Lee 
Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory 
Idaho Falls, Idaho  83415 
Abstract
Work is being performed to develop a versatile micro-power sensor platform for the 
purpose of  periodic, remote sensing of environmental variables such as subsurface 
moisture or radiation.  The key characteristics of the platform architecture are that the 
components are passive, thereby requiring no internal power source and that it 
communicates with a "reader" via short range telemetry, i.e. no wires need penetrate 
barrier structure. Other significant attributes include the potential for a long service life 
and a compact size that makes it well suited for retrofitting existing barrier structures.  
Functionally, the sensor package is read by a short range induction coil that both 
activates/powers the sensor platform and detects the sensor output via a radio frequency 
signal generated by the onboard programmable interface controller microchip.  To date, 
a prototype of the platform has been constructed and tested with a commercial  
moisture sensor.  Work is now in progress to extend the capabilities of the existing 
platform to permit moisture sensing through landfill surface barriers (caps).  
Specifically, work is being performed to extend the telemetry range for transmission 
through a cap, select/develop low power sensor elements, and package the components 
to survive subsurface conditions.  Considerations are being given to minimize package 
dimensions to permit retrofit applications.  
Background 
Monitoring the performance of landfill caps will be important during the initial 
development and testing phases as well as during long term use. Little research has 
been conducted to establish viable strategies for long-term monitoring. Often, life-cycle 
monitoring costs at closed waste sites are estimated to 30 years without consideration of 
additional monitoring. At present, a water moisture monitoring strategy might involve 
multiple embedded sensors, each wired to a data logger or telemetry unit. The wires 
present obstacles to heavy equipment at the time of cap construction and subsequent cap 
maintenance, and use of wired sensors also implies cap penetrations. Any maintenance 
of sensors means additional penetrations. A means to mitigate such problems are to 
implement a sensor platform that is both wireless and passive. For this case, passive is 
defined as not having an onboard power source.  Power is provided by a “reader” on 
the surface via magnetic induction.     
The general configuration as it relates to a landfill cap can be understood from Figure 
1. The basic approach is that one or more probes, in this case probes containing 
moisture sensors and telemetry, are mounted at points of interest that will allow 
determining the functionality and/or integrity of the landfill cap.  
Landfill
Backfill
Fill material to create
required grade
Low-permeability layer
(capillary barrier)
Topsoil
Vegetation
Probe (or probe array)
includes sensor and
passive telemetry
Inductive loop
Data logger or
conventional telemetry
to remote data logger
Gc00 0656
Figure 1. Cross-section showing a landfill barrier.
We recognize that the cap must retard the downward flow of moisture, e.g., by an 
actual barrier or by evapotranspiration from vegetation. At least one probe would be 
mounted below the cap's moisture barrier, while the inductive loop of the reader, which 
requires power, resides on top of the barrier. The moisture barrier within a landfill cap 
generally does not exceed two meters in depth, even for complex designs.1  The data 
logger can be located at any convenient spot, and linked by conventional radio 
frequency telemetry to the reader. Use of multiple probes with a single reader is 
possible, allowing measurement of vertical moisture profiles and area monitoring. 
Moisture infiltration maps can be generated from such data. 
This sensor architecture has several desirable attributes: (a) there are no wires to 
impede barrier construction activity; (b) there is no penetration of the barrier; (c) the 
probe can be robust and small, and thereby useful as an insertion-mounted retrofit to 
existing caps; (d) data acquisition can be remote and automated, as long as it is 
consistent with the approximate two-meter limitation between probe and reader; (e) the 
probe is low-cost and deployable in large numbers; (f) multiple sensors can be 
incorporated into a single probe; and (g) multiple probes can be interrogated by a single 
reader.
Sensor Platform 
To test the concept, a prototype was developed and tested.  The platform was designed 
around a microcontroller produced by Microchip Technology.2  It is essentially a 
single-chip computer programmable in a C-like language. It contains onboard 
nonvolatile memory, multiple analogue-to-digital (A/D) channels, and digital 
communication ports. The microcontroller can handle all the logic needed for power 
management, operation of a sensor, and communication with the reader. 
The telemetry concept is for low-frequency magnetic fields to carry both energy and 
information. Low frequency has acceptable penetration in moist soil. Key parameters 
relating to penetration depth are the soil electrical conductivity and the frequency of the 
penetrating field. The attenuation of the magnetic field can be estimated using a 
conventional skin depth calculation. Conductivities in arid soils have been measured at 
the INEEL3 with typical maximum (saturated soil) direct current values of order 0.1 
Siemen/meter. Using this value, we expect that attenuation is not important if we stay 
with low frequencies and distances of about two meters or less. For reference, the 
electromagnetic skin depth at 100 kHz and the above conductivity value is 5 m. Von 
Hippel4 has measured conductivity values at 100 kHz, but for lower moisture levels, 
which is consistent with this 5-m estimate.  A working frequency of 125 kHz was used 
for the prototype.   
For the reader to acquire a reading from the probe, the basic sequence is as follows. 
The reader first sends out energy in the form of a pulsating magnetic field, which is 
captured and stored in a capacitor within the probe. The captured energy then powers 
the microcontroller, which instructs the sensor to perform a measurement. This value 
(e.g., moisture content) is then digitized. At that point, the microcontroller powers the 
probe transmitter and also controls frequency-shift keying to impress the digital reading 
on the transmitted waveform, with subsequent decoding by the reader. A variation 
would be that the reader supplies instructions to the probe, as well as energy. For 
example, the probe might be instructed to report the value of a particular onboard 
sensor or to adjust the operating range of a sensor. 
Figure 2 shows a simplified block diagram of the probe. The antenna, actually a 
resonant circuit, is used both for capturing energy from the reader and transmitting data 
back to the reader. As energy builds in the storage capacitor, the microcontroller begins 
Figure 2. Simplified block diagram of the sensor platform. 
to operate and polls the energy detector circuit to determine if the capacitor is fully 
charged, in which case about 5 volts are available. When that condition is achieved, the 
RF detection circuit is polled to determine if the reader (not shown) is still transmitting 
the energizing pulse. If not, the reader has stopped to listen. If so, the microcontroller 
interrogates the sensor, which requires applying power to it and digitizing its analog 
output.
At this point, the measurement result is stored in the microcontroller's memory. Power 
is then applied to the transmitter, which in turn drives the antenna. Frequency-shift 
keying is accomplished by switching a small capacitance in and out of the resonant 
circuit of the antenna; the switching is controlled by the communications port on the 
microcontroller.  The receiving process is straightforward. An FM receiver is tuned 
such that its passband is centered on one of the frequency components of the modulated 
wave. This produces analogue output from the receiver that is level shifted to become a 
proper RS-232 signal. That signal is captured by the serial port of a computer, which 
serves as the data logger.  
Antenna
RF Detector
Transmitter
Energy Detector
Energy Storage Capacitor
Sensor 1
Sensor 2
Microcontroller
Critical to operation is the method of power management within the platform, i.e. the 
platform and sensor(s) must operate on the low power available from the induced 
currents. The microcontroller has a low power sleep mode that is used during the 
charging period. During sleep, the chip periodically awakens at predetermined intervals 
to execute the instructions outlined above. The maximum separation of the platform 
from the reader is determined by the point at which the charging current is less than the 
sleep current.  Figure 3 is picture of the prototype platform and  moisture probe5 used 
to demonstrate  feasibility.  
Figure 3.  Prototype sensor platform
Microcontroller
Moisture 
 Probe 
Antenna
Microcontroller
Moisture
 Probe 
Current Status 
Efforts are now underway to develop and test a field deployable  moisture sensor.  To 
accomplish this task work needs to be performed to 1) extend the telemetry range, 2) 
develop programming to handle two way communications, and 3) package the 
components for subsurface use.   
Extended Telemetry Range - Although functional, the original prototype had a very 
limited telemetry range, approximately 0.6 meter in air.  To increase the range, 
improved antenna designs are being developed and tested. Presently, a 3.0 meter range 
in air has been achieved.  Further improvements will be necessary to address magnetic 
field losses due to the electrical conductivity of the soil.   
Two Way Communications – The effort to develop two way communications will allow 
multiple/separate sensor packages to be addressed and read. Included will be the ability 
to implement multiple sensor types in a single package, e.g. moisture, temperature, or 
other sensor types that meet the current speed and low power consumption 
requirements.     
Packaging – The current goal is to achieve a cylindrical package size of 5 cm in 
diameter by 30 cm in length.  This size will permit implementation using conventional 
drilling/boring techniques and/or insertion into existing wells.  Note that antenna  
orientation, i.e. the package, will need to be consistent with the orientation of the 
antenna used with the reader.  Internal to the package will be the microcontroller, 
antenna, and power storage capacitor bank.  The moisture sensor intended to be 
implemented has short range detection capabilities and will require it’s sensing 
components to be attached to and/or integrated with the external surface of the package. 
 Field testing of the completed moisture sensor package will be performed at facilities 
located at Hanford and/or the Nevada test Site. Both locations have instrumented test 
beds that will allow a direct comparison of the sensor package to current moisture 
sensing technologies.     
References 
1. 
G. W. Lee and A. L. Ward, “Still in Quest of the Prefect Cap,” conference 
proceedings of “Landfill Capping in the Semi-Arid West: Problems, Perspectives, 
and Solutions,” edited by T. D. Reynolds and R. C. Morris for the Environmental 
Science and Research Foundation, ESRF-019, Idaho Falls, ID, 1997. 
2. 
Microchip Technology, Inc. Programmable Interface Controller PIC16F876-
04/SP.
3. 
W. M. Roggenthen and D. K. Parrish, South Dakota School of Mines, “Factors 
Affecting Ground Probing Radar at the Radioactive Waste Management Complex 
Idaho National Engineering Laboratory,” prepared for EG&G Idaho, Contract 
No. C92-17099 (1994). 
4. 
A. R. Von Hippel, editor, “Dielectric Materials and Applications,” The 
Technology Press of MIT, John Wiley and Sons, New York. 
5. 
Decagon, Pictured is a prototype of commercially available Echo Probe. 
