APRIL 2004
639
B I L L E S B A C H E T A L .
q 2004 American Meteorological Society
A Portable Eddy Covariance System for the Measurement of Ecosystem–Atmosphere
Exchange of CO2, Water Vapor, and Energy
D. P. BILLESBACH
Department of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Nebraska—Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska
M. L. FISCHER
Environmental Energy Technologies Division, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, California
M. S. TORN
Center for Isotope Geochemistry, Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, California
J. A. BERRY
Department of Plant Biology, Carnegie Institution of Washington, Stanford, California
(Manuscript received 25 June 2003, in ﬁnal form 20 November 2003)
ABSTRACT
To facilitate the study of ﬂux heterogeneity within a region, the authors have designed and ﬁeld-tested a
portable eddy covariance system to measure exchange of CO 2, water vapor, and energy between the land surface
and the atmosphere. The combination of instrumentation used in this system allows high precision ﬂux mea-
surements without requiring on-site infrastructure such as prepositioned towers or line power. In addition, the
system contains sensors to measure a suit of soil, climatic, and energy-related parameters that are needed to
quality control the ﬂuxes and to characterize the ﬂux footprint. The physical design and instrument packaging
used in the system allows for simple transport (ﬁts in a standard minivan) and for rapid deployment with a
minimal number of ﬁeld personnel (usually less than a day for one person). The power requirement for the
entire system (instruments and data loggers) is less than 35 W, which is provided by a companion solar power
system.
Side-by-side ﬁeld comparisons between this system and two permanent AmeriFlux sites and between the
roving AmeriFlux intercomparison system are described here. Results of these comparisons indicate that the
portable system is capable of absolute ﬂux resolutions of about 61.2 mmol m22 s21 for CO2, 615 W m22 for
LE, 67 W m22 for H, and 60.06 m s21 for u* between any given 30-min averaging periods. It is also found
that, compared to a permanent Ameriﬂux site, the relative accuracy of this ﬂux estimates is between 1% and
7%. Based on these results, it is concluded that this portable system is capable of making ecosystem ﬂux
measurements with an accuracy and precision comparable to most permanent AmeriFlux systems.
1. Introduction
The inﬂuence of land use and management is a central
question in climate change research. Spatial patterns of
use and management generate strong heterogeneity in
surface albedo, and ﬂuxes of heat, water, and carbon
dioxide, as well as in other surface properties that force
climate. Previous work in forests (e.g., BOREAS, more
information available online at http://www.daac.ornl.
gov/BOREAS/boreasphomeppage.html.) and in grazed
or crop ecosystems (e.g., Bremer and Ham 2002) has
Corresponding author address: Dr. D. P. Billesbach, Department
of Biological Systems Engineering, University of Nebraska—Lin-
coln, Lincoln, NE 68583-0726.
E-mail: dbillesbach1@unl.edu
shown the importance of land alteration. Climate,
edaphic variables, and history may also create hetero-
geneity within a given vegetation type or crop man-
agement regime. Because the ﬁrst priority of most ﬂux
networks has been to achieve representation of the major
different vegetation types, there are few replicates with-
in a single vegetative land cover type. As a result, re-
gional estimates of carbon exchange commonly must
extrapolate a single eddy ﬂux site to all areas within the
same vegetation type or management regime, without
an empirical estimate of the uncertainty due to spatial
heterogeneity. We seek to explore this heterogeneity on
the scale of 50 to 100 hectars, or on a ﬁeld-to-ﬁeld basis.
The magnitude of the differences between different
ﬁelds with the same crop type or the same land cover
type is currently unknown.
640
VOLUME 21
J O U R N A L O F A T M O S P H E R I C A N D O C E A N I C T E C H N O L O G Y
To characterize the carbon cycle dynamics in a het-
erogeneous region, we are developing a program of at-
mosphere–biosphere carbon exchange measurements in
the Southern Great Plains (SGP) Cloud and Radiation
Testbed (CART) of the Department of Energy (DOE)
Atmospheric Radiation Measurement (ARM) program.
The ARM–CART encompasses an area of 140 000 km2
in Oklahoma and southern Kansas (ARM SGP, more
information available online at http://www.arm.gov/
docs/sites/sgp/sgp.html). It is heavily instrumented with
atmospheric-observation technologies at the central fa-
cility (located near the town of Lamont, Oklahoma;
368379N, 978309W) and at a distributed network of ex-
tended facilities. The mission of this project is to im-
prove understanding and modeling of cloud and con-
vection processes in general circulation models. Ad-
dressing these objectives requires measurement of car-
bon, water, and energy ﬂuxes in many plots, with
accompanying measurements of other variables needed
to drive and test the ecosystem models and other ap-
proaches to scaling and prediction.
With the goal of facilitating measurements that cap-
ture the landscape scale heterogeneity in cropped and
grazed systems, we have identiﬁed a set of performance
criteria for an ideal portable ﬂux system. This system
should (i) be easily and rapidly moveable from site to
site while requiring only one or two people for setup;
(ii) operate continuously and unattended for weeks at a
time with low power consumption and infrastructure
requirements, such as permanent towers or line power;
(iii) be comprehensive enough to make all the mea-
surements necessary for quality control of ﬂuxes and
for modeling; (iv) provide accuracy and precision com-
parable to permanent eddy covariance installations; and
(v) be built at fairly low cost.
Existing portable ﬂux systems have shown the utility
of this concept. One portable system is currently being
used to cross calibrate carbon ﬂux sites within the
AmeriFlux program (Evans 2000). It makes high pre-
cision measurements, but it is typically set up using the
infrastructure (such as the tower, power, and ancillary
energy-budget sensors) of the permanent AmeriFlux in-
stallation. An earlier portable system was used to ex-
amine spatial and climatic heterogeneity in ﬂuxes from
arctic ecosystems (Eugster et al. 1997). While the in-
strumentation of this system was indeed portable, it re-
quired 150–200 W of power to operate. The authors
estimated that (at the time) different instrumentation
could have saved 45–60 W, but such a system would
still require 90 W or more to operate. Supplying this
resource required the use of a generator and its asso-
ciated fuel supply. A third system, was described by
Meyers (2001) and, although it was used in a long-term
experiment, it did have the potential for portability. This
system was based on a noncommercial gas analyzer de-
signed and produced at the National Oceanic and At-
mospheric Administration’s Atmospheric Turbulence
and Dispersion Division (NOAA ATDD) laboratory in
Oak Ridge, Tennessee (Auble and Meyers 1992). Un-
fortunately, this analyzer is only available from the au-
thors and exhibits limited offset stability.
Since the time that these systems were designed, new
gas analyzer technology has become available that al-
lows the design of more precise and energy-efﬁcient
eddy ﬂux systems. It is now possible to design a compact
portable system that minimizes power requirements with
good long-term stability.
The key instrument that makes this system effective
is an accurate and stable open-path infrared gas analyzer
(IRGA; LI-7500, LICOR Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska) that
measures the densities of CO2 and H2O. Compared to
earlier analyzers (Auble and Meyers 1992), this instru-
ment contains feedback and signal processing systems
that provide improved gain and offset stability, and that
signiﬁcantly reduce the frequency of calibrations needed
to make precise density measurements. As with other
open-path instruments, the LI-7500 requires little power
to operate (,10 W during operation) because the mea-
surement does not require the pumps used to transport
gas samples to closed-path analyzers.
In the absence of advection, the true surface ﬂux of
a trace gas (as measured by the eddy covariance tech-
nique) is the sum of three terms. The ﬁrst is simply the
raw covariance between the ﬂuctuations of the density
of the trace gas and the ﬂuctuations in the vertical wind
speed. The other two are proportional to the sensible
heat ﬂux and the latent heat ﬂux, respectively, and are
commonly referred to as the Webb–Pearman–Leuning
(or WPL) corrections (Webb et al. 1980; Paw U et al.
2000). We prefer the nomenclature of WPL terms in-
stead, since they are not corrections in the sense that
they make up for some perceived defect in the mea-
surement system. The relative magnitudes of these terms
differ between open and closed-path IRGAs. In partic-
ular, the term proportional to the sensible heat ﬂux often
reduces to 0 for closed-path analyzers but can be quite
large for open-path analyzers, sometimes exceeding the
raw covariance in magnitude. It is thus obvious that all
three of these terms must be measured and accurately
calculated to produce high-quality eddy covariance sur-
face ﬂuxes.
To validate the correct operation of our portable ﬂux
system, we undertook a series of ﬂux measurement com-
parisons between our system and other established ﬂux
systems under a variety of conditions. In the ﬁrst ex-
periment, we compared our system with a closed-path
IRGA based ﬂux system under typical prairie growth
conditions. This allowed us to compare our system to
a traditionally designed, closed-path IRGA based ﬂux
system, and to evaluate our system under conditions
providing a wide range of ﬂux values. In the second
experiment, we compared our system with another
closed-path IRGA based system under conditions where
the CO2 ﬂux was expected to be very small, but the
sensible heat ﬂux was expected to be very large. This
provided us an opportunity to test how well our system
APRIL 2004
641
B I L L E S B A C H E T A L .
FIG. 1. Photo of the complete system deployed in a wheat ﬁeld in north-central Oklahoma.
was able to measure and calculate the WPL term pro-
portional to sensible heat ﬂux under extreme conditions.
Also this allowed us to verify the precision and reso-
lution of our ﬂux calculations. Finally, in the third ex-
periment, we compared our system with the AmeriFlux
roving intercomparison system under growth conditions
similar to the ﬁrst deployment. This exercise provided
an estimate of the relative accuracy of our system with
respect to the AmeriFlux standard.
To summarize, we describe here the design and ﬁeld
testing of a portable, rapidly deployable, precision eddy
covariance CO2 ﬂux system. It takes advantage of the
LI-7500 IRGA to reduce power demands, while in-
creasing instrument portability, reliability, and preci-
sion. The results of our ﬁeld intercomparisons with ex-
isting ﬂux systems will demonstrate the measurement
accuracy and precision of the system under a range of
conditions, that include both large and small WPL
terms.
2. Instrument description
The design that was eventually chosen can be broken
down into two major subsystems, referred to as the
‘‘fast-response’’ subsystem and the ‘‘slow-response’’
subsystem. This nomenclature describes the measure-
ment frequency and the time response of the instruments
within each subsystem. In addition to these two sub-
systems, there is also a ﬂexible power module that is
adaptable to most ﬁeld sites, and a suite of data collec-
tion and analysis software. The full system is shown
deployed in Fig. 1.
3. Fast-response subsystem
The primary function of the fast-response subsystem
is to measure the variables needed to compute the tur-
bulent transfer of CO2, H2O, heat, and momentum. It
is composed of two sensors, the sonic anemometer and
the CO2–H2O IRGA. The anemometer chosen was the
Gill-Solent WindMaster Pro, three-dimensional sonic
anemometer/thermometer (Gill Instruments, Ltd, Lym-
ington, United Kingdom). This anemometer incorpo-
rates an analog input system that may be conﬁgured as
either four differential or eight single ended channels.
These inputs can digitize signals between 65 V with
14-bit precision. Data from the anemometer (wind speed
components, sonic temperature, and analog inputs) are
output as a single serial stream on an RS-422 data port
at the selected sampling rate (usually 10 Hz).
A LiCor LI-7500 open-path CO2–H2O infrared gas
analyzer (LiCor, Inc) was chosen to make density mea-
surements of CO2 and water vapor. The calibrated CO2
and H2O densities are output as analog voltages (0–5
V range, 16-bit resolution) and are connected (at the
signal junction box described below) to the WindMaster
Pro analog inputs. By taking advantage of the anemom-
eter analog inputs, we avoid possible time shifting prob-
lems that could be caused by using two unsynchronized
instrument clocks to control two separate serial data
streams. While not recording the full serial data stream
from the LI-7500 looses some of the ancillary data avail-
able from the IRGA (e.g., pressure, temperature, diag-
nostics), it simpliﬁes the data collection system by re-
quiring only a single serial data channel.
642
VOLUME 21
J O U R N A L O F A T M O S P H E R I C A N D O C E A N I C T E C H N O L O G Y
TABLE 1. Instrumentation and measurements made by the slow-response subsystem.
Instrument
Measured variable
Climatronics CS800-12 wind set (Climatronics Corp.,
Bohemia, NY)
Mean horizontal wind speed and direction
Vaisala Humiter 50Y (2) (Vaisala, Inc., Woburn, MA)
Temperature and relative humidity proﬁles
Vaisala PTB101B barometer
Mean atmospheric pressure
HFT3 soil heat ﬂux plates (4) (Radiation and Energy
Balance Systems, Seattle, WA)
Soil heat ﬂux
Type E thermocouples (6) (inhouse)
Soil temperature proﬁles
ECH2O soil moisture probes (8) (Decagon Devices,
Inc., Pullman, WA)
Soil moisture proﬁles
LiCor LI-190SA quantum sensor (LiCor, Inc., Lincoln,
NE)
PAR
LiCor LI-200SA pyranometer
Total insolation
Kipp & Zonen CNR-1 radiometer (Kipp & Zonen Inc.,
Bohemia, NY)
Upwelling and downwelling radiation (0.3–2.8 and 5–50 mm)
Kipp & Zonen NR-lite net radiometer
Net radiation
TE525 tipping bucket rain gage (Texas Electronics,
Dallas, TX)
Mean precipitation
The fast-response instruments are mounted at the top
of a Campbell Scientiﬁc CM10 tripod tower (Campbell
Scientiﬁc Inc., Logan, Utah). The sensors (IRGA and
anemometer) are mounted on a common horizontal bar
such that their lateral separation can be adjusted from
about 15 cm to more than 30 cm. To minimize ﬂux loss
and ﬂow distortion, the IRGA is mounted about 25 cm
below the anemometer volume (Kristensen et al. 1997).
As recommended in the LiCor LI-7500 manual, the
IRGA is tipped about 308 from vertical to facilitate
drainage of condensation and rain from the optical win-
dows. As received from the manufacturer, the tripod
tower allows the instruments to be mounted between
about 3 and 4 m above the ground. If higher or lower
deployments are required, the central pole of the tower
can be replaced with a longer or shorter piece of stan-
dard ANSI 1¼-inch galvanized steel water pipe. When
the tower was properly deployed with its guy wires and
foot pegs installed, it proved to be quite stable and vi-
bration free, even in sustained winds of between 10 and
12 m s21 (the strongest experienced on our test de-
ployments).
To record the raw, high speed data from the fast-
response subsystem, we used a small notebook com-
puter. The particular models used (Toshiba Portege
3110CT or Toshiba Portege 7200CT) were chosen spe-
ciﬁcally for their low power consumption. The notebook
computer is housed in a small, insulated plywood shel-
ter. The shelter is passively cooled with a standard roof
ventilator installed on top and ﬁve small soffet vents
installed in the bottom. The shelter has four, ANSI 1-
inch ﬂoor ﬂanges attached to its bottom. These allow
legs to be mounted to the shelter to elevate it above the
vegetation for improved ventilation. Field tests showed
that the interior temperature never rose more than about
58C above ambient.
To facilitate quick set up of the system, a signal junc-
tion box was fabricated from a weatherproof, polycar-
bonate box. Cables from both the anemometer and the
LiCor IRGA were terminated in black plastic circular
connectors (Amphenol Series One, Columbia, South
Carolina). Mating connectors were mounted to the junc-
tion box and all interconnections were made inside.
Since the serial data stream from the anemometer con-
forms to the RS422 standard, an RS422 to RS232 con-
verter (Telebyte Inc., Greenlawn, New York) was also
installed in the junction box. A similar box with mating
connectors was mounted on the outside of the computer
shelter. On the inside of the shelter, standard nine-pin
serial connectors were mounted in a small plastic work-
box attached to the wall. These allowed standard serial
cables to be used for all signal connections. The total
cost for the fast response subsystem was about $25,000.
4. Slow-response subsystem
The slow-response subsystem contains instrumenta-
tion used to measure ancillary parameters needed to
calculate accurate ﬂuxes, validate their quality, and to
quantify other ecosystem variables necessary for mod-
eling. In this subsystem, the instruments are read once
every 1–5 s by a Campbell Scientiﬁc datalogger. These
readings are then averaged in 30-min blocks to match
the usual averaging period of the fast-response subsys-
tem. Quantities measured by this subsystem include,
mean wind speed, wind direction, air temperature and
relative humidity at two heights, barometric pressure,
soil temperature proﬁles, soil heat ﬂux, soil moisture
proﬁles, total incoming solar radiation, photosyntheti-
cally active radiation (PAR), incoming and reﬂected ra-
diation in long and short wavelength bands, and net solar
radiation. The system is built around a Campbell Sci-
entiﬁc Inc. CR23X datalogger and AMT-25 multiplexer.
Instruments attached to the data logger are listed in Ta-
ble 1. While this is the list of instruments attached to
the current system, it can easily be modiﬁed for other
applications.
As in the fast-response subsystem, the slow-response
APRIL 2004
643
B I L L E S B A C H E T A L .
sensors are mounted on a Campbell Scientiﬁc Inc. CM-
10 tripod tower. The tower was modiﬁed by adding a
removable, horizontal outrigger bar for mounting the
radiation instruments. This bar is at a height of about
2.3 m and extends approximately 2 m out from the
central tower.
The outrigger and all other similar parts were con-
structed from ANSI standard plumbing ﬁttings and pipe.
This has the advantage that any lost or damaged parts
can be easily obtained from a local hardware or plumb-
ing supply store. We have found that this can be a dis-
tinct advantage for systems that are frequently moved.
For deployments outside the United States, these parts
can be replaced with near-equivalent metric parts.
The datalogger is housed inside an environmental en-
closure (Campbell Scientiﬁc Inc., ENC 12/14) that at-
taches to the tower. To facilitate instrument set up, a
signal junction box similar to the fast-response junction
box is permanently attached to the bottom of the data
logger enclosure, with short lengths of PVC pipe. These
also form wiring chases for the cables that run from the
connectors on the bottom of the junction box to the ter-
minal strips of the datalogger. All of the slow-response
instruments are terminated in the same kind of connectors
that were used with the fast-response subsystem or in
thermocouple connectors. This approach realizes signif-
icant savings in setup time. The datalogger stores aver-
aged values of each quantity measured and the user may
download this data to a laptop computer at any time
without interrupting the measurements. The total cost of
the slow response system was about $16,000.
5. Power system
The entire system (fast-response and slow-response)
runs from a power source supplying between 11 and 18
VDC. In the tests described here, the system drew be-
tween 2.2 and 2.5 A (at 13.6 V) or between 30 and 35
W. In later, longer-term deployments, the total system
power requirements were measured at 1.8 A (at 12.9 V)
or less than 25 W.
Power may be supplied from various sources, but for
remote deployments at unimproved sites, we have as-
sembled a solar panel system capable of running the
system indeﬁnitely. This power system consists of three
120-W solar panels and associated controllers charging
a pair of 105 A h batteries. The batteries are common
deep-cycle marine–RV types and, in the event of failure,
may be replaced from local vendors. The power distri-
bution system incorporates 0.01V resistors in series with
each solar panel and with each load distribution box.
These are connected to input channels on the slow-re-
sponse datalogger to monitor the condition of the power
system. Power is distributed to the various system com-
ponents using 18-gauge cable with reverse-gender plugs
(Amphenol Series One) to avoid accidental sensor dam-
age. The total cost of the solar power system was about
$2000.
6. Software
The fast-response data collection program is of our
own design and was coded by D. P. Billesbach. This
program, which runs under the MSDOS operating sys-
tem, has proven reliable at ﬁve different AmeriFlux tow-
ers since 1998. Only a few modiﬁcations were needed
to adapt the program to this project. The central function
of the program is to read the serial data stream from
the anemometer and store it in binary form on a hard
disk. The program can operate at any of the baud rates
available from the anemometer, but is capable on only
reading a single serial data stream. In addition, the pro-
gram does online unit conversions and keeps running
statistics (means, variances, and covariances) from
which online ﬂuxes and correction factors are calculat-
ed. We note that a new data collection program, which
runs under most versions of the Windows operating sys-
tem, is currently being developed and ﬁeld tested. The
new program will be capable of reading multiple serial
data streams and will be able to interface to many dif-
ferent anemometers and IRGAs.
While the online ﬂux values are considered fairly
accurate, proper reprocessing of the raw data is nec-
essary to obtain ﬂuxes of the highest possible precision.
The program used for this task (written by D. P. Bil-
lesbach) calculates and applies the optimum delay factor
for each channel (Chahuneau et al. 1989) and removes
mean values using a linear detrending technique (Rannik
and Vesala 1999). Should the user desire, the program
can be reconﬁgured to remove mean values by block
averaging, or high-pass ﬁltering. The program also cal-
culates covariances, ﬂuxes, and other relevant statistics.
Finally, the program calculates all terms and correction
factors (Webb et al. 1980; Moore 1986; Schotanus et
al. 1983) needed to assemble nonadvective surface ﬂux-
es. To provide an estimated system error, the program
calculates the worst possible covariance for each av-
eraging period by correlating data points separated by
at least one half of the averaging period. This number
should represent only accidental correlations and is thus
assumed to provide an estimate of the total system ﬂux
error. We assume that this total system ﬂux error is also
a good estimate of the point-to-point ﬂux resolution of
the system.
7. Field measurements
To validate and test the precision and accuracy of the
system, we conducted three short ﬁeld experiments in
2000 and 2001. The ﬁrst two were intercomparisons at
a pair of established AmeriFlux ﬁeld sites. The ﬁrst of
these was in north-central Oklahoma near the town of
Shidler and took place in a tall-grass prairie. The second
was also in north-central Oklahoma, near the town of
Ponca City and took place in a cultivated wheat ﬁeld.
The third experiment was an intercomparison between
our portable system and the AmeriFlux reference system
644
VOLUME 21
J O U R N A L O F A T M O S P H E R I C A N D O C E A N I C T E C H N O L O G Y
at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Atmospheric Bound-
ary Layer Experiment (DOE–ABLE) pasture site near
Smileyberg, Kansas.
When the ﬁrst experiment was conducted, the slow-
response subsystem had not been completed and only
the fast-response subsystem was deployed. The goal of
this test was to establish the correct operation of our
fast-response subsystem and to compare the precision
of the ﬂuxes obtained with those being collected from
the closed-path IRGA ﬂux system, already in operation
at the site, under typical prairie growing conditions. The
goal of the second test was to determine the precision
with which we could make our fully corrected ﬂux es-
timates and, because of the ﬁeld conditions, to estimate
the accuracy and minimum detectable levels of our mea-
sured ﬂuxes. The third experiment had the objective of
measuring the accuracy of our system, relative to the
AmeriFlux standard. In addition, this experiment of-
fered an opportunity to compare our ﬂux reprocessing
software with that used by the AmeriFlux standard sys-
tem. For all three deployments, we used a 30-min av-
eraging time for ﬂuxes and 10-Hz sampling rate for the
fast response instruments. These parameters will capture
all of the signiﬁcant high and low frequency ﬂux com-
ponents for our particular instrument heights, mean
wind speeds, and for the local topography.
8. Data quality control and instrument
calibrations
In the ﬁrst two experiments, only the raw, fast re-
sponse data were available from the ‘‘permanent’’
AmeriFlux stations. We processed these data using the
same program that we used with our portable system
data. For the third experiment, we were supplied with
reprocessed ﬂuxes from the AmeriFlux reference sys-
tem. Before comparisons were made, each dataset was
independently quality controlled. The criteria applied to
the CO2 ﬂux data were as follows. First, all averaging
periods where the mean horizontal wind speed was less
than 2 m s21 were rejected. This assured that the mea-
sured ﬂux was not local in nature and was representative
of the surrounding landscape. To eliminate anomalous
spikes, we also rejected periods where the standard de-
viation of the CO2 density was greater than 0.57 mmol
m23 (25 mg m23). All covariance and WPL terms were
corrected for frequency losses and then summed to yield
corrected surface ﬂuxes.
Throughout the development and testing period, the
calibration stability of the IRGA was found to be very
good. Before the ﬁrst deployment, both the CO2 and the
H2O channels of the LI-7500 were calibrated [on day
of year (DOY) 196]. Prior to this, the IRGA had last
been calibrated on DOY 78. The IRGA offset was mea-
sured to be 25 ppmv. After this offset was adjusted,
span gas with a mixing ratio of 384.9 ppmv was then
introduced into the calibration hood and measured as
385.5 ppmv. This represented a gain drift of less than
0.2%. A similar procedure was applied to the H2O chan-
nel using dry N2 and a Licor LI-610 dewpoint generator.
The offset was 23.2 mmol mol21 and a dewpoint of
20.008C was measured as 19.658C. As a check of the
CO2 calibration, N2 and a span gas (338.5 ppmv) were
run in the ﬁeld on DOY 201. The measured offset was
25.5 ppmv, and the span gas was measured at 335.5
ppmv. Calibrations made for the second and third de-
ployments showed similar results.
9. First deployment
The ﬁrst deployment near Shidler, Oklahoma was at
a native tallgrass prairie and lasted from 16 July 2000
(DOY 198) until 22 July 2000 (DOY 204). At the time
of this deployment, the slow-response subsystem was
not ﬁnished, so only the fast-response subsystem was
taken to the ﬁeld. The portable tower was set up ap-
proximately 8 m west of the existing AmeriFlux tower.
The IRGA was mounted on the west end, and the an-
emometer on the east end of the cross bar at the top of
the tower and they were separated by about 30 cm on
this east–west line. The sonic anemometer was located
4.05 m above ground level and the LI-7500 IRGA was
located 3.75 m above ground. The vegetation height was
about 40 cm. The permanent eddy covariance ﬂux sys-
tem was comprised of a Gill-Solent model R3 research
grade sonic anemometer and a LiCor LI-6262 closed-
path IRGA. The sonic anemometer was mounted 4.4 m
above ground, and the IRGA inlet cup was attached to
the anemometer body, just below the active volume. The
sample ﬂow rate was maintained at 8 standard liters per
minute (SLM). The IRGA was housed in a small, mod-
iﬁed refrigerator and kept at a constant temperature. This
system recorded its data on a desktop computer housed
in a small, air-conditioned shed and used a version of
the same data collection program as was used by the
portable system. Raw data from both the permanent and
the portable systems were analyzed with our reprocess-
ing program.
Because the portable slow-response subsystem was
not available for this deployment, we used meteorolog-
ical data (means of temperature, pressure, and relative
humidity) collected by the permanent system for ﬂux
reprocessing. A diurnal plot of CO2 ﬂuxes measured by
both the permanent and portable systems is shown in
Fig. 2a. To more clearly illustrate how the two ﬂux
systems compare, Fig. 2b shows CO2 ﬂux values mea-
sured by the portable, open-path LI-7500 based system
as a function of ﬂux values measured by the permanent,
closed-path LI-6262 based system. Comparison data for
latent heat ﬂuxes are shown in Fig. 3.
Besides using different IRGAs, the two ﬂux systems
also used different anemometers. To compare this aspect
of the systems, we examined the sensible heat ﬂux H,
since the anemometer measures all data for this quantity.
Figure 4 is a comparison of sensible heat ﬂuxes from
our portable system and the permanent system. In ad-
APRIL 2004
645
B I L L E S B A C H E T A L .
FIG. 2. Plots of the CO2 ﬂuxes measured during the ﬁrst deployment
(DOY 198–204). (a) The diurnal plot open boxes are ﬂuxes from the
portable system and the solid triangles are ﬂuxes from the permanent
system. (b) The horizontal axis represents the portable system and
the vertical axis represents the permanent system.
FIG. 4. Comparison of H ﬂuxes between the portable system
(horizontal axis) and the permanent system (vertical axis).
FIG. 3. Comparison of LE ﬂuxes between the portable system
(horizontal axis) and the permanent system (vertical axis).
FIG. 5. Comparison of friction velocities between the portable
system (horizontal axis) and the permanent system (vertical axis).
dition to the sensible heat ﬂux, we also considered the
friction velocity (u*), which is a function of the co-
variance between the vertical and horizontal wind
speeds. A comparison between the two systems is shown
in Fig. 5. Of the 261 individual ﬂux averaging periods
collected, 162 passed through the quality control ﬁlter.
10. Second deployment
The second deployment was in a freshly plowed, fal-
low wheat ﬁeld near Ponca City, Oklahoma. The ex-
isting AmeriFlux site at this location was instrumented
identically to the tall grass prairie site of the ﬁrst ex-
periment. This deployment lasted from 3 October 2000
(DOY 277) until 7 October 2000 (DOY 281). The por-
table fast-response tower was again set up approxi-
mately 10 m to the west of the permanent AmeriFlux
tower. The portable sonic anemometer was mounted 4.2
646
VOLUME 21
J O U R N A L O F A T M O S P H E R I C A N D O C E A N I C T E C H N O L O G Y
FIG. 6. Diurnal plot of the corrected (or total surface ﬂux) (solid
line) and uncorrected (or raw covariance) (dotted line) CO2 ﬂuxes
obtained from the portable system during the second deployment
(DOY 277–281).
FIG. 7. Diurnal plot of the corrected surface CO2 ﬂuxes from the
portable system (solid line) and the permanent system (dotted line)
obtained during the second deployment (DOY 277–281).
m above ground and the IRGA was installed at 3.9 m.
Like the ﬁrst deployment, they were separated by 30
cm on an east–west line. The slow-response tower was
located about half way between the portable fast-re-
sponse tower and the AmeriFlux tower. The cup ane-
mometer and wind vane were 3.45 m above ground and
temperature/relative humidity sensors were located at
3.15 and 2.30 m above ground. The radiometers were
mounted on the outrigger at a height of 2.35 m above
ground. During the time of this deployment, the site was
bare soil and had been under drought conditions for a
number of weeks. The ﬁeld had been freshly turned over
about a week prior to our deployment. Because of the
lack of vegetation, we anticipated little or no CO2 up-
take, and because of the dry conditions, we expected
very small soil respiration ﬂuxes. The net effect is that
we anticipated very small total CO2 ﬂuxes. Because of
the ﬁeld conditions (freshly turned over, extremely dry
and hard soil chunks), we decided that the soil heat ﬂux
and soil temperature sensors could not be properly in-
stalled and were left out of the system. Also, since there
was no vegetation, the PAR sensor was not deployed.
We expected relatively large sensible heat ﬂuxes and
small latent heat ﬂuxes (i.e., large Bowen ratios). These
are the most difﬁcult conditions to accurately apply the
WPL terms for ﬂux measurements with an open-path
sensor. Since the range of CO2 ﬂux values obtained
during this deployment is very limited, a direct com-
parison plot does not yield any information that is not
already contained in Fig. 2b. Figure 6 shows the diurnal
series of raw and fully corrected CO2 ﬂuxes obtained
from the portable system, and in Fig. 7, we show the
corrected CO2 ﬂuxes from both systems. Of the 170
individual ﬂux averaging periods collected, 161 were
passed through the quality control ﬁlters.
11. Third deployment
The third deployment was in a grazed pasture near
Smileyberg, Kansas, at the DOE–ABLE site. The in-
tercomparison began on 14 May 2001 (DOY 134) and
lasted until a strong storm forced the site to shut down
on 17 May 2001 (DOY 137). Four eddy covariance ﬂux
systems were deployed at this site, but we will only
report on the intercomparison between our system and
the AmeriFlux reference system. Our fast-response tow-
er was set up 12.6 m to the east of the AmeriFlux system.
Our fast-response instruments were installed at a height
of 3.79 m, and the other ﬂux systems were installed at
4 m. Because of the limited space inside the fenced area,
our slow-response tower was located about 3 m to the
north of the fast-response tower. Since the predominant
wind direction was from the south, this arrangement
introduced minimal ﬂow distortion to the fast-response
instruments. The land surface was an actively grazed
pasture with a vegetation height of about 20 cm. The
AmeriFlux system was composed of an Applied Tech-
nologies, Inc. model SATI/3SX sonic anemometer and
a LiCor LI-6262 closed-path IRGA. Further details of
this system can be found in Evans (2000). Comparisons
of CO2, LE, H, and u* are shown in Fig. 8. Of the 113
ﬂux averaging periods collected, 63 passed the quality
control criteria.
Because we had our full complement of sensors de-
ployed, we were able to estimate the degree of energy
closure. This is shown in Fig. 9 where we plot H 1 LE
as a function of available energy (Rn 2 G). A free
regression ﬁt to the data yields a slope of 0.887 6 0.016
and an intercept of 22.5 6 5.6 W m22 (R2 5 0.97). If
we constrain the regression to pass through the origin,
we obtain a slope of 0.929 6 0.013 (R2 5 0.960). It
should be noted that energy balance as an indicator of
the correctness of eddy covariance ﬂuxes is a contro-
APRIL 2004
647
B I L L E S B A C H E T A L .
FIG. 8. Comparison of (a) CO2, (b) LE, and (c) H ﬂuxes and (d) friction velocities between the portable system (horizontal axis) and the
AmeriFlux reference system (vertical axis).
FIG. 9. Energy balance measured by the portable system during the
third deployment.
versial issue. A comprehensive study of energy balance
at more than 20 AmeriFlux sites (Wilson et al. 2002)
indicates that the energy budget can often be open by
20% or more with the worst periods happening at night.
We therefore include these results, not as conclusive
evidence of the correctness of our ﬂuxes, but simply as
supporting evidence of the consistency of our slow-re-
sponse results with our fast-response results within the
limits of current energy balance theory.
12. Discussion of ﬁeld results
The data in Fig. 2a show good qualitative agreement
between the two ﬂux systems. We note in the ﬁgure,
that there are several gaps where ﬂux values have been
removed from the portable system record. Most notable
is the early morning of DOY 199. During this period,
strong thunderstorms moved across the region and pro-
duced rain events at the ﬂux tower site. Data points that
648
VOLUME 21
J O U R N A L O F A T M O S P H E R I C A N D O C E A N I C T E C H N O L O G Y
exhibited unrealistically large values of the variance in
the CO2 density were eliminated from further analysis.
This effect was believed to be the result of rainwater
collecting on the LI-7500 window and attenuating the
infrared beam. This was not unexpected behavior for
an open-path IRGA. When the LI-7500 was ﬁrst in-
stalled, it was mounted vertically. After this rain event,
we tilted it about 308 away from vertical to promote
runoff. While this should have improved performance,
we were not able to quantify the effect because there
were no more signiﬁcant rain events (note that the large
gap in the morning of DOY 202 was caused by power
problems). In this respect, the closed-path IRGA ex-
hibited an advantage over the open-path design. While
neither system performed adequately in heavy rains, the
closed-path system was observed to operate in periods
of light to moderate rain. Other rain events were noted
in the early morning of DOY 202, and during the night
and early morning of DOY 202 and 203. The data span
a range of 124 (uptake) to 214 (respiration) mmol m22
s21, and a regression ﬁt to the data in Fig. 2b yields a
slope of 1.03 6 0.02 and an intercept of 20.97 6 0.25
mmol m22 s21 (R2 5 0.93) with an estimated system
error (ﬂux resolution) of 61.2 mmol m22 s21. While the
slope is only 3% from ideal, the apparent bias of almost
21 mmol m22 s21 could be signiﬁcant. Examination of
Fig. 2b, however, shows that there are at least two points
where the permanent system signiﬁcantly overestimates
ﬂuxes relative to the portable system. It is possible that
with more rigorous quality control, these points would
be ﬂagged as suspect, which would have the effect of
reducing the relative offsets. Careful examination of Fig.
2b also reveals that no apparent nonlinear differences
exist between the two systems. We note that the quality
control criteria for this data (u . 2 m s21, and s
,
pCO2
0.57 mmol m23) are fairly simple and may include data
where the strict conditions for good ﬂux measurements
were not met. We chose this approach to include as many
data points as possible.
The one-to-one comparison of LE shown in Fig. 3
indicates some differences between the two systems. We
note that the slope is 0.95 6 0.02 and the intercept is
12.6 6 3.6 W m22 (R2 5 0.94) with an estimated system
error (ﬂux resolution) of 615 W m22. While the inter-
cept is not excessive, it is signiﬁcantly larger than the
intercept of the sensible heat (H) comparison (see be-
low). This behavior suggests that either the closed-path,
LI-6262 based permanent system may be underesti-
mating LE by several percent or the open-path, LI-7500
based portable system may be overestimating LE. Of
particular interest are small values of LE, where we
observe a distinct nonlinearity in the data. This nonlin-
ear behavior suggests that for small LEs, the closed-
path system may underestimate ﬂuxes worse than at high
LEs. This is consistent with expectations about closed-
path IRGAs and their response to water vapor. Water
vapor has one of the strongest dipole moments of all of
the permanent atmospheric gases (Weast 1974). This
implies that it will adsorb (or stick) to almost any sur-
face, including the inner surface of a sampling tube or
the walls of a closed-path analyzer cell. This could ob-
viously cause serious high frequency loss in the water
vapor spectral density, resulting in underestimation of
the ﬂuxes. In fact, Billesbach has observed exactly this
effect in spectral plots of unpublished data comparing
open-path with closed-path IRGAs. In addition, the non-
linear behavior combined with the large number of data
points clustered at small values where the nonlinearity
is strongest, may have biased the linear regression. A
ﬁt to points with LE values (from the portable system)
of 250 W m22 or less yielded a slope of 1.01 6 0.04
with an intercept of 27.6 6 0.3 W m22 (R2 5 0.88).
The regression ﬁt to the sensible heat ﬂux H shown
in Fig. 4 yields a slope of 0.93 6 0.01 and an intercept
of 3.5 6 0.9 W m22 (R2 5 0.98) with an estimated
system error (ﬂux resolution) of 67 W m22. As with
the CO2 ﬂuxes and the LE ﬂuxes, this result indicates
good agreement between the two systems. There does
seem to be a region of possibly anomalous behavior at
high values of H. In this region, it is possible that the
permanent system might be underestimating, or the por-
table system overestimating the sensible heat ﬂux. This
effect, however, is manifest only in a small number of
points and cannot be veriﬁed by this study.
The friction velocity comparison shown in Fig. 5 has
a slope of 0.93 6 0.02 and an intercept of 0.02 6 0.01
m s21 (R2 5 0.91) with an estimated system error (res-
olution) of 60.06 m s21. Again, this indicates good
agreement between two different instrument systems.
The similarities between the slopes of these two quan-
tities, which are derived only from sonic anemometer
data, suggest that both anemometers behave similarly.
Using the same reasoning as Eugster et al. (1997),
the above slope data suggest that our system can resolve
trend differences of 3% in CO2 ﬂuxes, 5% in LE ﬂuxes,
7% in H ﬂuxes, and 7% in friction velocity when com-
pared to similar permanent ﬂux systems.
During the second deployment, we concentrated on
the problem of calculating precise WPL terms for CO2
ﬂuxes (Webb et al. 1980). As seen in Fig. 6, the raw
CO2 covariance (from the portable open-path system)
showed a very strong diurnal variation. Because of the
ﬁeld conditions, we know that there was no photosyn-
thetic contribution to the ﬂuxes (there was no vegetation
in the fetch) and, because of the extremely low soil
moisture, that the heterotrophic soil respiration com-
ponent was also small. Our expectation was that there
should be very little diurnal pattern to the net CO 2 ﬂuxes
and we would see only a relative small and constant
respirative ﬂux. When all of the WPL terms are added,
the resulting surface ﬂux indeed conforms to these ex-
pectations. The corrected data show that the ﬂux was
almost constant until DOY 279. In the early morning
of DOY 279, the site received several millimeters of
precipitation, which was quickly absorbed by the soil
surface. We expected to see the respirative CO2 ﬂux
APRIL 2004
649
B I L L E S B A C H E T A L .
increase (grow more negative) slightly, and then taper
off as the soil again dried out. This trend, while quite
small is clearly apparent in the corrected data. The fully
corrected surface CO2 ﬂuxes from the portable and per-
manent systems (Fig. 7) both show the above-described
behavior, and quantitatively agree quite well. Careful
examination of DOY 277 in Fig. 6 reveals that the cor-
rected ﬂux does show some diurnal pattern (slight res-
pirative ﬂux). When we compare this to the permanent
closed-path system (no WPL H term and only a small
WPL LE term), we see a similar trend and therefore
believe that this is indeed a physiological effect. The
only signiﬁcant difference between the two systems
seems to be less scatter in the portable ﬂuxes (see Fig.
7) compared to the permanent system.
Examination of Fig. 8 shows that our portable system
measures ﬂuxes that are in good agreement with the
AmeriFlux reference system. The regression parameters
for CO2 ﬂuxes are slope 5 0.94 6 0.03, intercept 5
0.50 6 0.22 mmol m22 s21 (R2 5 0.93); for LE, slope
5 0.84 6 0.02, intercept 5 1.48 6 4.2 W m22 (R2 5
0.93); for H, slope 5 0.86 6 0.02, intercept 5 1.48 6
2.7 W m22 (R2 5 0.94); and for u*, slope 5 0.98 6
0.06, intercept 5 0.002 6 0.02 m s21 (R2 5 0.78). As
before, our analysis indicates a good comparison be-
tween these two ﬂux systems. We note that the same
nonlinear behavior of LE ﬂuxes seen at low values in
deployment 1 is also observed here. This is consistent
with our hypothesis that there are attenuation processes
associated with closed-path instruments, which are not
properly accounted for, and cause excess attenuation of
H2O density ﬂuctuations. We also note that the good
energy balance (closure between 7% and 12%) shown
in Fig. 9 indicates good internal consistency among our
own instruments. Because the AmeriFlux roving system
does not include soil heat ﬂux sensors, we cannot di-
rectly compare our results to that system.
Even though these validation deployments were of
limited duration, the data collected for the key eddy
covariance ﬂuxes (CO2, LE, H, and u*) covered a large
span of values. The comparison slopes for these quan-
tities showed only small deviations from ideal compar-
isons, indicating little (if any) systematic differences
between the ﬂux systems. The extremely small gain
drifts observed during our calibrations verify that little
ﬁeld maintenance is required for the IRGA. While some
offset drifts were observed, they were small and are
eliminated in the eddy covariance process.
The actual setup of the instruments went very smooth-
ly. During the ﬁrst deployment, Billesbach and Fischer
set up the fast-response subsystem in about 2 h. During
the second deployment, Billesbach set up both the fast
and slow-response towers alone in less than 4 h. It
should be noted, however, that these sites allowed easy
and close vehicle access. For less accessible sites, longer
setup times would be expected. In later deployments,
we found that we could set up everything except the
soil moisture and temperature sensors in similar times.
Installation of the soil sensors added considerable time
to the process and was found to be highly dependent
on ﬁeld conditions. For transportation, all components
of both subsystems and the solar power module ﬁt easily
in a minivan and broke down into light sections, each
less than 2 m in length. The heaviest components were
the batteries and the tripod towers, which weigh between
25 and 30 kg each. The computer shelter unbolts into
six ﬂat panels if desired, or can be transported assem-
bled. After the second deployment, the entire system
was dismantled, loaded, and ready to travel in less than
two hours. By design, only a minimal number of tools
were required to set up and dismantle the system (two
end wrenches, two Allen wrenches, a ﬂat-blade screw-
driver, wire cutters, a pipe wrench, and a hammer).
13. Conclusions
As demonstrated by these validation deployments, the
portable eddy covariance ﬂux system described here
meets the stated design goals. As shown by the short
setup and dismantling times and the minimal number
of ﬁeld personnel, the ﬁrst two goals, portability and
ease of setup, are well met. The measured power con-
sumption of 35 W (or less) is much less than the 150–
200 W required by previous systems based on closed-
path analyzers (Eugster et al. 1997). The majority of the
power savings come from elimination of the vacuum
pump necessary in a closed-path ﬂux system. The ex-
cellent calibration stability and good comparison with
the established AmeriFlux system show that we have
produced a high-precision, low-maintenance ﬂux sys-
tem. The close agreement with the AmeriFlux tall-grass
prairie closed-path system under typical growth con-
ditions shows that our system is capable of making ﬂux
measurements as precise as current closed-path based
systems. Similarly, the good agreement with the
AmeriFlux closed-path system during the second de-
ployment shows that the WPL terms can be calculated
with a high level of precision using this instrumentation.
Despite this success, more work should be done to better
understand the differences between ﬂuxes made with
open-path and closed-path IRGAs, especially for LE.
Comparison to the AmeriFlux reference system shows
that we can make ﬂux measurements with the same
relative accuracy as permanent or long-duration facili-
ties. The system performed well in all ﬁeld conditions
except during periods of moderate to heavy rain. This
clearly points out that no single ﬂux system design is
best for all environments. We would expect to have
greater instrument availability in rainy environments
(such as in the Amazon basin) with a closed-path based
system. Finally, by using off-the-shelf parts and elim-
inating some instrument redundancies, the system was
built for a relatively low total cost of less than $45,000.
Acknowledgments. The authors would like to express
their gratitude to Prof. Shashi Verma of the University
650
VOLUME 21
J O U R N A L O F A T M O S P H E R I C A N D O C E A N I C T E C H N O L O G Y
of Nebraska for allowing access to his research sites
and for graciously sharing his data with us. We also
wish to thank Mr. Sheldon Sharp of the University of
Nebraska for his help in building several of the system
components and Mr. John Martin of Ponca City,
Oklahoma for his assistance at the ﬁeld sites. This work
was supported by the Atmospheric Radiation Measure-
ment program (ARM), Ofﬁce of Science, U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy (DOE) under Contract DE-AC03-
76SF00098 and is a contribution of the University of
Nebraska Agricultural Research Division, Lincoln, NE
68583 (Journal Series No. 13516).
REFERENCES
Auble, D. L., and T. P. Meyers, 1992: An open-path, fast response
infrared absorption gas analyzer for H2O and CO2. Bound.-Layer
Meteor., 59, 243–256.
Bremer, D. J., and J. M. Ham, 2002: Measurement and modeling of
soil CO2 ﬂux in a temperate grassland under mowed and burned
regimes. Ecol. Appl., 12, 1318–1328.
Chahuneau, F., R. L. Desjardins, E. Branch, and R. Verdon, 1989: A
micrometeorological facility for eddy ﬂux measurements of CO 2
and H2O. J. Atmos. Oceanic Technol., 6, 193–200.
Eugster, W., J. P. McFadden, and F. S. Chapin, 1997: A comparative
approach to regional variation in surface ﬂuxes using mobile
eddy correlation towers. Bound.-Layer Meteor., 85, 293–307.
Evans, R., cited 2000: AmeriFlux Relocatable System: A relocatable
eddy covariance carbon ﬂux and meteorological measurement
system. [Available online at http://public.ornl.gov/ameriﬂux/
Standards/roving-system/rovingpupdatep12-26-2000.cfm.]
Kristensen, L., J. Mann, S. P. Oncley, and J. C. Wyngaard, 1997:
How close is close enough when measuring scalar ﬂuxes with
displaced sensors? J. Atmos. Oceanic Technol., 14, 814–821.
Meyers, T. P., 2001: A comparison of summertime water and CO 2
ﬂuxes over rangeland for well watered and drought conditions.
Agric. For. Meteor., 106, 205–214.
Moore, C. J., 1986: Frequency response corrections for eddy corre-
lation systems. Bound.-Layer Meteor., 37, 17–35.
Paw U, K. T., D. D. Baldocchi, T. P. Meyers, and K. B. Wilson, 2000:
Correction of eddy-covariance measurements incorporating both
advective effects and density ﬂuxes. Bound.-Layer Meteor., 97,
487–511.
Rannik, U., and T. Vesala, 1999: Autoregressive ﬁltering versus linear
detrending in estimation of ﬂuxes by the eddy covariance meth-
od. Bound.-Layer Meteor., 91, 259–280.
Schotanus, P., F. T. M. Nieuwstadt, and H. A. R. De Bruin, 1983:
Temperature measurement with a sonic anemometer and its ap-
plication to heat and moisture ﬂuxes. Bound.-Layer Meteor., 26,
81–93.
Weast, R. C., 1974: Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. CRC Press,
2225 pp.
Webb, E. K., G. I. Pearman, and R. Leuning, 1980: Correction of
ﬂux measurements for density effects due to heat and water
vapour transfer. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc., 106, 85–100.
Wilson, K., and Coauthors, 2002: Energy balance closure at FLUX-
NET sites. Agric. For. Meteor., 113, 223–243.
