ASSESSING THE LITERARY:
INTELLECTUAL BOUNDARIES AND JUSTIFICATION
IN FRENCH AND AMERICAN LITERARY STUDIES1
                                                 
1 This paper was made possible by funding from the Center for Excellence in French Studies, the Center
of International Studies, and the sociology department of Princeton University.  I wish to thank
Agnes Camus, Brian Colkler, Nathalie Heinich, Claudette Lafaye, Cyril Lemieux, Michael Moody,
Abigail Smith Saguy, John Schmalzbauer, Laurent Thèvenot, and Daniel Weber for their critical
reactions to the paper at several stages in its composition.  Special thanks go to Michèle Lamont,
Paul Starr, and Karen Petroski for their detailed criticism of multiple drafts.  I would like to thank
the twenty literary scholars in France and the United States, who shall remain anonymous, for
taking time from their busy schedules to be interviewed, and for answering my questions frankly
and with patience.  Finally, a number of literature professors and sociologists were kind enough to
read and comment upon the penultimate draft of this paper when it arrived unexpectedly on their
doorsteps:  my thanks to Sarah Corse, Priscilla Parkhurst Ferguson, Jean-Louis Fabiani, Catherine
Gallagher, Thomas Pavel, and Ezra Suleiman, and the two respondents who were also interviewees.
Jason Duell
Princeton University
INTRODUCTION
Has American literary criticism “gone French”? Affirmative answers to this
question have become commonplace. Many literature professors in America credit
French scholars such as Michel Foucault, Roland Barthes, Jacques Derrida, Louis
Althusser, Jacques Lacan, and Julia Kristeva with having revitalized their field after
the long postwar reign of New Criticism.2  Citations of these thinkers have steadily
increased in American journals of literary criticism since the late 1960s,3 and a large
number of the leading literary scholars in America have drawn heavily upon them in
their own work.4  It is difficult to think of a major critical paradigm in American
literary studies today—be it deconstruction, psychoanalysis, Marxism, gender and
                                                 
2 Frank Lentricchia, a literature professor at Duke, has compared his generation’s discovery of Derrida
to an “awakening” from a “dogmatic slumber" (Lentricchia , 1980: 159).  It is worth noting that
Lentriccia's opinion on the benefits of French theory has since changed dramatically.
3 Figures compiled by Michèle Lamont and Marsha Witten show a steady increase in articles on French
thinkers in American academic journals of literary studies.  Between the periods 1970-1977 and
1980-1987, for instance, there was an increase of 52 percent in articles on Foucault (44 vs. 67), an
increase of 32 percent in articles on Barthes (94 vs. 124), and an increase of 390 percent in articles
on Lacan (21 vs. 82).  Figures for articles  on Jacques Derrida show a similar trend, with an increase
from 60 in 1970-1977 to 147 in 1980-1984 (Lamont 1987).  My thanks to Michèle Lamont for
making these figures (some unpublished in the form presented here) available to me.  For expanded
discussion and numbers on the diffusion of French thinkers into a variety of disciplines in the
United States, see Lamont and Witten (1988).
4 Such scholars would include, for instance,  Edward Said, J. Hillis Miller, Gayatri Spivak, Eve
Sedgwick, Fredric Jameson, Judith Butler, Henry Louis Gates, Jr., Houston Baker, Barbara Johnson,
Barbara Herrnstein Smith.
race studies, New Historicism, or post-colonialism—in  which the work of French
theorists does not figure prominently.
Given the vast influence that many American literary professors attribute to
French theory—a vision shared by many of their critics (e.g., Hughes 1989; Paglia
1991; Kimball 1990), who deplore such influence5—one might expect to see a great
deal of intellectual commonality today between academic literary studies in France
and the United States.  Yet here a puzzle presents itself: if American literary critics
have indeed “gone French,” they seem to have done so in a manner quite different
than the French have themselves.  Interviews I conducted for this study with twenty
literature professors in both countries show significant cross-national differences in
their prevailing conceptions of what “literary studies” are and ought to be.6  Literature
                                                 
5 Critics of recent trends in American literary scholarship tend to see it as enthralled to trendy French
theories.  For instance, Robert Hughes (1989) laments American academic literary critics’
infatuation with “the lake of jargon whose waters (bottled for export to the United States) well up
between Nanterre and the Sorbonne and to whose marshy verge the bleating flocks of
poststructuralists go each night to drink.”  Camille Paglia daydreams a scenario where “Aretha
Franklin...  shouting ‘Think!’ blasts Lacan, Derrida, and Foucault like dishrags against the wall, then
leads thousands of freed academic white slaves in a victory parade down the Champs-Elysées” (The
New York Times Book Review, May 5, 1991).  Similar sentiments can be found in Kimball (1990).
6  Interviews were split evenly between each country (10 in France, 10 in the United States), and took
place in Paris and the New York area in the summer of 1995.  Interviewees were chosen via
snowball sampling:  an initial list was derived from surveying approximately a half-dozen
professors familiar with the discipline in either country, and interviewees were then asked to
provide further names.  The criteria for inclusion given to respondents was that they try to compile a
list that both included “prominent” scholars, and that represented the diversity of intellectual
perspectives within their discipline.  The institutional affiliations of interviewees in France included
professors in the United States, for example, consider a much wider range of material
to be appropriate for literary studies than do their French counterparts.  The two
groups also differ in the types of criteria they perceive as legitimate for determining
“good work.”  And French and American literature professors exhibit very different
amounts of professional consensus over these boundaries and evaluatory criteria, with
the French showing much more agreement over the basic goals and definition of
literary studies.  Finally, the two groups forward opposing narratives of how their
discipline has evolved intellectually in the past generation, and of where they think it
is headed in the future.
Why, despite the apparent massive influence of the French upon American
literary scholars, do literary studies show such marked variance between the two
countries?  I forward three explanations for these cross-national differences.  First, the
more diffuse and contentious sense of national cultural identity of the United States
and the greater legitimacy there of claims based on ascribed group characteristics has
weakened the traditional boundaries of the Anglo-American literary “canon,” and
forwarded the use of “representation” as a criterion for scholarship, whereas the
                                                                                                                                 
the Universities of Paris III & IV (the Sorbonne), VII, and VIII; the Ecole des Hautes Etudes en
Sciences Sociales; the Maison des Sciences de l’Homme; and the Collège de France.  In the United
States, they included Columbia University; the City University of New York Graduate Center; New
York University; Rutgers University, Princeton University; and Yale University.  The decision was
made to interview professors of French literature in France, and of English literature in America,
rather than professors of the same literature (French or English) in both countries, under the
assumption that scholars of the national literature of their respective countries would form more
structurally homologous groups than would scholars of a single literature that was foreign in one of
the two contexts.  All interviews were done under signed agreement that interviewee comments
would be anonymous in attribution, so that participants could speak with a maximum of candor.
opposite is the case in France.  Second, national differences in the ability of humanist
intellectuals to influence public debate drive the presence of “political” criteria in the
American literary studies and their relative absence in France.  Third, differences in
the national consensus over the status of high culture and differences in the
“disciplinary ecology” in both countries have influenced the professional strategy of
literary studies, with French literary scholars choosing to maintain their traditional
intellectual niche, while American literary scholars are increasingly moving into
intellectual terrain traditionally the province of the social sciences and philosophy.
Finally, I examine the paradoxical “Frenchness” of contemporary American
literary studies—why certain French scholars have become so influential, despite their
waning or nonexistent influence in literary studies in France itself.  I propose that
these French thinkers have provided an “alternative canon” for American literary
scholars, allowing them to maintain their professional distinctiveness (and legitimacy)
as they enter fields in which their work might otherwise be indistinguishable from
social science or philosophy.  I conclude, however, that for reasons of both supply and
demand the further importation of French theory is unlikely to play a significant role
in American literary studies in the future.
LITERARY STUDIES IN THE UNITED STATES
[I]t took more years than anyone could possibly have imagined for the earth to
move in the world of American literary and cultural studies.  What Jacques
Derrida calls “white mythology” has held uncommon sway for centuries in the
male hands of those who believe themselves to be completely responsible for
both the sun’s light and the legacy of the Enlightenment.  Toni Morrison
stunningly captures the entailments of this control in Playing in the Dark,
where she notes that any “others” in the American literary and cultural
enterprise were, until quite recently, considered dark or in the dark, the
exclusive property of, and instrument for, white males who were living in the
light—or who thought that they were.
It is precisely a new sense of a full, diversifying, and ever-proliferating
household on earth that has brought us to the sign “multiculturalism.”  The
sign has unfolded in the same critical and intellectual space that has witnessed
the coming to fullness of such denominations as black studies, women’s
studies, Chicano and Chicana studies, gay and lesbian studies, Native
American studies, and Asian American studies. Here, we might say—in these
denominations—is the earth’s plenty.  And there can be no doubt that the old
order has changed, yielding paradigmatically to the new. (Baker 1993, 5)
The above quote captures a number of themes that permeate much of
American literary scholarship today: the conflation of “literary” and “cultural” study;
the belief that traditional literary scholarship has been politically oppressive,
especially to women and minority groups; the citation of French theorists to help
expose the false Enlightenment rationalism by which that oppression was justified;
and the conviction that a cluster of “critical” (or, often, “post-modern”) scholarly
approaches based around categories of race, ethnicity, gender, and sexual orientation
has arisen to replace the older theories and set the situation right.  And while the
author states these ideas with a degree of force and conviction that is probably greater
than that which would be used by the majority of literature professors in America
today, the fact that he was the president of the Modern Language Association when he
wrote them (and that his comments were published in a journal distributed to every
member of that organization) seems enough to merit concluding that his perspective
on literary studies is not entirely out of the mainstream.  And indeed, all of the
literature professors interviewed for this study in America agreed that there have been
major changes in the discipline in the last twenty-five years, and that the academic
study of literature has become more imbued with theory, more concerned with politics
(especially issues of race, class, gender, and sexual orientation), and less tightly
focused upon a traditional “canon” of “great” literary works.  Most also noted that the
discipline has witnessed more intellectual conflict in this period, or at least that such
conflict has acquired more explicitly political overtones than was the case previously.
Throughout most of the postwar period until the late sixties, American literary
studies were dominated by the New Criticism, which provided a number of clear
standards for work in the discipline.  First, it drew a fairly clear line between
“literature” and “non-literature”; literary works were characterized by their richer,
more ambiguous language.  Second, it emphasized the formalist study of the internal
workings of literary texts, without reference to their social context; indeed, New
Critical doctrines such as the “heresy of paraphrase” and the “intentional fallacy”
(Wimsatt and Beardsley, 1954) militated against any attempts to summarize or explain
the meaning of literary works via factors external the text, even including authors’
stated intentions about their own work.  Aggressively challenged by a host of
theoretical movements, such as deconstruction, feminism, African-American studies,
Marxism, and psychoanalysis, the New Criticism began to decline in the late 1960s,
and had essentially disappeared by the late 1970s.  American literary studies have
since seen an explosion of new paradigms—New Historicism, post-colonialism, queer
theory, and Cultural Studies, to name some of the most prominent—and this new
theoretical landscape has resulted in major shifts in the scholarly boundaries of the
discipline that had held during the reign of New Criticism.
One of these shifts is that literary studies in America have become more
political in their focus.  Many of the most prominent paradigms in the discipline are
explicitly political, and often base their legitimacy upon the notion that they represent
perspectives which have traditionally been excluded from literary studies for political
reasons.  The intellectual climate appears to be sufficiently permeated by politicization
that even those scholars who have no particular wish to be “political” often cannot
help but see many of their everyday activities through a political prism (or, as many in
the profession might put it, a “hermeneutic of suspicion”7).  For instance, when asked
if he considered his work to be a political activity in any way, an Ivy League professor
(who specializes in drama) noted:
I don’t think of it that way while I’m doing it... [But] just by the choice of the
people whose work I consider most important in contemporary theater I’m
engaged in a political action, and when I make up the syllabus for the
contemporary drama course those are the people I’m teaching, and from some
people’s point of view this would look less like a syllabus than, you know like
a political correctness canon or something, so, yeah [my work is political].
While this particular professor showed ambivalence about treating his work as
political (“I don’t think of it that way while I’m doing it”), some other literature
professors fully embrace the idea of literary criticism as a politically engaged practice.
                                                 
7 The phrase “hermeneutic of suspicion” derives from philosopher Paul Ricoeur’s (1970) work on Freud
and Marx, and has come to refer generally in the humanities to any intellectual methodology which,
given a truth claim, immediately seeks to problematize it by uncovering the power interests driving
such claims.
One interviewed professor (a former tenured literature professor at an Ivy League
university) responded to the question “Do you see your work as political?” by stating:
“The only reason why I do what I do is for political reasons—I couldn’t see any
reason for doing it otherwise.” In the course of a discussion of the criteria for good
scholarly work, it further became evident that the professor viewed political concerns
as inevitably extending to matters such as evaluating job candidates:
I like work to have a goal. That’s something I would look for in someone’s
work—that they have a clear sense of purpose.
Does it matter what kind of purpose they have?
To my mind, it would have to be—it would have to be a political stake, that
was relevant.
Would you have a problem with hiring someone whose politics you found
repugnant?
Oh yeah—I wouldn’t hire him.  No way.  I mean, I have to work with these
people. [laughs]
To be sure, there are many literature professors in America who disapprove of
the highly politicized atmosphere in contemporary literary studies, or who at least feel
that its political aspects are being overblown and/or overextended into inappropriate
areas.  The majority of professors interviewed, for instance, felt that one could and
ought to draw a line between a scholar’s politics and the quality of his or her work,
and that the former should be excluded as a criteria in hiring.  But these professors
often expressed the concern that in practice, this separation does not happen, and that
instead the two aspects are conflated; for instance, one professor at a noted public
research university complained that job candidates often get evaluated on their skill in
a kind of political theater, in which they compete to appear ever more “radical,” and in
which a savvy performance gains one vital recognition as the “smart” candidate:
What counts as a better reading is actually a reading that does what the
paradigm is supposed to do even better than the paradigm.  So usually people
correct Said by showing that he’s not “Saidish” enough; he could be even
more postcolonial—or Eve Sedgwick could be even more queer...  And then
you show that you’re even more queer than Eve Sedgwick. You never get
points by saying that Eve Sedgwick is too queer, Edward Said is too
postcolonial...  It’s just this constant outflanking.  It’s “how do I take a position
just to the left of everybody else?” So you find somebody who’s already on the
left, and then you find some reason why part of their position might possibly
lead to fascism [laughs], there’s still some lingering degree of oppression, and
then you get rid of that...  It just becomes a kind of dance.  It’s very
predictable.
Besides causing what they perceive as an unwarranted intrusion of political
concerns into the evaluation of scholarship, politicization is also seen by some literary
scholars as beginning to extract a heavy toll on the discipline in the form of decreased
public legitimacy for the profession, and also in a frequent breakdown of collegial
relations, to the point where many departments witness open feuding and bureaucratic
breakdown:
The problem has been that it’s become much more difficult to defend what
people are doing in the academy because it looks rather shallowly adversarial
in a way that possibly it didn’t before—in the fifties and sixties...  It’s put
everybody in a very uncomfortable position, and it’s produced a lot of
stridency, I think, and I think the stridency results in increasingly simplistic
political paradigms.  So I think things are not in a great way right now...
Departments just collapse  because they get so factionalized, and everybody’s
so suspicious of everyone else’s motives—rightly so, probably! [laughs]—and
it’s made for a bad situation. It hasn’t shaken out, in other words, terribly
well—it’s been about ten or fifteen years since all this has been going on.
Another major shift that has occurred in American literary studies is in the area
of subject matter and methodology; the New Critical criterion of close and fairly
atheoretical readings of a narrow canon of aesthetically-defined literary texts no
longer holds.  Scholars from various minority groups have challenged the boundaries
of the traditional canon, by examining and problematizing the historical process of its
selection,8 by promoting the inclusion of certain minority authors into the canon, and,
                                                 
8 Books and articles on the process of canon formation and/or the social influences on the reception of
various authors have become a popular scholarly subject among American literary scholars.  See,
for instance, Tompkins (1985), Spender (1986), Crawford (1992), and Guillory (1993).
increasingly, by demanding separate canons for various minority groups.9  Scholars
from paradigms such as New Historicism, postcolonialism, and Cultural Studies have
often left literature behind entirely and moved into historical and social scientific
terrains, to the point where their range of subject matter is virtually anything that can
be read as a “text,” or that can be considered “cultural.”  Along with this vast
broadening in subject matter has come a proliferation of methodologies and
paradigms.  Literary scholars today borrow freely from other disciplines such as
psychology, history, sociology, anthropology, philosophy, semiotics, and linguistics,
to the point where many scholars feel there is no common denominator for defining a
“literary” method.
The result of these changes is that the scholarly terrain and the array of
methods perceived as legitimate for literary study is remarkably broad, and goes well
beyond any traditional definition of “literature” and “literary studies”; as the editor of
the Publication of the Modern Language Association recently put it in an editorial
column:
[I]sn’t literature today, for some readers at least, capacious enough to include
any text that can be studied from a historical or sociological perspective?
(Stanton, 1994: 359)
                                                 
9 These demands are being made on behalf of more groups than ever, with the initial movements for the
acceptance of Afro-American literature and women’s literature as legitimate and professionally
recognized categories being matched by calls for Hispanic, Asian-American, Native American, and
gay literatures as well.  Attempts to formulate canons for these groups have been made via the
publication of anthologies, and it is also increasingly common to see university literature courses
based around these categories.
All of the interviewed scholars noted this expansion of literary studies’
intellectual domain.  But they split sharply on its desirability.  Some lauded the
development as a positive development for the field, while others felt that literary
scholarship is extending itself into areas in which it has little methodological
competence, thus producing bad work.  As a member of the latter group put it:
The problem is that not everything is culture. But it’s being treated like it is.
So that humanities professors—English professors particularly—treat the
building across the street as a text.  And, you know, it’s also the building
across the street, but we don’t have any way to talk about it in those terms, and
the thing about Cultural Studies is that is does that—it grinds everything down
to text, and then does semiotic interpretation of it.  And I think the usefulness
of that is really questionable...  It works for literature because it is text, but it
doesn’t really work for everything else very well, and it becomes this very
obvious and self-serving way of analysis.
Where is literary studies headed in the United States?  For some scholars, the
seeming lack of any scholarly boundaries in the discipline is causing it to lose any
coherence or definition, and they fear the discipline is in danger of disintegrating.  For
instance, in a 1993 report to the American Council of Learned Societies on the state of
American literary studies, Barbara K. Lewalski—a Professor of literature at Harvard,
and the 1993 MLA delegate to the ACLS—noted the proliferation of subject matter
and methods as the primary problem facing the profession:
As I see it, the chief intellectual issues facing our discipline arise from one
central fact:  the enormous expansion of what may be said to constitute literary
studies.  Postmodern theory and the recent emphasis on cultural studies
combine to make all kinds of texts and discourses (verbal and even non-verbal)
proper subject matter for us, overwhelming received notions of a core, or
canon, or common theoretical ground, or common methodology for our
discipline.  There is, as well, a new attention to literary texts and traditions
hitherto ignored or marginalized...  We might add to these factors the
permeability of disciplinary boundaries...  In the contemporary critical milieu,
the distinction between background and foreground, literary and subliterary, is
blurred or obliterated...
At the root of the problem is the lack of consensus about what the discipline of
literary studies really is: if it is not a shared body of knowledge, not an agreed-
on canon of texts, and not a common methodology, then what is it?... These
questions afford a genuine basis for anxiety, and they have no ready and easy
solution... (1993: 92-94)
While several of the literature professors interviewed dismissed such talk of a
crisis in their profession, a majority had concerns about the potential “breakup” of
literature as a discipline.  Most of these professors were troubled by the possibility of
this development, but not all of them.  One professor at a major public university was
actively pleased by the prospect of literary studies breaking down into some sort of
“post-disciplinary” form, as he already saw literature departments (along with most
other humanities departments) as obsolete institutional artifacts with no intellectual
reason for existence:
If English departments start kind of proliferating into Cultural Studies,
women’s studies, gay and lesbian studies, etc., and all this other stuff is
interdisciplinary by definition—and even to some extent anti-disciplinary, in
the sense that it was founded more to react against what was going on—then
who knows what will happen to them... I think that’s actually a great
development, from my point of view, because I think disciplinary authority is
pretty fraudulent... The problem is that you still have this shell left called the
“department” or the “discipline”, and everybody still operates frantically
within the shell because that’s the way you have a career—but nothing
intellectually conforms to what the shell is supposed to stand for.
Similarly, the chair of an Ivy League literature department observed that
literary studies may well eventually be replaced by “media studies,” in which
literature could be overshadowed by studies of film and television; while he noted that
this development was not something he himself was pushing for, he stated that he
would have no problem with it if it came to pass.
LITERARY STUDIES IN FRANCE
Twenty-five years ago in literary studies many people appeared who wanted to
introduce new disciplines into the field—structuralism, psychoanalysis,
Marxism, things like that.  At the time, there was an extreme intensity about
literary study—when one did literature when I was a student, around 1968, one
had the impression that literary studies could be a really very important terrain:
that one wasn’t doing just literature, that it concerned the entire symbolic
order;  that it was eminently political, even if one didn’t directly do politics;
that language was fundamental, that language was the symbolic key to
institutions, etc.  In a lot of this work—there wasn’t a disappearance of
literature exactly, but it was nonetheless a bit phased out... So, there was both
the sense that these were important stakes, and at the same time a certain
dissatisfaction that literature was being a bit obscured, or that it was serving
just as a pretext.
We’re certainly in a totally different phase now.
This sentiment—that literary studies in France was in a state of political and
intellectual ferment in the years surrounding 1968, but that there has since been a shift
to a qualitatively new stage in the discipline’s history—is from an interview with a
prominent literary scholar at a CNRS research institute in Paris.  It has been chosen
for its conciseness, but could be replaced by many others, for the fact is that every
single literary scholar interviewed for this study, when asked “how has literary studies
in France changed in the last twenty five years?”, expressed a similar sentiment, and
drew a similarly strong boundary between literary studies “then” and “now.”
The first characteristic cited as proof of this difference was inevitably the
observation that the heated debates which existed in the discipline in France in the late
1960s and the 1970s between advocates of traditional literary history and those of
newer, “modernist” positions (such as Marxism, psychoanalysis, and structuralism)
have diminished to the point where they are generally considered “ancient history.”10
In contrast to the turbulent situation many American literary scholars attributed to
their discipline, French literature professors invariably described literary studies in
France as in a period of relative calm. As one professor put it:
The great wars of the epoch—where there had been a kind of war between the
modernist positions and those of the old Sorbonne—all that’s gone.  It hasn’t
completely disappeared, but it’s pretty much gone.  You can still find a few
professors at Paris IV [i.e., the Sorbonne] who continue the war from twenty-
five years ago, and who say things like “Barthes was an impostor” and that “all
those types are dangerous,” but it’s become a bit rare, eh? [smiles].
You could say instead that there’s been a phenomenon of assimilation, of
absorption... I have the impression that by all evidence there has been a
lowering of the intensity of debate over literature in France today... There’s not
at all the passion that there was twenty-five years ago.
                                                 
10 I use the term “modernist” as it is the term which is used by French scholars themselves.  In the
United States, however, many of the same intellectual positions (such as those of Foucault, Lacan,
Barthes, etc.) are typically referred to as “postmodern,” and the term “modernist” instead is used to
refer to older forms of scholarship (or to current scholarship perceived to be operating under
antiquated assumptions), typically in a derogatory way.  The fact that “postmodernism”—perhaps
the most (de)central referent in American literary studies in the last fifteen years or so—is a term
with little or no meaning for French literary scholars is itself suggestive of wide cross-national
intellectual differences in the discipline.
As the mention of “assimilation” and “absorption” suggests, this period of
calm has not been precipitated by the victory of one side or another within the
discipline.  Unlike in America, where the New Criticism and the older model of
literary history have essentially been vanquished, and conflict remains among the
victorious paradigms, in France the older and newer methods of scholarship both
remain, and seem to be co-existing relatively peacefully.  Many professors described
the discipline as being in a state of “eclecticism,” in which varied methods often mix
in the work of individual scholars to the point where it has become difficult (and
pointless) to try to label their scholarship as belonging to one tradition or the other.
But if French literary studies are indeed now “eclectic,” it is an eclecticism that
operates within much clearer and narrower boundaries than those found in the United
States.  In the process of entering the mainstream of French literary studies, modernist
scholars appear to have shed most of their original interdisciplinary and political
ambitions, and have instead increasingly adopted the traditional criteria of the
discipline.
This trend can be most clearly seen in the range of subject matter covered by
French literary scholars today.  Whereas pioneering modernists like Barthes (1957)
once implicitly challenged the notion of a literary “canon” as the appropriate boundary
of scholarship by producing works on subjects as various as travel guides, television
wrestling shows, and laundry detergent advertising, attempts to recast French literary
studies into something analogous to the Cultural Studies model seen in the United
States today appear to have been fairly weak and short-lived.  Interviewed professors
described the move into the analysis of non-literary objects like film and mass culture
as a brief trend in the early 1970s, which acquired little inertia and quickly fizzled out,
at least in university departments.  There appears to be little or no push for such
studies today, and few literary scholars in France today deviate, at least in their
professional work, from the study of traditional literature.11
Beyond choices of subject matter, an increasing consensus also appears to be
emerging in French literary studies about the appropriate relation between theory and
literature, and this too is a change from initial modernist positions.  Just as current
standards discourage literary scholars from drifting into social science in their choice
of topics, so do they increasingly discourage styles of work which adopt an overly
social-scientific tone and discuss literary works only to validate social, psychological,
or other theories.  The threat that literature is being “obscured” by theory thus seems
to have waned.  Few purely theoretical works are being written by French literary
scholars today, and most professors now appear to believe that attempts to fit literary
works into overarching social or psychological theories are a thing of the past; as a
CNRS researcher explained:
Literature used to be a pretext for bringing in an exterior discourse—Marxist
literary studies, for example.  I think now that’s finished; their points have
been made.  It’s true that there are still psychoanalytic studies, but I think that
it’s understood now that it’s been turned around, and that it can be interesting
for literature to interrogate psychoanalysis, but not the other way around.  So
                                                 
11 Two of the scholars I interviewed did do work that is non-canonical in focus (one on journalism in
the 19th century, and the other on a range of symbolic phenomena in the middle ages), but both
were connected with interdisciplinary CNRS research institutes.  Both labeled themselves as
ñimpureî literary scholars, however, and noted that they have little contact with the mainstream of
their discipline.
all that kind of research is I think a bit out of fashion, or is no longer
productive.
In contrast to a transdisciplinary or post-disciplinary identification, many
literary scholars feel that despite the methodological eclecticism of literary studies in
France today,  the discipline is not merely the branch of les sciences humaines that
deals with literature as its object; in contrast, several scholars drew the distinction that
while other disciplines might draw upon literature as “evidence” in social or historical
analysis, the mark of the literature scholar is to use social and historical analysis
(among other methods) to “enrich the meaning" of the literary text.
Finally, the highly political overtones that accompanied modernist literary
scholarship at its inception appear to have largely disappeared in France today.
Whereas one’s intellectual alignment in the 1960s and 1970s usually predicted one’s
politics, and many modernists challenged the legitimacy of the older scholarship by
accusing it of reflecting conservative and/or oppressive political values, today the
equation of paradigms with politics has broken down.  The salience of political issues
generally seems to have subsided in literary studies; while most of the professors
interviewed were willing to grant that literary scholarship inevitably contains some
political assumptions and overtones (two professors categorically denied even this,
and insisted that their work had nothing at all to do with politics), they typically did
not feel that the literary profession was in any meaningful sense an arena for political
debate or engagement.  Only two of the interviewees embraced a description of their
work as a “political activity,” and if another professor is to be believed, the proportion
of such politicized scholars in the profession is declining:  when asked if he felt that
many literature professors see their research and teaching as political activities, he
replied:
I don’t know.  Of course, there are a certain number of instructors—who tend
to be a bit older than me [the interviewee was in his mid-forties]—who still
have the idea that it’s very political.  I don’t have the impression of
encountering that among younger scholars.  In any case, it’s not big.  It exists
at the level of the individual, of course, but I don’t think that today it’s
something with much resonance.
Another indication of the subsiding of political concerns in French literary
studies today is that political concerns seem to have diminished dramatically as a
factor in the job market.  While a number of professors noted that literature
departments had until recently tended to align themselves as a whole towards either
radical or traditional scholarship, and had only hired like-minded professors, they all
noted a general sea-change in the profession away from hiring practices based on such
litmus tests, and towards more meritocratic criteria; as one professor put it:
It seems to me that conflicts [over hiring] are based more on the quality of
work.  That’s to say—to put it really very roughly—one used to say “he’s on
our side,” or “he’s not on our side,” and today one would say instead “his work
is good” or “his work isn’t good.”  It’s “good” or “not good.”
Similarly, a professor at a department at one of the newer Parisian universities
(i.e, created in the late 1960s or early 1970s) told me that while he felt that the initial
deliberate establishment of his department as a home for “radical” scholarship was
“necessary at the time,” he now feels that the separation of perspectives is the worst
thing for the discipline intellectually, and that departments should no longer impose
intellectual or political litmus tests upon candidates for jobs.
Where are literary studies in France headed in the future? Most of the
professors interviewed declined to speculate, but many noted that the current trend
seems to be towards work of a more traditional style.  Several scholars mentioned that
much of the current scholarship in the field resembles the “old literary history” with
only slight modifications, and that a large number of the new books in French
literature today consist of fairly atheoretical scholarly works, such as definitive
scholarly editions of individual writers’ works.  As one professor with modernist
leanings put it:
There’s a tremendous amount of work which has a more traditional allure.
There’s a return to more in-depth works, more critical editions, more scholarly
editions, more than there are works of polemics or essayism.  I think that’s the
tendency.  I’m not a good example, but this is [pulls off his shelf and displays
a volume from a recently published definitive scholarly edition of a minor 18th
Century author].  This isn’t at all what would have been done twenty years
ago.
This should not be taken to mean that “modernist” scholarship is on the wane,
although it does seem to lack the vitality of the traditionalist revival, and although
certain “modernist” paradigms—most notably Marxism—do seem to be disappearing.
But it does seem to indicate that there are few signs at present that literary studies in
France will head soon towards anything approaching the direction of the discipline in
America.  If anything, they appear to be moving in the opposite way.
EXPLAINING THE VARIANCE
Why have French and American literary studies developed in such different
directions in recent years? Without wishing to discount the effects of individual
agency or other important contingent factors, there appear to be a number of
sociological variables, both at the national and academic levels of social organization,
which may account for much of the observed variance between the French and
American cases.  I will focus here upon three sets of factors whose cross-national
differences seem particularly salient in this regard:  1) the differing amount of racial,
ethnic, and cultural diversity in each country, and the differing ways in which these
kinds of diversity are institutionally recognized and mediated; 2) the differing social
position in each country of humanist intellectuals; and 3) the different “disciplinary
ecology” in which literary studies is positioned in each country.
Multiculturalism
From its initial transformation in the late 1960s to the present, American
literary studies has shown more concern over issues related to ethnic, racial, or other
minority or “marginalized” groups than has been the case in the discipline in France.
This concern has been manifested both in the conflicts over the traditional canon for
literary studies, and in the appearance of scholarly paradigms based upon inserting
categories like gender, race, and sexual preference into the analysis of texts.  In
contrast, French literary studies has witnessed neither of these movements.  Why has
this difference existed, and what have been its consequences for literary studies in the
two countries?
One reason for the difference may be simply that the United States is a more
ethnically and racially diverse society than France.  Given this greater diversity—and
the fact that certain groups, most notably African-Americans, have not assimilated
along the ideals of the “melting pot”—and given the fact that this diversity is
increasingly represented in an academic system that was previously fairly culturally
homogeneous along WASP (and largely masculine) lines, it is perhaps unsurprising
that literary scholarship in America is more attentive to issues of diversity.
While this simple reflection model (more diversity leads to more attention to
diversity) makes a certain amount of intuitive sense, and may account for some of the
variance between literary studies in France and America, it also presents certain
problems.  For while France is certainly less culturally diverse than the United States,
it is by no means lacking in groups which might plausibly have challenged the French
canon in a manner similar to the challenges in the United States.  Why, for instance,
has the French literary canon not seen significant challenges from women, or from
French citizens of African descent whose Francophone literary traditions are scarcely
visible in French literature departments?12 Women are certainly not a smaller
percentage of the population in France than in the United States, and while
Francophone blacks are a smaller group proportionally than African-Americans, they
are not a smaller percentage of the population than are some of the other groups in
America (Native Americans or Asian Americans, for instance) which have
successfully mobilized around charges of their group’s exclusion from literary study.
Accounting for these issues requires moving beyond a simple reflection model
to an examination of the differing ways in which social categories like ethnicity, race,
and gender are treated in France and the United States in various contexts of claim-
making and justification.  As Paul Starr (1992) has noted, all bureaucratic institutions
                                                 
12 While individual feminist literature scholars are present in France, none of the French scholars
interviewed noted any feminist challenge to the canon analogous to that in the United States.  None
of the scholars in the sample worked on Francophone literature, and the one scholar who mentioned
Francophone literature in an interview did so only to note its absence; he stated that Italian literary
scholars have actually done more work in the area than French scholars themselves.
must choose from the potentially infinite array of possible social classifications a
limited set which will be treated as legitimate for use in institutional classification and
decision-making; in the ideal-typical democratic-liberal state, for instance, the use of
many ascribed and/or group characteristics (such as religion, race or gender) in the
evaluation, rewarding, and sanctioning of individuals is legally forbidden (one cannot
employ such a category to discriminate for or against someone in an employment
decision, for instance).  But as Starr also notes, liberal democracies often deviate from
this model in specific situations; in the United States, for instance, while the legal
system forbids discrimination against individuals on the basis of such “suspect
classifications,” it has permitted the use of these same classifications in certain
programs, such as affirmative action, which seek to remedy previous discrimination
based on those categories.  There thus exists what Starr calls a “classificatory tension,”
in which the use of these suspect categories is simultaneously forbidden and
permitted, depending on context and purpose, and in which many predominantly
“liberal” American institutions veer at times into a “corporatist” model of governance
whose principle is the mediation between officially recognized groups rather than the
liberal principle of mediation between “suspect classification”-free individuals.
The presence of this sort of classificatory tension is evident in the American
university system, where “suspect classifications” have been embodied not only in the
presence of affirmative action hiring and admissions for various minorities, but also in
the creation of separate programs, institutes and/or departments centered around
minority concerns.  First established for Afro-American and Women’s studies, these
programs have proliferated as more groups have organized and come forward as
marginalized identities demanding representation within a university system which
they feel has ignored or suppressed them and their concerns.  As we have seen, such
movements also exist within literary studies, in the form of claims by these same
groups that they merit separate canons, courses, and/or theoretical perspectives.
While French society certainly has its share of corporatist tendencies (such as
in the sphere of industrial and labor relations), French universities are much freer of
this sort of corporatist mediation than are their American counterparts.  One reason for
this seems to be that the use of “suspect classifications” in France is largely confined
to work and class-based categories (or what Laurent Thévenot calls “industrial” orders
of worth: see Desorisères & Thévenot, 1988 and Boltanski & Thévenot, 1991).
“Suspect” classifications based on ethnic, gender, and racial categories are much more
uniformly forbidden in institutional decision-making than in the U.S. Also, the very
open admission policies of French universities and the relative lack of an institutional
“pecking order” among them means that there has been little concern over whether
disadvantaged groups are being excluded from admissions or being shunted off into
lesser schools.13  There are no affirmative action-style policies in place for
disadvantaged groups in French higher education, and French universities also lack
their American counterparts’ long and continuing history of preferential treatment for
alumni offspring and athletes.  In this relatively meritocratic and universalistic
environment, American-style ethnic, gender, race, or other "group studies" movements
are not perceived as legitimate: when French literature professors were asked why
such movements do not exist in France, for example, the most frequent response was
                                                 
13 The great exception to the general lack of hierarchy among higher educational institutions in France
is of course the small number of elite Grandes Écoles, and there has been some recent concern about
the demographic makeup of the students at these institutions, whose graduates comprise a very
disproportionate percentage of France’s elite.  At a recent talk at Princeton, for instance, a professor
from the École Normale Supérieure presented statistics showing that the composition of the student
body has increasingly been dominated by the upper classes.  So far, however, admission to the
Grandes Écoles remains entirely based upon competitive examinations, and the schools are seen by
many as the epitome of French educational meritocracy.
that they are "impensable" (unthinkable) within the context of French "universalism"
and "Republicanism."
The fact that scholarly groupings based upon ethnic, racial, and other group
status do exist in American literature departments and do not in French ones explains
some of the differences observed between them along the dimensions of subject
matter, politicization, and intellectual conflict.  In the area of subject matter, the
challenges such groups have made to the traditional canon in America have obviously
broadened the range of subject material for the discipline, at the very least by adding
more literary works by minority authors.  It may have also contributed to the move in
American literary studies towards the study of mass culture and other "non-literary"
(in the classical sense) texts; since many marginalized groups have historically
participated less in the production of "high literature" than in other cultural forms,
many literary scholars (e.g., Baker, 1992) from these groups have focused at least part
of their efforts on other cultural products of their groups, such as slave narratives or
rap music.  Finally, since these scholars are often interested in how their group has
been marginalized or oppressed in society in general, and not just in the sphere of
literature, they have often pushed into Cultural Studies terrain, textually analyzing
non-written social phenomena like movies and television or public debates to reveal
racist, patriarchal, or homophobic images and discourses.
It is also likely that the presence of these scholarly groupings has contributed
to the more politicized and contentious atmosphere in American literary studies.  Most
basically, these scholarly movements have usually relied upon charges of
discrimination as the foundation for their legitimacy, and typically are predicated upon
actively combating what is seen as the continuation of such discrimination in society
and/or the profession.  Even when talk of discrimination is replaced by the notion of
“representing multicultural diversity,” certain corporatist dynamics which often lead
to politicization remain inescapable.  For "multiculturalism" by definition (or if
perhaps not by all possible definitions, then certainly by the definitions most often
used in practice) involves a form of corporatist mediation, as it implies a number of
different cultures or groups which merit representation.  Not only does this framework
invite conflict over how much representation (i.e., resources, space in the curriculum,
etc.) each group will receive, but it also inevitably involves the contentious issue of
which groups merit recognition in the first place.  Realistically, only a limited number
of groupings can be granted official institutional recognition, and this fact has created
the necessity for mobilization around group identities that are broad enough to achieve
the critical mass sufficient for recognition; Afro-American and women's studies
clearly long ago reached this critical mass and are well represented institutionally,
while movements around other identities, such as Latino studies, Gay studies, Native
American studies, and Asian-American studies, are still struggling (with varying
degrees of success) for similar levels of institutional recognition.  These broad identity
labels often include considerable diversity within them (such as differences between
American and Caribbean blacks), which can give rise to internal conflicts, and this
problem is especially acute in cases where groups fall under several labels at once, yet
feel insufficiently represented within any of them; feminist studies, for instance, has
witnessed a great deal of internal division and conflict over whether it has
marginalized the perspectives and interests of women of color or lesbians.
Finally, but certainly not least in significance, besides these conflictual
dynamics internal to multiculturalism, the corporatist form that multiculturalism has
taken in American academia is itself a very controversial issue (both within academia
and the public at large), with many scholars (and a very large number of politicians
and public critics) strongly disapproving of what they see as the "balkanization" of
academia (Schlesinger, 1992).  Some of these scholars and critics are themselves
members of the marginalized groups, and their dissent from the multicultural
consensus (often on the ground that the identity politics and corporatism typical of
multiculturalism produce a damaging "victim mentality" among minorities, and/or
only serve to further underscore group differences, thus impeding integration) has
been the cause of some of the most heated polemics and political recriminations in
literary studies in recent years.14
The Position of Humanist Intellectuals
While the national differences in how issues of race, gender, and other
marginalized categories are handled clearly account for much of the difference
between French and American literary studies in recent years, there are other
significant national differences which seem likely to have also been factors.  Among
these are the differing legitimacy and position of humanist intellectuals (particularly
those of a leftist or “progressive” stripe) in each country, and the differing way that
intellectual life relates to academic work.15
French humanist intellectuals have long been noted for their exceptionally
prominent place in their nation's public and political discourse.  While the amount of
this influence has declined since the days when Sartre and other intellectuals
championed the opposition to France's war in Algeria, and led protest marches in
1968, French intellectuals and their ideas remain quite visible in the public sphere,
especially within the press but also on certain television shows like the popular
                                                 
14 The loud objections many minority literary scholars have directed towards dissidents like Shelby
Steele, Camille Paglia, and Katie Roiphe have been matched in polemical force perhaps only by
those directed at Republican appointees to the National Endowment to the Humanities such as
William Bennett and Lynne Cheney.
15 The term "intellectuals" is notoriously vague, and I should make clear here that I am using “humanist
intellectuals” to refer to artists, writers, philosophers, and critics, etc., who wish to intervene in
public debates, and not to political figures, policy experts, or professional journalists.
Bouillon de Culture (formerly Apostrophes ).  In contrast to their French counterparts,
American humanist intellectuals—particularly those on the Left—have traditionally
had a much less prominent and legitimate position in American public life.  The
notion that artists, writers, and humanist academics have by grace of their intellectual
positions the right to have influence on public issues is much less widely accepted by
Americans than by the French, and many observers have commented on the general
suspicion of the American public towards intellectuals (e.g., Hofstadter, 1943; Ross
1989).  And while certain conservative humanist intellectuals have succeeded in
achieving a fair amount of public attention in recent years (often thanks in large part to
their connections with certain major newspapers, a number of well-funded
conservative institutes, and the Republican party), intellectuals on the Left and/or from
minority groups commonly feel that they have been shut out of the media, out of the
narrow spectrum of the two party system, and thus out of any significant presence in
public life.16
The peripheral position of progressive humanist American intellectuals may
account for a good deal of the politicization of American literature departments.
Given their perceived lack of access to the major organs of public debate, many of
these intellectuals have decided to utilize the academy as a sort of “headquarters of
                                                 
16 A list of humanist intellectuals in America today  who are both publicly prominent and conservative
could include, for instance, William Bennett, George Will, William F. Buckley, and Irving Kristol,
to name a few.  For documentation of the rise of public conservative intellectuals,  and its
connection with the broader rise to power of conservatism in America in recent decades, see
Blumenthal (1988).  It should be noted that the sense of media isolation among intellectuals from
minority groups in America may be diminishing with the increasing rise to public prominence of a
group of black intellectuals such as Cornel West, Henry Louis Gates, Jr., and Bell Hooks, among
others (Anderson 1994).
last resort” for radical political change and expression.  During the course of one
interview, for instance, a professor described his vision of the mission of his
department in precisely such terms:
What we’re trying to do here is to create a program where people who think of
themselves as intellectual activists can train themselves.  It’s a very distinct
category—it’s people who come to the academy to do the kind of work that
they can’t do outside of the academy—but the academy is not necessarily the
only location for that work...  It has a lot do to with the lack of journalistic
organs that are available in the independent public sphere.  Since officially the
Left does not exist in America, at least in terms of mainstream media
definitions, there are very few Left intellectuals, academic or otherwise, who
really have access...  The structure of the academy gives you openings to speak
in certain areas, it gives you access to certain forms of media that you wouldn’t
have otherwise—and if you don’t speak, surely someone else will, whose
politics you may not agree with.  So, I say “seize the day” under those
circumstances.
While the number of professors who view their academic positions with this
degree of political calculation is almost undoubtedly a minority within American
literature departments (and academia generally), they have been numerous enough to
spawn a backlash from conservative (and some liberal) critics in the media and
politicians, who have seized upon the presence of these "tenured radicals" (and often
on related phenomena like multiculturalism) as proof that American higher education
is in the thrall of "political correctness."   These charges of "PC" (as it has become
commonly referred to) received enormous amounts of coverage in the national press
in the early 1990s,17 have been the subject of many books (e.g., Kimball, 1990;
D'Souza, 1991), and remain a staple in many conservative publications.  Responding
to these attacks, politically engaged literary scholars have charged that their subject
matter is inherently and unavoidably political, and that their conservative critics are
hypocrites who want not to depoliticize academia, but rather to align it with
conservative politics and values (Graff, 1992).
The overall effect of these public conflicts has undoubtedly been to highlight
the political dimension of literary studies in America, and to create an atmosphere
where many scholars feel caught between polarized camps of conservatives and
radicals.  As one professor lamented, literary studies has "become fodder for the
culture wars":
The culture wars have clearly replaced anti-communism as a sort of national
political hot button thing...  So that’s created this kind of siege mentality,
which then produces even more aggressive scholarship and posturing.  I just
think it’s a very unpleasant situation for people when they get caught in the
middle of it.
                                                 
17 The phrase "political correctness" first appeared in the press in a New York Times article by Richard
Bernstein (1990).  At its height the controversy over PC received a cover study in Newsweek (1990),
a major feature article in Time (Henry, 1991), stories in USA Today (e.g., Grabmeier, 1992) and
similarly high-profile coverage in most other major journalistic publications.
Since it is not very easy to take a neutral position in these disputes, it is not
surprising that, as we have seen, many literary scholars who would probably not
describe their work as "political" in different circumstances feel compelled to do so in
the current atmosphere of literary studies:  political prisms have become difficult to
avoid.
French literary studies (and French academia generally) has avoided anything
resembling the "political correctness" debate in America.  In large part this may be
because there are no significant groups who have both the incentive and the means to
start such a debate.  In the absence of multicultural movements, there is no struggle
over minority group representation in the academic profession.  Those literary
scholars who wish to take public intellectual stands on political issues tend to do so
outside the profession in the general public intellectual sphere; an academic career is
thus typically for engagé intellectuals more of a stepping stone and resource base for
their public activities rather than their principal field of engagement.18
Also, none of the political parties in France seems to be very interested in
making an issue of the political orientation of university professors.  Unlike in
America, where attacks on “political correctness” and multiculturalism often seem to
fit into a broader conservative populist rhetoric against “liberal elites,” who are
accused of fomenting “the welfare state,” cultural decline, and unpopular affirmative
action programs, none of these issues has much resonance in mainstream French
politics, and the one political party which has made a major issue of protecting a
French “way of life”—Jean-Marie Le Pen’s National Front—has seen the threat to
                                                 
18 Priscilla Parkhurst Clark notes that public intellectuals in France today tend to use university
appointments as “a springboard to general intellectual life and to a broad, heterogenous public"
(Clark, 1987: 197).
French culture as emanating mainly from immigration, and not from any vision of
countercultural elites in academia or the media preying upon traditional values.19
The Professional Ecology
One final set of factors that may account for some of the differences between
French and American literary studies—particularly their different conceptions of
appropriate subject matter—concerns the different possibilities that the “disciplinary
ecology” in each country has offered for the expansion of literary studies’ intellectual
terrain, and the incentives that the discipline in each country has had for such
expansion.
One of the more fruitful ways of looking at professions, as Andrew Abbott’s
work (1988) has documented, is by seeing them as existing within a larger
professional “system” or “ecology,” within which both nascent and existing
professions must compete with each other for recognized and exclusive expertise over
different “niches” of specialized services.  Professions are thus seen as engaged in a
process of “turf wars,” in which—much as in Paul Starr’s discussion of
corporatism—conflict often centers as much upon the definition and delimitation of
the various “niches” as upon which profession will have dominion over each of them.
The result of these definitional struggles is often a situation where a single broad
service area (care of the mentally ill, for instance) is traversed by a number of
different professional niches (psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, counselors),
                                                 
19 Of course, if French academia were witnessing affirmative action programs for scholars of Algerian
and African descent, and/or if attacks were being made on the French canon in the name of a
Francophone or Franco-Arab multiculturalism, this situation might be quite different—which
perhaps underscores the role these types of phenomena may have had in the United States in making
literary studies the subject of political controversy.
sometimes in an orderly and stratified manner, and sometimes in a more hodgepodge,
overlapping, and/or conflictual way.
In the academic context, the various professional disciplines have historically
competed with one another for dominion over intellectual terrain, and the same sort of
overlapping jurisdiction over broad categories exists (economic phenomena, to take
one example, are the terrain of an entire discipline—economics—but are also studied
in other disciplines in fields such as political economy, economic sociology, economic
history, anthropology, public policy programs, and occasionally psychology, each of
which study different aspects of economic phenomena and/or utilize different
theoretical paradigms and methodologies, and/or simply overlap).  The same sort of
rise, fall and contestation of specific niches is also present, with the occasional new
discipline emerging (computer science, for instance), certain once quite central
disciplines seeing their niches wane in importance (Classics), and some disciplines
making moves into others’ terrain, either because their traditional niche is on the
decline (for instance, anthropology’s increasing move towards the ethnographic study
of “modern” societies—traditionally sociology’s preserve—because of the dwindling
number of already often overstudied “premodern” societies), or out of imperialistic
ambitions (such as in the efforts of Rational Choice theorists to “economize” the study
of many social and political phenomena outside of economics’ traditional terrain).
Using this perspective to look at literary studies, it seems that in many ways
the heightened attention to “theory” and the recent expansion of subject matter in
American literary studies are the result of professional dynamics similar to those in
these last two examples of anthropology and rational choice theory.  Motivated either
by concerns about literary studies’ waning professional fortunes, and/or by a desire to
spread the insights of literary analysis to the terrains of other disciplines, American
literary scholars have in recent years shown a pronounced tendency to move into
subject areas that overlap with the professional domains of other disciplines.
Literature departments in America witnessed a pronounced decline in
undergraduate enrollments in the 1970s,20 and much of the move towards more
interdisciplinary and theoretical work in literary studies seems to have been influenced
by literature professors’ concern to reverse this decline.  For instance, in a influential
1981 book on literary theory, Jonathan Culler (a Professor of literature at Cornell, and
one of the more widely read disseminators and interpreters of French post-structuralist
theory), advocated more attention to mass culture and interdisciplinary theory in
literature departments precisely for the reason that such a method would attract more
students:
In most universities the traditional English courses organized according to
periods have suffered a decline in enrollments...  The problem is structural,
involving the marginal situation of literature within the students’ cultures...
Confronted with students for whom literature is simply one aspect of their
culture, and an aspect with which they are relatively unfamiliar, teachers need
to be able to discuss literature in relation to more familiar cultural products and
in its relations to other ways of writing about the human experience, such as
philosophy, psychology, sociology, anthropology, and history (Culler, 1981:
212-3).
                                                 
20 The number of bachelor's degrees awarded in English literature in the United States declined from
64,342 in the 1970-71 academic year to 32,254 in 1980-81—a drop of 50%.  This number has
gradually recovered strength since the mid-to-late 1980s, with 56,133 degrees reported in 1992-3,
the latest year for which statistics are available at the time of this writing (National Center of
Education Statistics, 1995: Table 243).
Furthermore, Culler also advocated that English departments begin to pick up
intellectual niches that were being left behind or neglected by other disciplines,
particularly the “humanistic” tradition:  towards the end of his book he offered
[w]hat may seem a peculiar suggestion—to have English departments go
“outside the field” to teach what other departments neglect...  This is especially
important, it seems to me, in universities where philosophy departments fail to
teach traditional philosophy and psychology departments reject
psychoanalysis, producing a situation in which the central texts of the
humanist tradition—Plato, Descartes, Hegel, Nietzsche, Freud—are neglected,
unless they are taught in literature courses. (1981: 221)
Finally, Culler put forward the idea that literary studies could use literary
theory to shore up its professional legitimacy vis à vis other academic disciplines.  In a
manner similar to the way in which economistic paradigms like Rational Choice
theory have recently gained professional ground by redefining many social and
political issues as “economic,” literary studies could deconstruct the theories and
methods of many other disciplines to show how they relied upon “literary” images and
conventions, thus raising the relative professional status of literature departments:
[W]e can think about literature in relation to other types of discourses by
focusing on a theoretical topic, such as narrative or theory of tropes, that will
enable us to see the importance and pervasiveness of structures that we
traditionally regard as “literary” and thus to justify the importance that we
think literary study ought to have. (1981: 217)
In the years since Culler voiced these suggestions, American literary studies
has moved along many of the directions he proposed.21  Scholarship studying literature
from interdisciplinary perspectives has proliferated, as has work relating literature to
other cultural forms.  The approach of analyzing social science discourse to reveal its
implicit “narratives” and “rhetorics” has caught on quite widely, and has precipitated
major discussions and autocritiques in a number of disciplines; while this has not
wholly been the result of the efforts of literary theorists, their work often figures
prominently in these discussions (e.g., Brown, 1987; Clifford and Marcus, 1986;
Hunter, 1990; McClosky, 1985).  Literary theory, particularly through deconstruction,
has kept a window open to continental philosophy and the humanist tradition, and
while some have complained that this has led to situation where undergraduate
English majors tend to “discuss the logocentrism of the philosophical tradition without
having read a single classic of philosophy” (Lamont, 1987: 593),  it does seem to have
made English departments attractive to many students.22
                                                 
21 It should be made clear that I am not trying to claim that these ideas originated with Culler, or to
place any specific measure on the effects of his advocacy; rather I cite him to show that concerns
such as his were evident in American literary studies at least as far back as the early 1980s.
22 The noted American philosopher Richard Rorty has suggested that literary theory in the United States
today fills an important role for intellectually-minded students that philosophy used to fill in
America, and still does in France and other European countries:
I think that in...  America philosophy has already been displaced by literary criticism in its
principal cultural function—as a source for youth’s self-description of its own difference
The most dramatic attempt at securing a new “niche” for literary studies,
however—and the one which appears to have both the most momentum at present,
and the most potential ramifications for the future of the discipline and the disciplinary
ecology in general—is the contemporary push to redefine the professional subject
matter of literature departments from “literature” to “culture” (or “discourse,” or
“text”).  As we have seen, this is the program of many American literary scholars
today.  Their effort to secure “culture” as the province for literary study seeks in
essence to legitimate the movement of many literary scholars onto intellectual terrains
traditionally the province of history and the social sciences.
Some of these scholars see this project in a way analogous to literary studies’
appropriation of  Continental philosophy and the Humanist tradition; they believe that
the social sciences and history have neglected the study of cultural phenomena to the
point of abdication, and that literature departments can profit by picking up the
abandoned niche; as Russell Berman (a professor of literature at Stanford) recently put
it in Profession:
Despite some recent developments, the study of culture is still marginal in
history departments, and culture is barely a factor at all in the quantitative
social sciences.  So the interdisciplinarity that devolves from the replacement
of literature (narrowly defined) by culture (broadly defined) has the advantage
of revitalizing the language and literature model by using an innovative
                                                                                                                                 
from the past...  This is roughly because of the Kantian and anti-historicist tenor of Anglo-
Saxon philosophy.  The cultural function of teachers of philosophy in countries where
Hegel was not forgotten is quite different and closer to the position of literary critics in
America. (Rorty, 1980: 168)
pedagogy that examines a culture through a range of objects, including but not
restricted to canonic literature.(Berman, 1995: 91)
For many of these scholars, however, “culture” is defined more broadly, and is
not just a question of subject matter but also one of politics and methodology.  They
perceive their model of cultural studies as opposing interpretive, textual, and/or
“postmodern” methods to what they see as the positivist and technocratic orientation
of the quantitative social sciences.23  From these scholars’ perspective, a “critical” and
culturally-focused literary studies has as its legitimate terrain the entire range of social
phenomena, and is often seen as existing in a contested relation to the mainstream
social sciences, which are viewed as reflecting a number of intellectually and
politically regressive and outmoded “modernist” assumptions about objective
knowledge, value-neutrality, and/or human nature.  Many of the more Cultural-
studies-inclined professors interviewed, for instance, expressed a generalized
skepticism about quantitative work and positivistic rhetoric in the social science
                                                 
23 In the case of certain literary scholars associated with “Science Studies,” this suspicion about
positivist methodology also extends to the natural sciences, and has produced much controversy,
such as in the recent “Sokal Affair,” in which New York University physicist Alan Sokal submitted
to Social Text (a prominent Cultural Studies journal) a paper which contained many erronoeus
statements about physics but was written in a “postmodern” style.  The paper was published, and
Sokal's subsequent revealation that it was a hoax attracted a great deal of media attention.  See Alan
Sokal (1996a and b), Scott (1996), Berkowitz (1996), and Begley and Rogers (1996).
disciplines,24 and one explicitly described his work as entering onto social science
terrain in order to combat such tendencies:
Most of what I do I see as being more in social science terrain rather than the
humanities nowadays.
What’s the difference?
Once you move into social science terrain, the local battles are a little different.
You tend to be at loggerheads with quantitative paradigms  And you can see
from department to department how there’s a war going on, very clearly.
Do you see yourself as warring against quantitative paradigms?
 Oh, yeah, I would be part of that.  I’m part of that crusade, to save what we
can [laughs].  In a way it’s the frontline between humanistic values and natural
science values.
                                                 
24 A representative quote: “I’m generally skeptical of positivistic claims, outside of the hard sciences...
I think that human stuff doesn’t quantify terribly well, and I further have doubts about the people
who do it (laughs), in terms of their infallibility. I’m skeptical of the general face that quantitative
work, positivistic work, presents in the social sciences.”
For a variety of reasons, then—to react to a threatening dropoff in enrollments
and prestige, to seize perceived opportunities to seize intellectual turf that is seen as
“up for grabs,” and to further methodological and political agendas—American
literary scholars have sought to expand their discipline’s professional intellectual
niche.
In contrast, French literary studies has witnessed little of this kind of activity,
and remains focused fairly narrowly upon the traditional terrain of canonical literature.
Part of the reason for this may be that such efforts would be difficult and seen as out
of place for literary studies within the French disciplinary ecology.  With regard to the
appropriation of other disciplines’ abandoned professional terrain, there are few
niches—at least of the sort which American literary studies have seized upon—for
literary studies to pick up within the French disciplinary ecology.  Psychology
departments in France still teach Freud and Lacan, and French philosophers retain
interest in both the history of philosophy and the Continental philosophical tradition.
Many of the philosophically-oriented social theorists often imported and appropriated
by American literature departments (such as Michel Foucault, Jean Baudrillard, and
Gilles Deleuze) are also the products (and the province) of French philosophy
departments.
Attempts by literary scholars to appropriate the sphere of cultural phenomena
from the social sciences, or to mount a humanistic challenge against them, would also
seem implausible in the French context.  While (often American-influenced)
quantitative work and paradigms do exist in the French social sciences, they are fairly
marginal.  The mainstream of French social science has a long tradition of being
“critical,” interpretive, and attentive to culture; indeed, many of the thinkers often
cited by Cultural Studies scholars in the United States (Pierre Bourdieu, for instance)
are French social scientists.  Generally, there seems to be more common ground and
much less of a sense of intellectual separateness between the social sciences and the
humanities in France than there is in the United States; French professors in both the
humanities and the social sciences report less sense of intellectual foreignness or
“otherness” across the social science/humanities divide than do their American
counterparts, and many reject the distinction entirely in favor of a composite
conception of the “les sciences humaines” (the human sciences).25  Given the situation
in French social science, then, any attempt by French literary scholars to turn their
discipline into a sort of refuge for a “shadow,” humanist social science would seem
superfluous; the social sciences in France already are largely humanist.
But by themselves, these greater obstacles to the discipline’s expansion do not
seem sufficient to fully explain why French literary studies has remained so canonical
in focus.  Some subject niches—popular fiction, for instance, and perhaps some other
parts of mass culture—could certainly be within the professional domain of literature
departments in France if literature professors wished to incorporate them.  But by and
large, they have shown little interest in making such an appropriation, and are content
to remain focused on canonical literature.  Why the lack of interest?
Partly, this seems to do with some of the national differences in literary studies
already described earlier.  The lack of any strong multicultural movement among
                                                 
25 In related research I have also interviewed 20 political scientists in France and the United States.
When asked about scholarship across their side of the social science/humanities divide, American
political scientists and literary scholars were much more likely to report feelings such as a lack of
intellectual familiarity or a sense of strong intellectual difference, and more often expressed the
sense that they lacked the competence to evaluate such work as good or bad (frequently with
explanations such as “I don’t understand what the rules are in those disciplines”).  French scholars,
by contrast, were much less likely to report such feelings of difference, and tended to be quite
confident in their ability to evaluate all but the most technical or specialized work across the breadth
of “les science humaines.”
French literary scholars, for instance, takes away a group that in the American context
has had a whole set of incentives to push the borders of traditional subject matter, and
the absence in France of American-style displaced political intellectuals would seem
to have a similar negative effect.
It also seems likely that French literary scholars have had less reason to feel
insecure about the prestige or institutional security of canonical literary study than
have their American counterparts, and so have had less incentive to try to move into
other areas of scholarship.  Institutionally, literature departments in France have had
little reason to fear being “downsized.”  Funding for academic departments is seldom
tied to changes in undergraduate enrollments (which in any case seem to have been
steadily rising for literature departments)26 and funding for universities generally in
France comes directly from a central government which is much less likely than
American state and national governments to view funding for literary scholarship as
an expendable luxury item in yearly budgets.  In an era in which Francophone culture
is often seen as under siege from “Hollywood” and other Anglophone influences,
there is considerable and broad public support in French society for measures to
protect and preserve the national culture.  Besides the well-known instances of the
French government’s protection of the French film industry against American
competition, and the Academie Française’s efforts to resist the Anglicization of the
French language, this cultural nationalism is manifested generally in the presence of
state support for projects and institutions related to “patrimoine” (patrimony, or
national heritage).  The preservation and dissemination of classic French literature in
the nation’s universities fits directly into this goal of preserving patrimoine, and while
literature departments are hardly lavishly funded, none of the scholars interviewed felt
                                                 
26 Eric Fassin, personal correspondence.
that there was any danger of their support being significantly cut.  As one of the
CNRS literary scholars put it:
Our society, despite its hypermodernism, is obsessed with patrimony.  The
word that is the most saleable today is the word “patrimony.”  If one wants to
obtain money for a project for no matter what, one doesn’t speak the language
of “breakthroughs”, et cetera; one must only say the word “patrimony,” and
the money rains down.  This is a society which is at the moment completely
patrimonial, and it’s evident that there’s nothing more patrimonial than
literature as a cultural treasure.  It has an obvious patrimonial aspect.
Beyond assured state support, it appears that canonical literature remains a
cultural status item of more general and widespread importance in France than in the
United States.  Attempts to transpose Pierre Bourdieu’s (1987)  model of how
“cultural capital” plays a key role in social stratification and reproduction from its
initial context of French society to American society seem to have demonstrated that
cultural capital has a less significant role in American society than in France;
Americans are less likely to value being “cultured” than are the French.27
Furthermore, the very definition of cultural capital is more problematic in the United
States; while the French seem to have a fairly homogeneous understanding of what
sort of knowledge and culture make one a “cultured” person, Americans seem to share
much less common ground on this issue, and the value of having a familiarity with the
                                                 
27 For an empirical and theoretical examination of how Bourdieu’s model fares when applied to the
United States context, see Lamont (1992).
national canon of “high literature” is much less self-evident for many Americans than
it is for a solid majority of the French.  This greater social significance and
appreciation of canonical literature in France may constitute a final reason why French
literary studies have kept their canonical focus; with their object of study retaining a
strong and generalized social prestige, French literary scholars may feel no need to
move into other subject areas in order to maintain their discipline’s “relevance” or
intellectual profile.
CONCLUSION :  THE PARADOX OF FRENCH INFLUENCE?
In conclusion, let us return to the puzzle posed at the beginning of this essay:
if French theorists have been so influential upon American literary scholars, then why
are literary studies so different in the two countries?  Since most of this paper has
already been devoted to explaining these differences, it is perhaps best at this point to
reverse the terms of this apparent paradox: why have American literary scholars
devoted so much energy to importing French scholarship, given that literary studies in
the two countries are so “out of step” intellectually?
The paradoxical aspects of this importation largely disappear when one
examines the specific French thinkers that American literary theorists have imported,
for these thinkers are themselves largely “out of step” with contemporary French
literary criticism.  First and foremost, virtually all of these French thinkers are (or
were) members of the more radical preceding generation of French intellectuals,
against which the current generation of French literary scholars draw sharp intellectual
boundaries.  Furthermore, many, such as Lacan, Foucault, Derrida, and Althusser,
were (or, in Derrida’s case, are) not literary scholars, but rather hailed from other
disciplines.  Some, such as Barthes, were literary scholars, but never held regular
academic appointments.  Of the pantheon of French theorists imported to the United
States in recent years, only Julia Kristeva holds a regular university appointment in a
literature department in France.  Of course, the fact that most of these thinkers have
not held literature chairs does not mean that they have not been influential in French
literary studies:  many of them have been, particularly Barthes and Foucault.  But their
influence seems to have coincided largely with the atmosphere of radical politics that
permeated France in the years following 1968, and with the relative waning of anti-
statist and anti-capitalist sentiments in France since that time, their intellectual
influence in French literary studies has declined.
By contrast, the “hermeneutics of suspicion” that form the common intellectual
denominator of most of the French theories imported to the United States have proven
more resiliently resonant with an American audience of literary scholars who remain
more concerned with issues of power and domination than do their French
counterparts.28  While the focus of their concerns is obviously somewhat different,
with more attention paid by Americans to issues of gender, race, and sexual
preference, the French theorists who have become the most popular among American
literary scholars are those whose theoretical apparatuses have proven sufficiently
flexible to fit these issues.  Michel Foucault’s dissections of the intertwining of
“discourse” and power, Derrida’s deconstruction of hierarchical concepts of
“difference,” and Lacan’s notion of the “Other” are all capable of being transposed
onto issues of race, gender, and sexuality, and have been by American literary
scholars.
One would not, however, want to attribute the importation and influence of
French theory solely to its elective affinity to the contemporary sociopolitical concerns
                                                 
28 Michèle Lamont and Marsha Witten, noting the often significant intellectual differences between the
theorists imported to United States humanities departments, conclude that they “converge
substantively only to the extent that [most] of them study the process by which culture...  contributes
to the reproduction of power relations.” (Lamont and Witten 1988: 19).
of American literary theorists.  In a number of articles Michèle Lamont (1987; Lamont
and Witten, 1988) has offered some other explanations for  the popularity of Jacques
Derrida and other French thinkers in American literary studies:  their initial
championing by professors at certain leading universities; the fact that “French
theory” has been perceived as sophisticated, and has thus been used as a form of
“cultural capital” within the academic literary field; and the fact that deconstruction’s
(and other French theories’) applicability to a wide variety of literary products has
offered literature department a way of creating a degree of intellectual community
across the divisions of periodization.
This study suggests another cause related to Lamont's point about theoretical
unification.  Beyond internally unifying literary studies across periodizations, the
importation of French theories has also strengthened American literary studies in its
struggles with external disciplines over intellectual terrain.  In particular, the
importation of French theory has given literature scholars a “canon” of theories and
theorists that is in effect social-scientific, yet which differs from the set of canonical
theories and texts in the American social sciences themselves.  It has thus aided those
American literary scholars who seek to turn the discipline into a competing variant of
the social science disciplines, helping to maintain the distinctiveness of their work
from mainstream social science and thereby legitimating the discplines’ coexistence in
traditionally social-scientific terrain.
To the extent that a set of French theorists have played such a key role in the
founding of contemporary American literary and cultural studies, their influence has
been undeniable.  But is this influence likely to continue?  I would suggest that this is
unlikely, for reasons of both supply and demand.  On the supply side, there seem to be
few “undiscovered” French theorists from the generation of Derrida and Foucault who
have not already been imported by American literary theorists, and as we have seen,
the contemporary generation of French literary scholars is not producing similar work.
On the demand side, I would posit that American literary scholars no longer need an
external theoretical canon on which to base their work.  There are now enough
“homegrown” canonical theorists and texts in American literary studies to form a
basis for new scholarship, and a dissertation in literature in America today can just as
easily build upon the work of American theorists such as Said, Sedgwick, or Butler as
it can on Derrida or Lacan.  Indeed, to the extent that American theorists have taken
French theory in directions different than the French themselves, further importation
of French theory might prove unwelcome and jarring.  I would posit that the situation
of American literary studies today is in some ways like that of sociology just after the
rise of Parsonian structural functionalism: in that situation, too, a set of European
theorists was used as the basis and legitimation for a new and sharply different style of
scholarship, but with a tenor and an emphasis that made the field soon diverge from
developments on the Continent, after which the direct influence of European scholars
on their American counterparts dropped off sharply.
This study has confined inself to the examination of literary studies, and while
this discipline has been among those most influenced by French theory,  performing a
satisfying analysis of the importation of French theories to American academia in
general would require a broader focus than is provided here.  The less successful (but
still quite influential) attempts to bring French theories into disciplines such as
anthropology, sociology, history, and political science would need to be accounted for,
and this is beyond the scope of what can be accomplished here.  It is hoped, however,
that by providing an analysis of the differing state of literary studies in France and the
United States, this paper has gone some distance towards examining the social factors
affecting academic disciplines in France and the United States, and shed some light
upon their often complicated international relations.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abbott, Andrew 1988, The System of Professions, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Anderson, Jervis 1994, “The Public Intellectual (profile of Cornel West)," The New
Yorker 17 January.
Baker, Houston, Jr. 1993, “Introduction” to “Presidential Forum on Multiculturalism:
The Task of Literary Representation in the Twenty-First Century,” Profession
93.
Baker, Houston, Jr. 1992, Black Studies, Rap, and the Academy, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Barthes, Roland 1957, Mythologies, Paris: Editions de Seuil.
Begley, Sharon and Adam Rogers 1996, "'Morphogenic field’ day  (academic journal
Social Text falls for A. Sokal's hoax debunking postmodernist literary
theory)," Newsweek 3 June.
Berkowitz, Peter 1996, "Science fiction (A. Sokal perpetrates hoax in Social Text),"
The New Republic 1 July.
Berman, Russell A. 1995, “Global Thinking, Local Teaching: Departments, Curricula,
and Culture,” Profession 95.
Bernstein, Richard 1990, "The Rising Hegemony of the Politically Correct," The New
York Times 25 October.
Blumenthal, Sidney 1988, The Rise of the Counterestablishment. New York: Harper &
Row.
Boltanski, Luc and Laurent Thévenot 1991,  De la justification. Les économies de la
grandeur, Paris: Gallimard.
Bourdieu, Pierre 1984, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Brown, Richard Harvey 1987, Society As Text: Essays on Rhetoric, Reason, and
Reality, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Clark, Priscilla Parkhurst 1987, Literary France: The Making of a Culture, Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Clifford, James and Steven Marcus (eds) 1986, Writing Culture: The Poetics and
Politics of Ethnography, Berkeley: University of California Press.
Crawford, Robert 1992, Devolving English Literature, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Culler, Jonathan 1981, The Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction,
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Desrosières, Alain and Laurent Thévenot 1988,  Les catégories socioprofessionnelles,
Paris: La Découverte.
D'Souza, Dinesh 1991, Illiberal Education:  The Politics of Race and Sex on Campus,
New York: The Free Press.
Grabmeier, Jeff 1992, "Clashing over political correctness," USA Today 12
November.
Graff, Gerald 1992, Beyond the Culture Wars, New York: W.W. Norton.
Guillory, John 1993, Cultural Capital: The Problem of Literary Canon Formation,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Henry, William A. 1991, "Upside down in the groves of academe," Time 1 April.
Hofstadter, Richard 1943, Anti-Intellectualism in American Life, New York: Knopf.
Hughes, Robert 1989, “America (book review),” The New York Review of Books 1
June.
Hunter, Albert (ed) 1990, The Rhetoric of Social Research: Understood and Believed,
New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.
Kimball, Roger 1990, Tenured Radicals: How Politics Has Corrupted Our Higher
Education, New York: HarperPerennial.
Lamont, Michèle 1987, “How to Become a Dominant French Philosopher: The Case
of Jacques Derrida,” American Journal of Sociology 93:3.
Lamont, Michèle 1992, Money, Morals, and Manners, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Lamont, Michèle and Marsha Witten 1988, “Surveying the Continental Drift: The
Diffusion of French Social and Literary Theory in the United States,” French
Politics and Society 6:3.
Lentricchia, Frank 1980, After the New Criticism, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Lewalski, Barbara K. 1993, “Critical Issues in Literary Studies,” Profession 93.
McClosky, Donald N. 1985, The Rhetoric of Economics, Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press.
National Center of Education Statistics 1995, "Bachelor's Degrees Conferred by
Institutions of Higher Education, by Discipline, 1970-71 to 1992-93 (Table
243)," 1995 Digest of Education Statistics, Washington, DC: United States
Department of Education.
Newsweek 1990, "Taking offense.  (political correctness movement on campus; cover
story; special section)," Dec. 24.
Paglia, Camille 1991, “Ninnies, Pedants, Tyrants and Other Academics,” The New
York Times Book Review 5 May.
Ricoeur, Paul 1970, Freud and Philosophy: An Essay on Interpretation, New Haven:
Yale University Press.
Rorty, Richard 1980, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Ross, Andrew 1989, No Respect: Intellectuals and Popular Culture, New York:
Routledge.
Schlesinger, Arthur, Jr. 1992, The Disuniting of America, New York: W.W. Norton.
Scott, Janny 1996, "Postmodern gravity deconstructed, slyly. (A. Sokal's parody in
Social Text)," The New York Times May 18.
Sokal, Alan 1996a, “Transgressing the Boundaries: Toward a Transformative
Hermenuetics of Quantum Gravity,” Social Text  45-46 (Spring/Summer).
Sokal, Alan 1996b, “A Physicist Experiments with Cultural Studies,” Lingua Franca
(May/June).
Spender, Dale 1986, Mothers of the Novel: 100 Good Women Writers Before Jane
Austen, London: Pandora Press.
Stanton, Domna C. 1994, “Editor’s Column: What is Literature?—1994,”
Publications of the Modern Language Association 109.
Starr, Paul 1992, “Social Categories and Claims in the Liberal State,” Social Research
59:2 (Summer 1992).
Tompkins, Jane 1985, Sensational Designs: The Cultural Work of American Fiction
1790-1860, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wimsatt, W.K. and Monroe C. Beardsley 1954, “The Intentional Fallacy,” in The
Verbal Icon:  Studies in the Meaning of Poetry, Lexington: University Press of
Kentucky.
