D-3 
THE DOZER BOSS 
 
Who is the dozer boss (DOZB) and just what does he do?  The DOZB is an ICS 
position who is usually supervised directly by a DIVS or STLD in the nationally 
recognized operations chain of command.  He is the manager of an agency contract 
for one or more dozers, with operator, transport, and assigned personnel.  He may 
manage agency assigned equipment/personnel independently or in addition to 
private contractors. 
 
Assignments may be for initial attack fire suppression (usually a “District” 
resource order) or for extended attack (ordered by Incident Command Team).  
BAER teams also regularly need equipment and DOZB.  Other resource orders 
may be made for ice storm, wind storm, insect disease projects, and other risk 
incidents where the scale of operations exceeds local capacities to handle. 
 
The use of dozers and heavy equipment has three overwhelming advantages to 
hand labor: 
 
1. 
Equipment generally can do the same job faster. 
2. 
Equipment generally can do the same job cheaper. 
3. 
Equipment eliminates safety risks to people by reducing the number of 
people on site. 
 
The old adage “a machine can do the work of a hundred men” is truer than ever.  
But it is critical to have the right machine, in the right place, with the right 
operator.  You as a dozer boss can size up this combination and ensure the right 
job gets done.  Capable operation and supervision is essential to avoiding and 
mitigating specific hazards associated with the use of machinery. 
 
This S-232 course is designed within a timeframe to give you the best training 
available to assume a new responsibility important and respected in ICS.  Your 
performance will determine whether this position earns more or less in the future.  
Accomplishing incident objectives, your own performance evaluation, and the 
image of your peer group depends on individual commitment to strive for 
excellence.  Do not be overwhelmed with this challenge, but grow with it.  Ask 
questions and gain from the knowledge of others. 
 
D-4 
The difference between a DOZB and tractor plow boss (TRPB) may be nil 
depending on local factors and needs, but in theory, here is a comparison: 
 
DOZB 
TRPB 
Tracked dozer 
Tracked dozer with rear plow 
attachment 
Usually larger than JD450, D7 
common 
Can be small as JD350, JD550 
common 
Private contractor more common 
Agency equipment and operator more 
common 
DOZB may not be an operator 
TRPB must be operator qualified 
Operator experience usually low 
in fire and wildland environment 
Operator experience usually good in 
fire and home unit wildland 
environment 
Mostly western U.S. 
Mostly eastern U.S. 
Mostly extended attack, indirect 
Mostly initial attack, direct 
May be assigned Alternative 
Industrial Machinery (skidders, 
skidgines, track hoes, feller bunchers, 
processors, chippers, etc.) 
 
 
Both positions should be filled by people who have experienced backgrounds in 
various wildland fuels and fires.  They should have experience working with 
increasing organizational complexity including handcrews, air operations, and 
equipment.  Others may get most of their experience through timber sales 
operations by developing advantageous skills in utilizing equipment under results 
oriented workloads.   
 
DOZB should have good interpersonal skills just as CRWB has to control and 
motivate those he is in charge of to accomplish work safely, satisfactorily, and 
agreeably.  The DOZB also works with CRWB, HEL attack, and other DOZB.   
 
D-5 
The DOZB sizes up the work he is assigned to going on around him.  This is a 
daily necessity and is usually accomplished at pre-op or post-op briefings.  
Machinery has its own safety hazards which the DOZB must be aware of in 
addition to everything else. 
 
Candidates who wish to take S-232 or develop the skills to be a DOZB, usually 
need to have a minimum of five years experience, some operation experience, and 
awareness of (or an interest in) getting jobs done with machines.  Although neither 
a DOZB nor operator is usually a mechanic, some knowledge of maintenance and 
field repair is very valuable.   
 
Efficient accomplishment of the job also depends on cooperation of the DOZB 
with operators, understanding operator’s abilities, and comfort level.  A machine, 
even at maximum performance and matched to the optimum situation, may still fail 
to produce expected results.  Perhaps the expectations are unreasonable, work 
conditions have changed with time/distance, or are limited by operator skill.  Do 
not expect the operator to produce results that far exceed his skill as safety may be 
compromised or equipment may be damaged. 
 
At this point, do you have an understanding of who the DOZB is and what he 
does?  Now that your motor is warmed up to operating temperature, let’s turn up 
the RPM’s. 
 
 
D-6 
D-7 
Dozers 
 
 
Dozers are specially designed, heavy construction equipment that has been adapted 
to wildland firefighting applications.  Recent federal safety laws have seen 
development in dozer rollover protection (ROPS), fire curtains, and lighting 
equipment.  Advanced radio communication devices that enable the operator to 
talk hands-free are also being used.  Still, with all these advances, the dozer 
operator has a risk level approaching that of an air tanker pilot. 
 
Dozers vary in size from the small Type 3 dozers to the large Type 1 dozers.   
Light dozers (Type 3) are effective in building fireline in light fuels on level to 
moderate terrain.  They perform best in soil with few rocks, and in wet soil 
conditions, especially when equipped with wide tracks.  They’re maneuverable in 
close quarters and generally do less damage to the environment.  They also can be 
very useful in mopup operations. 
 
Medium-sized dozers (Type 2) are generally the best all-around size for fireline 
construction as they are maneuverable and perform well on moderately steep 
slopes.  They will handle the average fuel and terrain conditions in the 
mountainous areas and when fitted with wide tracks perform well in wet soil 
conditions. 
 
Heavy dozers (Type 1) are generally too big for many fireline construction 
situations.  They are hard to maneuver in close quarters, especially in steep terrain.  
They are best assigned as lead dozers to pioneer in heavy fuels on level to 
moderate terrain.  Pioneering is when a dozer clears an area ahead of a crew.  
Heavy dozers will have difficulty in wet ground unless fitted with extra wide 
tracks.  On standard tracks their bulk weight more that offsets the hold up surface 
of the tracks, and once these large machines are stuck, it is a major job to free 
them. 
 
As with any piece of specialized equipment, the dozer has limitations.  As a 
general guideline, dozers should not be operated across slopes (sidehill) greater 
than 45 percent, uphill slopes greater than 55 percent, or downhill on slopes greater 
than 75 percent (see Figure 1). 
 
D-8 
Figure 1 – Guideline for Maximum Percent Slope Dozer Operation 
 
 
 
 
Percent slope is determined by the vertical distance (rise) divided by horizontal 
distance (run) multiplied by 100 (see Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2 – Calculation of Percent (%) Slope 
 
 
 
100% Slope 
75% Slope (max downhill) 
55% Slope (max uphill) 
45% Slope (max sidehill) 
0% Slope 
D-9 
An easy method to determine percent slope is with the use of a slope meter (see 
Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3 – Slope Meter 
 
 
 
 
 
D-10 
Clinometers or abney levels are instruments that can be used to measure percent 
slope.  To use the clinometer, hold it to your eye and with both eyes open, look 
simultaneously through the lens and alongside the housing.  A horizontal sighting 
line will appear.  Raise or lower the clinometer (by tilting your head) to place the 
sighting line at the top or bottom of the object.  Read the percent slope number 
closest to the sighting line. 
 
Operate the abney level similarly to the clinometer, but rotate the outside scale 
forward or backward to align the bubble inside the instrument rather than tilting 
your head.  Read the number from the outside percent slope scale. 
 
D-11 
Clinometers and Topographic Abney Levels can be used to measure slope, height 
of objects, and vertical angles (see Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4 – Measurements with Clinometer or Abney Level 
 
 
 
D-12 
Production rates of line construction (single-pass) vary, but a Type 2 dozer can 
construct about 2,500 feet of line in grass, 1,100 feet of line in medium brush, and 
900 feet in heavy brush per hour.  These figures are averages, figuring upslope run 
does not exceed 40%.  In level situations, that same Type 2 dozer can construct 
4,000 feet of single pass line in grass, 3,300 feet in medium brush, and 1,900 feet 
in heavy brush, per hour. 
 
Table 1 – Single Pass Line Construction 
40% Slope* 
12-14 foot Blade Widths 
 
 
Grass 
Medium Brush 
Heavy Brush 
Type 2 
2,300 feet 
1,000 feet 
700 feet 
Type 1 
3,000 feet 
1,500 feet 
1,100 feet 
 
* 40% slope is average for most wildland fire areas. 
 
(To compare with a Type 1 handcrew, see the Fireline Handbook) 
 
 
D-13 
Table 2 provides single pass line construction rates in chains per hour for several 
variables.  The table was developed from a series of field tests. 
 
Some generalities that can be concluded from Table 2 are:  1) production rates 
drop as the fuel loadings increase and 2) slope has an effect on production rates, 
particularly traveling upgrade, and some dozer sizes are better suited for select jobs 
than others. 
 
Table 2 – Fireline Production Rates (Single Pass)  
for Dozers Manufactured Since 1975 
 
 
 
D-14 
As with any specialized piece of equipment, the machine is only as efficient as the 
operator.  Each operator has varying degrees of skill in operating equipment in a 
variety of wildland situations.  Many areas are very fortunate to have qualified fire 
operators.  These operators know their machines and what they can or cannot do.   
 
When using dozers in the attack plan, brief the operator(s) prior to deploying them.  
Review the control objectives and what must be accomplished and let them 
determine where and how they get the job done.  The operator will tell the dozer 
boss if he/she needs help or other assistance.  The dozer operator is very busy once 
the line assignment starts; therefore, frequent interruptions or radio traffic calls can 
be upsetting. 
 
The deployment of dozers is basically the same as with any ground resource.  
Work from an anchor point up each flank toward the head (pincer action).  
Remember, the dozer even with metal cage protection is just as vulnerable to fire 
as a hand crew person and the same safety rules apply.   
 
Because of their special qualities and ability to put in line quickly, a dozer can be 
“bumped-up” ahead of ground forces on a flank.  Make sure an anchor point has 
been established.  When bumping-up a dozer, make sure the operator knows your 
intentions.  Bumping up a dozer ahead of another dozer is called leap frogging.  
Many times the operator can “see” the plan and he will bump-up on his own in an 
indirect method.  Coordination is very important; make sure the ground forces tie 
into the dozer line so the control line is completed. 
 
D-15 
The dozer operator has an “instinct” of knowing how to get around the head and 
for working the hot flank.  In doing so, he/she needs concentration, lack of radio 
interruptions, and on occasion air support.  Once on the upper end of the hot flank, 
the dozer’s progress needs to be closely monitored to ensure he/she is safe.  Air 
attack priorities should include supporting dozer work on the hot flank.  Dozers 
should be deployed on the hot flank first, and then as they control the head, they 
will circle the fire finishing up on the cold flank. 
 
 
 
To this point, we have only addressed the typical wildland fire with no special 
problems of fast rate of spread or wind problems.  Because of steep topography, 
poor access, high winds, or high rate of spread it may be necessary for the incident 
commander or operations section chief to back off to a wide ridgeline and 
construct a fire break off of that ridge. 
D-16 
D-17 
Dozer Use 
 
 
Dozers are effective firefighting tools if they are used correctly.  They are costly to 
operate and require good operators, good supervision, and adequate service and 
repair.  However, in excessively rocky areas and in some dense timber stands, 
especially with many large trees, their progress will be drastically slowed.  When 
they are needed to pioneer ahead of a tractor/plow or crew, they are indispensable.  
In this capacity they do the clearing work so that the plow or crew can build the 
line as they follow. 
 
Dozers will come with various types of blades and control systems.  There are two 
types of blade control systems used on dozers.  These are cable and hydraulic.  
Almost all dozers produced during the past 30 years will have the hydraulic 
system.  Cable systems were common before that period; however, there are still 
some of the older dozers with cable system in use.   
 
Cable controlled systems are best used in light fuels for light scarification of soil, 
for finishing fireline, and for road grading. 
 
Hydraulic systems can exert pressure down as well as raise the blade, thus are best 
used for digging in hard ground, cutting through roots, cross ditching or water 
barring, digging sumps and pits, and downslope breaking action.  The hydraulic 
control is also helpful if the dozer becomes high centered or stuck and the terrain 
needs to be built up under the tracks. 
 
The four common types of blades and their best uses in fire suppression are: 
 
• 
Straight blade.  It can usually be angled and push soil to either side of the 
dozer.  This is not true with the other types; therefore, the best uses for 
straight blades are:  pioneering and finishing fireline, cross ditching (water 
barring), road construction and maintenance. 
 
• 
“U” blade.  Best used for pioneering fireline when followed up by a straight 
angle blade, sump digging, and earth moving (as in road construction).  A 
semi-U blade may be more common in firefighting. 
 
D-18 
• 
Brush blade.  The best uses for brush blades are pioneering in brush, clearing 
and piling slash, mopup work, and certain rehabilitation work. 
 
• 
V blade.  Best used in swampy ground as dirt is thrown to both sides in front 
of dozer for tracks to ride up on. Also good for punching through dense 
stands of small diameter fuels (pioneering). Not good in rocky ground or 
steep slopes. 
 
Line location is as important for dozers as for handtools, and the same principles of 
width, depth, and location apply.  Locate the line in accordance with the fire 
control strategy, vegetation, and terrain.  The line should be located well ahead of 
the dozers but not so far that the line location would need to be changed by the 
time the dozers get there.  The locator should check periodically with the spotter or 
operator of the lead dozer or with the dozer boss to advise them of what is ahead. 
 
Locations where dozers cannot work effectively should be avoided and completed 
with handtools.  These locations would include areas of large rocks, rock outcrops, 
excessively steep terrain, or other limitations to the use of dozers.  Trench undercut 
lines, and treat all hazards in the same manner as hand line construction and 
mopup. 
 
The principles of direct, parallel, and indirect attack also apply to dozer line 
construction; and, as a general rule, all dozed material should be case outside the 
line and scattered.  In a very few instances the dozer might be used on very small 
fires to push the burning edge into the fire area all the way around the perimeter.  
This is not a highly recommended practice. 
 
Dozers are extremely effective tools for building firelines, particularly in heavy 
fuels and brush.  They must be followed with handtools to finish the line, to burn 
out where necessary, to hold the fire within the line, and to combat slopovers and 
spot fires. 
 
Once the fireline is built, it is necessary to begin the mopup from the fire edge 
toward the center of the fire, and this operation requires handtools.  Often, engines 
or hose lines can be used to assist with holding action and mopup.  Much will 
depend on the kind and volume of fuels.  Dozers can be used to a limited extent on 
mopup operations. 
 
D-19 
Often it is practical and desirable to build the dozer line where it will serve as an 
access road for engines and the movement of crews.  Grade along the line then 
becomes important so that four wheel drive vehicles can travel.  This use is very 
valuable but should not dictate the location of the fireline.  The location for fire 
control purpose must take precedence. 
 
It may be necessary for dozers to clear out safety areas.  These should be built well 
in advance of probable need. 
 
Dozer organizations will vary with the size of the fire, the kind and amount of 
fuels, the topography, the practice in that locality, and the personnel available.  On 
a large fire with several dozers a dozer boss or dozer strike team leader will 
normally supervise dozer operations (see Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5 – Dozer Organization on a Large Fire 
 
 
 
 
D-20 
In heavy going, a spotter, swamper, line locator, and hand crew may be assigned to 
assist with dozer line construction.  Because of the danger from rolling rocks 
and/or debris, no personnel should work directly below a dozer. 
 
At least one person should be assigned to each dozer as a swamper.  The contractor 
will normally provide a swamper for contract dozers.  The swamper is to: 
 
• 
Handle the winch line and choker, help change blade positions, assist with 
the maintenance, and otherwise assist the operator of the dozer. 
 
• 
Communication by hand signals with the dozer operator. 
 
• 
Cut away projecting branches and sticks that may jam the machine and 
cause damage or endanger the operator, to remove rocks and debris from the 
machine on signal from the operator, and to cut with an ax or chain saw 
where necessary to move logs and tangled windfalls. 
 
• 
Work as a spotter if one is not assigned or as a contact between the operator 
and the spotter. 
 
• 
Act as an alternate operator. 
 
D-21 
Since mechanical equipment is generally noisy and it’s difficult for operators to 
hear other personnel in the area, a simple but effective communications system can 
be accomplished through the use of hand signals and other signals (see Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6 – Dozer Hand Signals 
 
 
 
By gunning the dozer motor twice, the operator can signal that he cannot see the 
spotter.  By gunning the motor once, he can signal that he wants the helper to come 
to the dozer. 
 
D-22 
The following are good dozer line construction principles: 
 
1. 
Utilize anchor points and LCES (lookouts, communications, escape routes, 
and safety zones). 
 
2. 
All unburned fuels should be cast away from the fireline and scattered to the 
extent possible. 
 
3. 
Where both soil and debris must unavoidable be pushed to the inside, spread 
and scatter this material well back into the burn. 
 
4. 
In fuel types with down timber it may be best to use power saws ahead of 
the lead dozer to “buck” the material. 
 
Chain saw crews should be closely supervised, kept well ahead of the dozer, 
and avoid doing work the dozer can do.  Saw crews are not needed if the 
lead dozer is large enough to do the job or if it can do the job without 
creating excessively large piles of debris. 
 
5. 
Snags can be quickly felled by dozers.  Where snag felling is hazardous to 
dozers, the job should be done by felling crews.  Local practices will vary 
for different sections of the country. 
 
6. 
Consult with the operator (both operator competence and dozer capability) 
before assigning dozer work in steep terrain and contouring sideslopes. 
 
7. 
Generally, two dozers should work together in pairs or tandem when 
constructing fireline.  They can reinforce each other and assist each other if 
one dozer needs help.  The largest machine or the one in the best condition 
should serve as the lead dozer.  Neither machine should be operated below 
the other on slopes or too close together because of the danger of rolling and 
falling material.  If a narrow fireline is needed, the lead dozer pioneers the 
line by doing the rough clearing job and the second dozer cleans up the line.  
If a wider fireline is needed, both dozers may be doing a substantial amount 
of clearing; however, the second dozer still cleans up the line. 
 
D-23 
8. 
The line may be wider in some sections than in others depending on the job 
it is intended to do.  There must be a reason for extra width of line.  It may 
be because the brush is tall and thick, because the canopy needs to be opened 
up, or to keep the crew from being scorched during burnout. 
 
The line should be wide enough to hold the fire; usually 1½ times the height 
of the fuel in brush and not less than one-half the height of the fuel in timber. 
 
It is often impractical to make it wide enough to withstand a run of the fire.  
Enough area must be burned out from the line toward the fire to contain it 
and any spotting. 
 
9. 
Use a cleanup crew behind the dozer to speed up the line construction and to 
make it secure.  The job of the clean crew is to prepare the line for burnout 
by reducing the kind and amount of fuel along the edge of the line so that the 
chances of radiated heat and mass transport across the line will be reduced.  
The job is accomplished by: 
 
• 
Felling snags on both sides of the line. 
 
• 
Felling leaners. 
 
• 
Breaking up, tearing apart, flattening, and dispersing accumulations of 
fuel close to the line. 
 
• 
Lopping and scattering tops and branches and cleaning up the lower 
stems of standing trees by cutting off limbs, moss, and vines. 
 
• 
Making sure the line is continuous and free of surface fuels. 
 
Normally, three to six people are needed in a clean up crew plus a squad 
boss.  They may be part of the burnout crew if the cleanup job is light. 
 
The main point here is that hand tools are needed to follow the dozers in any 
type of fuel to make sure the line is ready to burn out and hold.  The cleanup 
crew must stay away from the immediate area around the dozers, since they 
are constantly backing and maneuvering. 
 
D-24 
10. 
The burnout crew may be part of a combination crew that does both cleanup 
and burnout.  On larger fires it will be separate and supervised by a squad 
boss or a crew boss according to its size. 
 
If burning out follows the dozers, it should not follow so close that the firing 
will handicap the dozer’s operation or jeopardize the line construction and 
cleanup. 
 
11. 
Proper supervision must be provided for hired equipment.  Proper 
organization and supervision are the keys to successful operation of 
equipment. 
 
12. 
Provision must be made for servicing equipment as soon as the equipment 
moves onto the fire.  These are expensive machine, and they cannot be 
operated long without servicing. 
 
13. 
Dozers and tractor/plows must be properly equipped. 
 
• 
They should have canopies of sufficient strength to withstand rolling 
over and to protect operators from falling material. 
 
• 
The dozers should be armored underneath. 
 
• 
They should have functioning lights, both front and rear when it is 
dark. 
 
• 
They should have seat belts. 
 
• 
They should have a fire extinguisher and shovel. 
 
• 
They should have a properly functioning spark arrestor. 
 
• 
Operators must be supplied with required personal protective 
equipment, including fire shelters.  It may be necessary to instruct the 
operator on the proper use of the fire shelter. 
 
 
D-25 
Key Points to Consider in Steep Topography, in Poor Access,  
in High Winds, or in High Fire Rate of Spread Areas 
 
 
1. 
Stay away from narrow ridgelines, narrow being 100 feet or less across the 
top. 
 
2. 
Allow the dozer operator plenty of lead-time to construct a break. 
 
3. 
Put in safety zones a minimum of 100 feet in diameter every 600 feet or less 
if fuel types are medium or heavy brush (see Safety Zone Guidelines in the 
IRPG).   
 
4. 
Follow-up any indirect line constructed with qualified Type 1 crews to burn 
out the line. 
 
5. 
If possible, have air tactical group support any indirect line construction put 
in by the dozer(s). 
 
When constructing line, production rates mentioned earlier were single-pass 
construction and are bare minimums.  Remember, if backing off of direct attack 
and using indirect, the sooner the break the better.  The key is to plan out the 
objectives with adequate time for dozers to complete the assignment.   
 
The dozers may have to make 4 or 5 widths plus safety zones.  If the fire is 
spreading up the drainage toward the ridge and the width is less than hoped for, it 
can be widened by pre-treatment with air tanker support if available.  This 
retardant line or “wet line” will buy personnel and equipment on the ridge some 
time and afford a safety zone.   
 
Remember, if pre-treatment is used, hold off until the last minutes that will still 
enable a retardant line to be completed.  Fire retardant/foam can stay “wet” for one 
hour depending on winds and heat. 
 
D-26 
The majority of wildland fires are 10 acres or less when dozers arrive on the scene.  
When they arrive, they usually unload and start around the hot flank and encircle 
the fire.  If pockets of fuel(s) remain, (referring primarily to grass) engine 
personnel or hand crew(s) should burn out islands or pockets that might later 
threaten to go across control lines.   
 
It is also prudent for the incident commander or operations section chief to review 
the line constructed to make sure objectives are met.  Ensure that no dozer piles 
remain and snags that might pose a fire or safety problem are mitigated.  Check 
with line personnel for any specific small jobs and if none remain then release the 
dozer. 
D-27 
 
Safety 
 
 
LCES CHECKLIST 
 
LCES must be established and known to ALL firefighters BEFORE needed. 
 
Lookouts 
 
• 
Experienced / Competent / Trusted 
• 
Enough lookouts at good vantage points 
• 
Knowledge of crew locations 
• 
Knowledge of escape and safety locations 
• 
Knowledge of disengagement trigger points 
• 
Map / Weather Kit / Watch / IAP 
 
Communications 
 
• 
Radio frequencies confirmed 
• 
Backup procedures and check-in times established 
• 
Provide updates on any situation change 
• 
Sound alarm early, not late 
 
Escape Routes 
 
• 
More than one escape route 
• 
Avoid uphill escape routes 
• 
Scouted:  Loose soils / Rocks / Vegetation 
• 
Timed:  Slowest person / Fatigue and Temperature factors 
• 
Marked:  Flagged for day or night (NFES 0566) 
• 
Evaluate:  Escape time vs. Rate of Spread 
• 
Vehicles parked for escape 
 
D-28 
Safety Zones 
 
• 
Survivable without a fire shelter 
• 
Back into clean burn 
• 
Natural Features:  Rock areas / Water / Meadows 
• 
Constructed Sites:  Clearcuts / Roads / Helispots 
• 
Scouted for size and hazards 
• 
Upslope? 
• 
Downwind? 
More heat impact – Larger safety zone 
• 
Heavy Fuels? 
 
Escape time and safety zone size requirements will change as fire behavior 
changes. 
 
It seems that most injuries and fatalities occur with one or more of the following 
common elements: 
 
1. 
Grass or sage fuel bed(s). 
2. 
Failure to recognize changing fire behavior. 
3. 
Taking small fire for granted. 
4. 
Topography modified fire spread. 
5. 
Inexperience in wildland firefighting. 
6. 
Poor physical condition. 
7. 
Failure to recognize a transition fire (reference IRPG). 
 
There are four major common denominators of fire behavior on fatal and near-fatal 
fires.  Such fires often occur: 
 
1. 
On relatively small fires or deceptively quiet areas of large fires. 
 
2. 
In relatively light fuels, such as grass, herbs, and light brush. 
 
3. 
When there is an unexpected shift in wind direction or in wind speed. 
 
4. 
When fire responds to topographic conditions and runs uphill. 
 
Alignment of topography and wind during the burning period should always be 
considered a trigger point to re-evaluate strategy and tactics. 
 
D-29 
Even with the smallest grass fire, no attack should be made unless an anchor point 
has been established.  This anchor provides security and safety during a basic flank 
attack.  It also prevents the fire from out flanking firefighters, should conditions 
change. 
 
One of the more common errors made in light fuel beds is an over-aggressive 
attack (with the wind), making a wet line or running attack in such a hurry that 
spots are missed.  Then visibility, heat, or driver zig-zag from black to green 
(unburned) causes an open line to occur.  When this happens, firefighters can be 
outflanked or trapped if winds change or shift. 
 
Grass fires are a common cause of firefighter fatalities, injuries, and burns because 
they can creep or explode across a field.  Grass requires little preheating, and even 
the slightest wind can increase fire intensity and behavior.  Grass fires produce 
three to four foot flame heights and 400-degree F aerial temperatures, even in short 
grass.  These conditions exceed human ability to withstand heat and flame 
exposure.  All grass fires, regardless of size and intensity, should be treated with 
caution.  Anchor your attack using a natural or man-made barrier to keep the fire 
from later outflanking you or your personnel. 
 
A basic flank attack working up the flank(s) from a common anchor point is 
recommended.  If you only have a single resource, attack the hot flank first, 
working towards the head.  If the fire has a large black area free from hazards or 
broken topography you can safely work in the black toward the head. 
 
A number of fatalities have occurred when observers reported the fire was in the 
mopup stage and looked benign. 
 
Topographic factors have also contributed to many fatalities, injuries, and burns.  
As pointed out in watch out situation 15, the wildland firefighter must understand 
the effects of: 
 
1. 
Slope 
2. 
Narrow canyons 
3. 
Saddles 
4. 
Chimneys 
5. 
Narrow ridge line(s) (hog backs) 
6. 
Broken topographic features 
 
D-30 
A slope primarily modifies fire behavior and, especially, rate of spread.  If a fire 
burning on level terrain burns into a 30% slope, the rate of spread will double 
without any help from additional wind speeds or lowered relative humidity. 
 
Narrow canyons, chimneys, or chutes modify fire behavior.  Narrow canyons and 
well-defined drainages increase the rate of preheating and potential for spotting 
and area ignition.  Chutes, chimneys, and saddles are paths of least resistance for a 
fire.  Narrow ridgelines or hog back ridges are dangerous, because the radiant and 
convective heat is generally too high for firefighters to survive. 
 
A fire moving across broken topographic features such as rock outcrops will have a 
tendency to finger a lot and spread erratically due to wind eddies. 
 
In addition to safety factors, specific agency regulations apply to heavy equipment 
in forests. 
 
D-31 
Watershed Considerations 
 
 
Install firelines where they can be properly drained later.  Avoid locating firelines 
across concave slopes or areas that will create troughs. 
 
If firelines must go across drainages, cross at a right angle to the drainage to 
minimize the disturbance. 
 
Avoid wet areas such as seeps, springs, or meadows.  Not only would disturbance 
result in resource damage but equipment can become stuck and fireline work can 
be delayed. 
 
Scrape away only burnable vegetation and duff.  Avoid deep cuts into the soil that 
will remove topsoil and reduce soil depth. 
 
Keep organic debris and soil out of streams, if possible.  Don’t dam up running 
streams with debris.  Debris in dry draws is not critical because it can be cleaned 
out during emergency rehabilitation. 
 
For additional reading refer to local Best Management Practices and/or agency 
Minimum Impact Suppression Tactics guidelines. 
 
Emergency Rehabilitation 
 
The objective of emergency rehabilitation is to treat disturbed areas to prevent 
erosion and to leave the area in the pre-fire drainage pattern as much as possible. 
 
Local conditions and standards will determine water bar spacing guidelines. 
 
Make sure water bars are built into solid soil and not constructed with loose soil 
and organic debris.  They must be deep enough to withstand abuse by 4-wheel 
traffic and breakdown by erosion or settling over time.  The outlets of water bars 
must be open to function properly.  Place water bar outlets where the soil is well 
protected by organic debris or natural rockiness so it can withstand runoff from the 
water bar at a 30% angle downslope.  Don’t locate water bars where they will 
divert a natural drainage. 
 
D-32 
Soil and debris that is pushed to the side during fireline construction acts as a berm 
and can cause runoff to concentrate over long distances.  Break berms frequently 
between water bars.  Where possible, push soil and organic debris displaced by 
fireline construction back onto the fireline.  This will help restore topsoil and soil 
cover.  Do this only if it does not cause excessive additional soil disturbance. 
 
 
D-33 
Special Considerations for Dozer Operations 
 
 
1. 
Designated Areas 
 
* 
Wilderness 
* 
Primitive Areas 
* 
State/National Parks and Monuments 
* 
Reservations/Burial Grounds 
 
2. 
Private Property 
 
* 
Land Line/Survey Monument 
* 
Landowner Permission 
* 
Travel Routes Approved 
* 
Private Bridges 
 
3. 
Cultural Areas 
 
* 
Historical/Archaeological Sites 
* 
Cemeteries 
* 
Sacred Areas 
* 
Homesteads 
 
4. 
Environmental 
 
* 
Wetlands 
* 
Marshy Areas 
* 
Meadows 
* 
Protected Biological/Botanical Areas 
* 
Stream Crossings, etc. 
 
D-34 
5. 
Human-made Concerns 
 
* 
Bridge Load Limits 
 
* 
Structures 
 
* 
Hazmat from Structures/Dumps/Natural 
 
* 
Fences/Gates 
 
* 
Railroad Tracks 
 
* 
Underground Utilities 
 
- 
Gas/Oil/Telephone/Water/Electrical/Cable 
- 
Sewer and Septic Systems 
- 
Mine Shafts 
- 
Above Ground Utilities 
- 
RAWS, earthquake detection, rain, and snow detection sites 
- 
Telephone/Cable/Oil/Electric Poles and Lines 
- 
Radio Transmission Sites 
- 
Oil and Gas Fields 
 
* 
Paved and Surfaced Driveways, Highways, and Freeways 
D-35 
Dozer Terminology 
 
 
1. 
Dozer 
2. 
ROPS (Rollover Protection Structure); FOPS (Falling Object Protection 
Structure); brush package 
3. 
Winch 
4. 
Cable 
5. 
Hook 
6. 
Rippers 
7. 
Tracks, sprockets, idlers, rollers 
8. 
Pads 
9. 
Grousers 
10. 
“C” Frame (angle dozer only) 
11. 
Push arm (straight blade only) 
12. 
Dozer blade (angle or straight) 
13. 
Cutting edge 
14. 
End bits 
15. 
Tilt adjusters (manual type) 
16. 
Tilt cylinders (hydraulic) 
17. 
Belly pans 
18. 
Rock guards 
19. 
Operator’s Controls 
a. 
Switch (battery) 
b. 
Throttle and decelerator 
c. 
Start switch 
d. 
Power shift, manual shift, hydrostatic 
e. 
Master clutch (Johnson Bar if applicable) 
f. 
Steering clutches/differential steering 
g. 
Brakes and lock 
h. 
Blade control 
i. 
Winch control 
j. 
Tilt control 
D-36 
D-37 
 
Jobs that may be Performed by the Dozer Boss 
to Assist the Dozer Operator 
 
 
1. 
Assist in loading and unloading the dozer 
 
a. 
Ask the operator 
 
b. 
Watch for traffic and bystanders 
 
2. 
Swamping 
 
a. 
Get together ahead of time and learn dozer operator’s way of thinking.  
Work with the operator. 
 
b. 
The swamper’s job is to safely assist and guide the operator.  This 
means the swamper must be OFF the dozer and far enough out to see 
any hazards. 
 
c. 
Consistently check the terrain, vegetation, and fire situation.  Inform 
the dozer operator of important changes. 
 
d. 
If you are unsure of a situation, stop and inform the dozer operator. 
 
e. 
The basic job of the swamper is to be the “eyes” of the dozer operator.  
You must be out where the work is to be done looking for hazards and 
leading the dozer through the best locations. 
 
f. 
Assist in servicing dozer as necessary. 
 
D-38 
3. 
Winch Operation (assist) 
 
a. 
Keep hands and feet clear of cable and hook. 
 
b. 
Learn and use winch signals. 
 
c. 
Always wear gloves. 
 
d. 
When pulling cable out, grasp the hook. 
 
e. 
The operator will indicate the proper hook-up. 
 
f. 
Stand clear as the cable becomes taut.  Never position yourself inside 
the bight.  Never step over or straddle a tight cable. 
 
4. 
Assist dozer operator with manual adjustments 
 
a. 
Blade angle direction 
 
b. 
Ripper shank depth 
D-39 
Dozer Maintenance Tips  
 
 
Maintenance is the operator’s responsibility.  Dozer bosses can keep equipment 
working by assisting the operators and watching for these items when doing daily 
inspections and when constructing dozer lines. 
 
Always change edges and bits before wear reaches the support.  If wear has 
occurred on the support, check for burrs.  Grind them off to insure that the edge or 
bit will fit flat against the support.  Remove any soil that is packed between the 
edge or bit and the support. 
 
Keep bit and edge hardware tight at all times.  In the case of end bits, loose or 
missing bolts can result in failure.  Use only high strength bolts and heat treated 
nuts with DH-2 Steel edges and bits.  These fasteners exceed SAE Grade 8 
standards. 
 
Inspect bolt holes on the back side of edge and bit supports.  Be sure there is a 
solid, smooth surface to support the nut.  If not, it will be impossible to keep 
hardware tight.  Repeated burning off of hardware can weaken support around the 
holes.  Also, prolonged or repeated operation of the blade with loose hardware can 
cause bolt holes in support to become elongated. 
 
Ripping may improve dozing.  There may be a production advantage in ripping 
before dozing.  The decision depends upon the material and job conditions.  From 
the standpoint of prolonged service life, ripped material is always easier on ground 
engaging tools. 
 
Reduced speed.  Speed is the enemy of dozers and ground engaging tools.  When 
a boulder or hard compact layer of material won’t budge, a slow and steady prying 
force is more desirable than high speed impact. 
 
