18
$
Agricultural Research/June 1999
Fighting Fusarium
A
lmost every year, a disease called
head scab wreaks havoc some-
where in America.
Scab now ranks as the worst
plant disease to hit the United
States since the stem rust of the 1950s. In
the past decade, outbreaks in Illinois,
Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, North
Dakota, Ohio, and South Dakota have led
to more than $1 billion in crop losses.
Caused by a fungus known as Fusar-
ium graminearum, scab gets its name from
the whitish-gray lesions that form on the
kernel-bearing portion, or head, of infect-
ed wheat or barley plants. The Fusarium
microbe can also cause root, stalk, and
ear rots in corn.
Infected wheat kernels often shrivel
and become discolored, and they may
harbor compounds called mycotoxins that
are manufactured by the fungus. Most
notable of these natural compounds is
deoxynivalenol, which can make wheat
unsuitable for flour or cereals and too toxic
for sale as animal feed.
Today, Agricultural Research Service
scientists at a half-dozen laboratories
around the United States are exploring an
array of tactics to thwart the fungus.
Deactivating the Toxin
One defensive strategy relies on ex-
ploiting the mechanism apparently used
by F. sporotrichioides, a relative of F.
graminearum, to protect itself from its
own toxin, known as T-2.
“Because both of these Fusarium
species produce toxins the same way,”
explains ARS microbiologist Nancy J.
Alexander, “the process they use to
deactivate those toxins may also be
similar.”
Alexander and colleagues with ARS
at Peoria, Illinois, found—in F. sporotri-
chioides—a T-2 resistance gene that they
named TRI-R.
“This gene,” says Alexander, “cues the
fungus to make an enzyme that alters the
structure of the toxin. The enzyme does
this by placing a protective chemical
group on the toxin. The altered toxin
apparently can’t harm the fungus.
“Equipping wheat and barley plants
with a gene to deactivate the toxin made
by the scab fungus, F. graminearum,
might give the plants a new and powerful
form of protection.”
Expelling the Toxin
Another organism in nature—the Sac-
charomyces cerevisiae yeast used in
breadmaking—has a gene called PDR5
that can pump toxins out of its cells.
Alexander and co-researchers borrowed
PDR5 from scientists at The Catholic
University of America in Washington,
D.C. They rebuilt it to work in plants.
Now, ARS colleagues in Fargo, North
Dakota, are moving PDR5 and TRI-R into
barley, while co-workers in Albany, Cal-
ifornia, are transferring the genes into
wheat.
ARS geneticist Lynn S. Dahleen at
Fargo has some healthy plants with the
TRI-R gene working inside and others that
boast the PDR5 gene. “Now our goal,”
says Dahleen, “is to get both genes up and
running in the same barley plant—pref-
erably one that’s either a commercial
variety or at least similar to a commercial
barley.”
One target of Dahleen’s experiments:
MNBrite, a commercial barley from the
University of Minnesota. The North Da-
kota Barley Council is financing some of
this work.
A handful of wheat plants nurtured in
an Albany lab and greenhouse are also
now outfitted with either the PDR5 or
TRI-R gene. Ann E. Blechl and Patricia
A. Okubara at Albany used a gene gun, or
bioblaster, to propel gold particles coated
with these genes into wheat cells. Fusar-
ium-resistance testing will follow. The
North American Millers Association is
funding part of this research.
Proteins To Knock Fusarium Out
Blechl and Okubara are also examin-
ing wheat genes that may knock out the
pathogen.
In tests elsewhere, proteins produced
on command by these genes hindered still
another F. graminearum relative, F. oxy-
sporum. A scientist at the University of
Zurich provided one of these experimen-
tal genes. It tells plants to make what’s
known as a thaumatin-like protein. A
second gene, isolated by Kent F. McCue
at the Albany center, directs plants to
produce a protein called purothionin.
Another protein in the thionin fami-
ly—hordothionin—is a target of research
by ARS scientists and their colleagues in
Madison, Wisconsin.
ARS molecular biologist Ronald W.
Skadsen says, “We think hordothionin
and another protein, permatin, may play
a role in keeping Fusarium from gaining
a foothold in barley kernels.” Skadsen
and colleagues cloned two genes that
barley plants use to make the proteins.
“In barley,” Skadsen says, “these pro-
teins are found only inside the kernel.
We’re hoping to rebuild the genes so that
Geneticist Ann Blechl looks at root growth
on genetically engineered wheat plants that
may carry new genes for resistance to
Fusarium.
JACK  DYKINGA  (K5147-10 )
Agricultural Research/June 1999
19
Plant pathologist James D.
Miller (right) inoculates
progeny of a durum-emmer
cross with Fusarium fungus as
geneticists Leonard R. Joppa
(left) and Norman D. Williams
assist in selecting flowering
heads for testing.
Lighter, discolored barley heads are
infected with Fusarium head scab fungi.
BRUCE  FRITZ  (K8472-1 )
BRUCE  FRITZ  (K8475-1 )
Grower and trade organizations are supporting development of a variety of defensive tactics.
20
$
Agricultural Research/June 1999
plants will produce the proteins on leaf-
like structures that surround the kernel,
where Fusarium can begin its attack.”
The American Malting Barley Asso-
ciation and the North American Barley
Genome Mapping Project help fund the
research.
Help From a Wild Relative
A wheat cousin called wild emmer has
resistance genes that might be moved into
domesticated wheat. Emmer is a relative
of durum wheat, which is used to make
flour for pasta and for pizza doughs.
North Dakota State University re-
searchers, along with ARS plant pathol-
ogist James D. Miller and ARS geneti-
cists Leonard R. Joppa and Norman D.
Williams at Fargo, are crossing emmer
with domesticated durum wheats. The
work gets some support from grants from
the Agricultural Production and Utiliza-
tion Committee of North Dakota, North
Dakota Wheat Commission, and U.S. Du-
rum Growers Association.
In other experiments, they are cross-
ing wild emmer with special wheats called
aneuploids.
“Aneuploids are invaluable to us,” says
Williams, “because they take up individ-
ual emmer chromosomes intact. That
makes it easier to find which emmer chro-
mosome contains a resistance gene. Once
we locate that chromosome, we may be
able to pinpoint the location of the resis-
tance gene on it—or at least that of an
associated marker gene.”
Markers Tell Us Where It’s At
A marker gene is a sequence of DNA
that acts somewhat like a signpost to in-
dicate the presence of a gene of interest.
“When we find wheat-emmer hybrids that
have a resistance gene or marker,” Wil-
liams says, “we can select the best of these
plants for further breeding.”
“The more scab-resistance markers
scientists can identify,” says geneticist
James A. Anderson, “the closer we should
all come to locating the actual resistance
genes that we’re seeking.” Anderson,
the offspring.
“We chose a Chinese variety as one of
the parents,” says Anderson, “because
some Chinese wheats appear to have the
best natural resistance.”
The researchers located markers for
two genes that, Anderson says, “seem to
have significant impact on scab resis-
tance. The three other markers indicate
genes that make minor contributions.”
Other promising markers have been
discovered by scientists with the Univer-
sity of Illinois at Urbana, working with
ARS molecular biologists Guihua Bai—
now at Peoria—and Leslie L. Domier at
Urbana. They crossed Ning 7840, a scab-
resistant Chinese wheat, with Clark, a
susceptible variety developed in Indiana.
“One marker,” says Bai, “is linked to
a gene that may account for up to 50 per-
cent of the scab resistance. Several other
markers are for two minor genes that may
account for another 20 percent of the re-
sistance.”
Further research may reveal other new
markers linked to different resistance
genes. “Resistance from different genetic
sources,” says Bai, “is the best option,
because it will give breeders a larger pool
from which to develop new varieties for
the future.”
Screening for Resistance
The best-performing plants from these
and other experiments may make their
way to the Uniform Regional Scab Nurs-
ery, a rigorous program of scab-resistance
screening of new wheats for the upper
Midwest. ARS plant geneticist Robert H.
Busch, who is at St. Paul, coordinates the
nursery, helping breeders field-test can-
didate wheats.
Previously, Busch helped oversee dis-
tribution of USDA funds for scab-resis-
tance research at ARS labs and universi-
Geneticist Robert Busch examines a newly
developed, high-yielding, scab-tolerant
spring wheat variety.
BRUCE  FRITZ  (K8471-1 )
formerly with ARS at Pullman, Washing-
ton, and now with the University of Min-
nesota at St. Paul, is among the first to find
a scab-resistance marker in wheat.
He did the work with researchers at
North Dakota State University. The re-
search was funded by a USDA National
Research Initiative Grant, the North
American Millers Association, and the
North Dakota State University Research
Foundation.
In all, the team discovered five mark-
ers. They crossed a scab-resistant wheat
from China, called Sumai 3, with a mod-
erately susceptible variety, called Stoa,
from North Dakota. Then they examined
Conventional breeding and biotechnology may bring
Agricultural Research/June 1999
21
ties nationwide. This year those funds to-
taled $3.5 million.
In his own breeding research, Busch
develops scab-tolerant wheats for the
upper Midwest, including one he is re-
leasing this year. “Through both conven-
tional breeding and biotechnology,”
Busch says, “we expect to be able to offer
high-yielding wheats with even more scab
resistance in the future.”
Some of the other new wheats and
barleys for the upper Midwest might con-
tain genes discovered or rebuilt by
Busch’s ARS colleagues at St. Paul.
William R. Bushnell, for example, is
developing a faster, less expensive test to
determine if experimental scab-resistance
genes can help cells foil Fusarium.
Plant physiologist William Bushnell and technician Tessa Goff examine a computerized
image of red barley cells expressing antifungal genes shot into barley tissues.
BRUCE  FRITZ  (K8469-1 )
He links a gene he is testing for scab
resistance to another gene that cues plants
to make anthocyanin, a natural pigment
that gives fall leaves their red colors. After
the genes are shot into plant tissue, cells
with the anthocyanin gene turn red. This
means they have likely taken up the gene
for possible scab resistance, as well.
When the tissue is inoculated with
Fusarium and monitored under a micro-
scope, the distinctive color makes it fast-
er and easier to pinpoint these key cells.
Microbial Controls
In addition to giving plants new, more
powerful genes to boost scab resistance,
scientists are scrutinizing about 700 mi-
crobes for their potential to serve as bio-
logical controls of the fungus.
ARS plant pathologist David A.
Schisler at Peoria and colleagues at Ohio
State University are testing the microbes
for their ability to gobble up two com-
pounds naturally present on wheat heads
when Fusarium strikes. The compounds
are choline and betaine. They nourish the
fungus as it grows from the male organs
of wheat flowers—where it sometimes
lands—to where it can infect the devel-
oping kernel deeper inside the flower.
Says Schisler, “We are also perfecting
a liquid fermentation medium to econom-
ically produce the most effective mi-
crobes.” The medium could be sprayed
on wheat during flowering.
Other new tactics for outflanking the
Fusarium fungi might come from sleuth-
ing the microbe’s development. To stalk
the fungus, former Peoria microbiologist
Thomas M. Hohn borrowed a gene from
a bioluminescent jellyfish, Aequorea
victoria, and hooked it to the fungus.
The jellyfish gene causes the fungus to
glow a telltale green when fungal-infected
tissues are exposed to fluorescent light.
Though the idea of using the jellyfish gene
in lab experiments isn’t new, Hohn was
apparently the first to use it for spying on
Fusarium.
“This innovative pairing of jellyfish
and Fusarium,” says molecular biologist
Skadsen, “should shed new light on the
biology of this destructive fungus.”—By
Marcia Wood, Don Comis, Ben Hardin,
Linda McGraw, and Kathryn Barry
Stelljes, ARS.
This research is part of Plant Diseas-
es, an ARS National Program described
on the World Wide Web at http://
www.nps.ars.usda.gov/programs/
cppvs.htm.
Contact scientists mentioned in this
story through:
Marcia Wood, phone (510) 559-6070,
fax (510) 559-5882, e-mail
mwood@asrr.arsusda.gov.
Don Comis, phone (301) 504-1625, fax
(301) 504-1641, e-mail
dcomis@asrr.arsusda.gov. N
high-yielding wheats with even more scab resistance.
