 
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
COMPLIANCE PROGRAM GUIDANCE MANUAL 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
CHAPTER 03 - FOODBORNE BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS 
 
SUBJECT: 
 
IMPLEMENTATION DATE 
7/31/06 
COMPLETION DATE 
 
IMPORT ACIDIFIED AND LOW-ACID CANNED FOODS 
COMPLIANCE PROGRAM  (FY 06/07/08) 
 
This program has completed A Good Guidance 
Practices clearance by CFSAN’s ORP and OC/DFP/CPB 
in July of 2006. 
9/30/08 
DATA REPORTING 
PRODUCT CODES 
PRODUCT/ASSIGNMENT CODES 
INDUSTRY CODES:    
 REPORT INSPECTIONS UNDER THE 
FOLLOWING PACs:
03, 04, 09 12-18, 
03003 
LACF Products 
 
20-25, 27, 29-31, 33-41 
03003A 
Acidified Products 
USE APPROPRIATE PRODUCT CODES: 
 
 
(refer to Attachment A for an extended 
list) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Material that is not releasable under the Freedom of Information Act 
(FOIA) has been redacted/deleted from this electronic version of the program. 
Deletions are marked as follows: (#) denotes one or more words were deleted; 
(&) denotes one or more paragraphs were deleted; and (%) denotes an entire 
attachment was deleted. 
 
FIELD REPORTS TO HEADQUARTERS 
 
Hard Copy Reporting to Headquarters
 
All hard copy reports are to be submitted by the analyzing laboratories, as 
listed in PART IV. 
 
FACTS Reporting
 
The analyzing laboratory will report results for each sample of low acid and 
acidified products into FACTS using PAF = ACD.  
 
Use the following Problem Codes: 
 
AFD = Acid food Analysis 
 
ACF = Acidified Food Analysis 
 
LAF = Low-Acid Canned Food Analysis 
 
OTHER Reporting 
 
If there is any Entry Review or Filer Evaluation work, the following PAC Codes 
should also be included: 
 
  
 1
DATE OF ISSUANCE:
PAGE
 
 
FORM FDA 2438 (7/92) 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO 
 
PAGE 2 
 
FORM FDA 2438g (10/91) 
PAC 03R833 Entry Review (report as Import Investigation – Operation Code 14) 
PAC 99R833 Filer Evaluations (report as Program Evaluation – Operation Code 
95)  
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO  
 
PART I 
PAGE 1 
 
FORM FDA 2438 g (10/91) 
 
PART I - BACKGROUND
 
 
Inadequate or improper manufacturing, processing or packing of thermally 
processed low-acid foods in hermetically sealed containers, or acidified foods 
may result in the distribution in interstate commerce of processed foods that 
may be injurious to health.  The absence of oxygen at normal room temperature 
storage conditions with adequate moisture and nutrients favor the growth of 
Clostridium botulinum (C. botulinum) in Low-Acid Foods.  A failure to either 
destroy or control (by water activity or acidification) the germination and 
growth of spores of C. botulinum due to improper manufacturing, processing or 
packing may result in the production of a toxin which causes the potentially 
fatal food poisoning known as botulism. 
 
The requirements in 21 CFR 108 (including the requirements for manufacturers 
of low-acid or acidified foods to register their processing plants and file 
scheduled processing information with FDA), and the mandatory requirements of 
21 CFR 113 and 114 are intended to ensure safe manufacturing, processing and 
packing of thermally processed low-acid food in hermetically sealed 
containers, and acidified low-acid food, and to permit the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) to verify that the procedures are being followed.   
 
This program is part of FDA's verification procedures to determine whether the 
foreign industry provides adequate controls over the production and 
distribution of LACF and acidified food (AF).  FDA attempts to identify 
problems which may have broad implications such as commodities, industry 
segments from a particular region or country, faulty equipment, defective 
containers, etc. 
 
Chinese mushrooms were implicated in four outbreaks of Staphylococcal 
Enterotoxin (SET) poisonings which occurred between February 13, 1989 and 
April 22, 1989. FDA’s testing of Chinese mushrooms detected SET in samples of 
mushrooms that were associated with the outbreaks.  To prevent further SET 
outbreaks, on May 10, 1989, FDA initiated detention without physical 
examination (DWPE) of all #10 cans of People’s Republic of China (PROC) canned 
mushrooms and all other can sizes from PROC canneries whose mushrooms tested 
positive for SET. This DWPE was extended to all can sizes of mushrooms from 
all PROC canneries on October 17,1989. In 1995, the DWPE provisions were 
established for the “Lot by Lot” release program to allow entry of PROC 
mushrooms.  *Import Alert 25-11 and the “Lot by Lot” release program was 
officially cancelled as of March 1, 2004.  FDA and the Peoples Republic of 
China had a recent meeting and reached an agreement to cancel this import 
alert. The Chinese government has assumed responsibility for most of the firms 
currently shipping to the U.S. and recent visits and other information 
indicate that this alert is no longer supportable.  Chinese mushrooms will now 
be covered under normal import surveillance.*
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO  
 
PART II 
PAGE 1 
 
FORM FDA 2438 g (10/91) 
 
PART II - IMPLEMENTATION
 
Objectives
 
• 
To determine whether products comply with the plant registration and 
process filing requirements as required by 21 CFR 108. 
 
• 
To determine if AF and LACF products are improperly processed or 
packaged through examination of lots or analysis of samples. 
 
 
Interaction with Other Programs 
 
AF/LACF Foreign Inspections: 
Inspections of foreign manufacturers of LACF products and acidified foods to 
determine compliance with 21 CFR 108 (Emergency Permit Control), 113 
(Thermally Processed Low-Acid Foods Packaged in Hermetically Sealed 
Containers) and 114 (Acidified Foods) 
(http://intranet.cfsan.fda.gov/OC/pages/industry.htm) are accomplished under 
FDA’s Foreign Inspection Program.  The Agency has been performing Foreign 
Inspections on a yearly basis and will continue to do so in the future.  PAC 
Code 03R233 should be used for each Foreign Inspection. Investigators should 
refer to Compliance Program 7303.803a, Domestic LACF and Acidified Foods 
Compliance Program, for inspectional and regulatory guidance.  CFSAN reviews 
foreign inspection EIRs and classifies each inspection.  Regulatory actions, 
such as DWPE and/or placement on Import Alert, may be recommended by CFSAN if 
significant deviations from the regulations are revealed. 
 
*Import Seafood Products Compliance Program, CP 7303.844: 
Seafood hazards other than C. botulinum (e.g. histamine toxin formation, 
shellfish toxins, etc.) are to be reported under the Import Seafood Products 
Compliance Program, CP 7303.844, which provides additional coverage of fish 
and fishery products. 
 
Import Foods – General Compliance Program, CP 7303.819: 
Products labeled Keep Refrigerated, but are not are temperature abused, should 
be covered in the Import Foods – General Compliance Program, CP 7303.819.* 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART III 
PAGE 1 
 
FORM FDA 2438g (10/91) 
 
PART III - INSPECTIONAL
 
 
NOTES: 
 
1. 
The Import Alerts in FIARS list products and firms to be given 
intensified coverage. 
 
2. 
Import Alert 99-04 lists products/firms to be detained without 
physical examination even if these firms have Food Canning 
Establishment (FCE) numbers or processes (SID’s) on file.  
Therefore, this alert should be reviewed before release of an 
entry is considered. 
 
3. 
If the listed manufacturer in the line entry is not the actual 
processor, the entry should not be released until the importer is 
contacted and the manufacturer’s name determined and registration 
confirmed.  If the manufacturer's name cannot be determined, the 
product should be detained. 
 
A. 
ENTRY REVIEW
 
Determine whether the product is LACF or an AF.  Definitions for 
LACF and AF are found in 21 CFR 113.3 and 21 CFR 114.3. 
 
*Attachment A lists valid product codes for this program (not all 
inclusive).* 
 
1. 
Examples of LACF and AF products (not all-inclusive): 
 
a. 
Low-acid canned foods (LACF) 
 
Bamboo shoots, bean sprouts, black olives, mushrooms, 
mussels, sardines, snails, tuna 
 
b. 
Water activity (aw) and salt controlled LACF 
 
Bean paste, caviar, canned cake or bread, chutney, guava 
paste, lupini beans, salted fish, salted vegetables, some 
oriental cooking sauces, some soy sauces   
 
c. 
Acidified Foods (AF) 
 
Artichokes, hearts of palm, non-fermented pickles and 
pickled products, peppers, pimentos, papaya and other low-
acid tropical fruits 
 
d. 
LACF where pH control at levels greater than 4.6 is a 
critical factor in the scheduled process. 
 
Clam sauces, gazpacho, okra and tomatoes, limas and corn, 
some potato salads, some spaghetti and other pasta in tomato 
sauces, shrimp in tomato sauce, turtle soup 
 
e. 
Mis-identified Fermented Products 
 
If it is suspected that the product is mis-identified as a 
fermented product, check the LACF database to determine if a 
process is on file, and if there is no process on file and 
resources exist, collect six subs and analyze for water 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART III 
PAGE 2 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
activity (aw), salt content and pH.  If after analyzing, the 
product falls within the parameters of an AF or LACF product 
(per 21 CFR 113.3 and 21 CFR 114.3), a recommendation should 
be made to DIOP to place the manufacturer/product under DWPE 
and to issue an advisory to the field and to CFSAN/Division 
of Enforcement/Imports Branch/HFS-606 alerting them of the 
situation.  If processing procedures can be obtained from 
importer/filer, please include in recommendation package. 
 
  
f. 
Other Products (including refrigerated products) 
 
If products are unfamiliar to District personnel and cannot 
be readily classified as LACF, AF or fermented, and a check 
of the LACF database reveals no process information on file, 
then collect six subs and for aw and pH analyses.  If the 
product falls under the parameters of a LACF or AF, follow 
the directions in 1e above.  Consult CFSAN/Division of 
Enforcement/Imports Branch/HFS-606 for guidance and/or the 
Division of Import Operations/HFC-170 for guidance. 
 
Also, refrigeration does not necessarily exempt a product 
from the regulations.  For example, the small, extended 
shelf-life coffee creamers usually bear a “Keep 
Refrigerated” statement on the small peel-off foil top.  
Many times they are not held under refrigerated conditions 
(e.g. restaurant tables), so they are subject to the 
regulations.  
 
2. 
*Example containers used for LACF and AF 
 
a. 
Metal - tinplate, steel and aluminum (usually LACF) 
 
Containers may be cylindrical, square, rectangular, or oval.  
Irregular shapes may be encountered. 
 
b. 
Glass (usually Acidified) 
 
Containers are generally cylindrical with a metal screw cap 
or pressed-on cap.  There may also be unusually shaped 
containers. 
 
c. 
Plastic  
 
Rigid or semi-rigid cylindrical cans, trays, cups, or tubs 
with heat sealed or double seamed ends (usually Acidified) 
 
Flexible - pouches heat sealed on two or more sides, tubes 
either heat sealed or closed with a metal crimp (usually 
LACF)* 
 
d. 
Multilayer  
 
These containers are usually flexible or semi-rigid and 
consist of multiple layers of various materials such as 
plastic, fiberboard and aluminum foil. 
 
B. 
REGISTRATION AND PROCESS FILING
 
Determine whether the manufacturer has registered and filed processes 
for the product(s). 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART III 
PAGE 3 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
 
1. 
Obtain from import entry documents:  
 
• 
Country of origin 
• 
Product name 
• 
Name of the manufacturer 
• 
Food Canning Establishment (FCE) number and/or actual 
plant address of the site specific manufacturer. 
• 
SID number of the container dimensions 
 
If this information is not transmitted electronically or cannot be 
determined after review of the import documents from the importer, 
the product should be detained.  
 
2. 
*The LACF Web Application System Website, available at # will 
assist in the determination of whether the manufacturer has 
registered and filed a process for the product(s) entered.  ORA 
and District Office Personnel requiring access to this website may 
create their own accounts at # under the “Create New Accounts” 
link.  Only FDA personnel who deal with LACF-related activities 
will be listed in the drop down list.  Any FDA personnel who do 
not find their name in this list should contact the CFSAN Help 
Desk or send an e-mail to LACF@cfsan.fda.gov for assistance.  
There is a User’s Guide available under the above referenced URL 
selecting the “LACF User Guide” link.  If the Word version is 
selected to print, go to the bottom of the document to allow all 
graphics to load prior to printing the document. 
 
OASIS release 4.3.01 provides a link between OASIS and the 
information stored in the LACF database.  Entry reviewers and 
other import staff are able to link directly from a line entry to 
the data stored for a specific FCE, manufacturer or scheduled 
process.  They are also able to perform ad hoc queries of the data 
from within OASIS. 
 
a. 
If the FCE number is not provided, the FCE Registration 
Search/Update option may be used to search, using the 
manufacturer’s or firm’s name along with Country. 
 
b. 
If the manufacturer is registered, determine if there is a 
process on file for the product(s) and container size(s) 
being entered. 
 
i. The Generate Reports option in the LACF Website should be 
used: 
 
• 
Searches for LACF products and containers require 
two searches:  View Tracking Option and Products 
Report Option: 
 
View Tracking Option:  This option lists all 
forms which have been received by FDA and are in 
various stages of acceptance.  For specifics on 
the information on this screen, refer to the LACF 
User’s Guide.  The dates on this screen are 
critical to determine the form(s) status of 
acceptance. 
 
Products Report Option:  This option lists 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART III 
PAGE 4 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
process filing form(s) currently accepted and on 
file with FDA.  It lists the firm information, 
FCE, SID, product name, governing regulation, 
i.e. whether filed as LACF or AF, water activity 
and pH (if critical), processing method, etc as 
well as container information. 
 
• 
If a firm is on Import Alert #99-04, a reference 
to the product(s) on alert will appear in the 
report. 
 
c. 
The LACF Registration Coordinator, HFS-618, should not be 
contacted, except in unusual circumstances, since the LACF 
Web Application Computer System is updated continuously. 
 
d. 
The Import Alert option is a list of firms under Import 
Alert #99-04.  It is advisable to check FIARS as well this 
option.  Any discrepancies, please contact CFSAN/Division of 
Enforcement and Programs/Imports Branch/HFS-606 or the 
Division of Import Operations and Policy (DIOP)/HFC-170.* 
 
3. 
Container Dimensions (see Attachment C) 
 
Also note the following: 
 
• 
Metal Containers 
 
Some countries incorrectly file a "plug diameter" 
measurement (diameter inside double seam) for cans.  It may 
be necessary to measure the plug diameter to determine 
process filing.  The plug diameter will be approximately 
2/16 smaller than the outside diameter. 
 
Cylindrical (round) cans have two dimensions - diameter and 
height.  Square, rectangular and oval cans have three 
dimensions - length, width and height. 
 
Measurement of can diameter (round) or length and width 
(square and oval) should be measured from the outside of the 
end or lid seam.  Side-to-side measurement of can height 
should be from the top of one end seam to the top of the 
other in 3-piece round, square or oval cans, or from the top 
of the seam to the bottom of the container in 2-piece cans. 
 
• 
Pouches 
 
Measurement of length and width in pouches should be made 
from the inside edge of the seal area, side-to-side.  Pouch 
thickness should be determined by placing the container 
horizontally on a flat surface and measuring the thickness 
approximately halfway down its length.  Pouches have three 
dimensions - length, width and thickness.  The actual pouch 
thickness should be less than or equal to the thickness 
listed in the filed scheduled thermal process.  Thickness 
listed in the filed scheduled thermal process represents the 
maximum thickness during thermal processing and is not 
necessarily the pouch thickness dimension. 
 
• 
Semirigid Containers 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART III 
PAGE 5 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
 
Measure heat-sealed containers using procedures similar to 
that described under pouches.  For plastic bowl shaped 
containers with metal lids that are double seamed, measure 
the diameter of the double seamed end, the height, and the 
dimension of the plastic bottom.  Plastic bottles are 
measured similar to procedures described for glass 
containers.     
 
• 
Glass Containers  
 
The widest body diameter or the neck diameter is often given 
on filing forms. 
 
Measurement of the diameter of a glass jar may be 
facilitated by using a flexible measuring tape to measure 
the circumference, then dividing by π (3.1416) to obtain the 
diameter.  
 
Height is usually measured from the lip to the bottom.  
Accurate measurements will not be possible on jars in a 
shipment because of the presence of the cap. 
 
Manufacturers are permitted to file container capacity for 
irregularly shaped containers.  The filed weight should be 
the weight declared on the label. 
 
C. 
OASIS Reporting Instructions
 
Process the entry as a DTR (Detention Requests) if the following 
criteria are met: 
 
1. 
The firm is not registered. 
 
2. 
No process is on file. 
 
3. 
Process filed but: 
 
• 
The container dimensions on file deviate by 2/16 inch or 
more in any dimension from those indicated on the 
file(for glass containers allow 3/16 or more). Therefore, 
conclude that a process has not been filed.  
 
• 
The product name is not the same as that which is on file 
(with some exceptions).  Therefore conclude that a 
process has not been filed.  If there are questions about 
product names, then contact the LACF Registration 
Coordinator. 
 
Process the entry as a DER (Detention Request without Exam) if: 
 
The firm is identified for DWPE under a particular Alert such as 
Import Alert #99-04. 
 
 
DTR and DER should include, if possible, copies of invoices, 
packing lists, and copies of labels, etc. since those documents 
may indicate the actual manufacturer. 
 
D. 
FIELD EXAMINATIONS AND PRODUCT SAMPLING 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART III 
PAGE 6 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
 
*Reconciliation Exams:   
 
A comparison of records with the physical product to verify that 
the entry is consistent with declarations on product documents 
with regard to the type and quantity of product. These exams 
should be performed consistent with the guidance in the IOM and/or 
current Division of Import Operations/HFC-170 instructions. Refer 
to IOM 5.4.1.4 at:  
 
http://www.fda.gov/ora/inspect_ref/iom/ChapterText/5_4.html#SUB5.4
 
NOTE: Submit all samples as directed in Part IV, Item I. 
Analytical Laboratories. 
 
1. 
Low-Acid Canned Foods
 
a. 
Field Examination - See IOM, Sample Schedule 2 at: 
 
http://www.fda.gov/ora/inspect_ref/iom/ChapterText/ssc
hedule2.html
 
A "lot" should consist of only one production code and 
one product.  If codes are commingled to the extent 
that sorting is impractical, consider the entry as one 
lot for the purpose of the field examination. 
 
Make a notation on the Collection Report (C/R), the 
codes observed, number of containers examined, and 
number of abnormal or defective cans by type of 
abnormality or defect, and relate to the can codes. 
 
When listing can codes, use a hyphen or a dash to 
denote a space between characters, and a slash "/" to 
denote separate lines. 
 
b. 
Sample Collection
 
If abnormal or defective containers are found during 
the field examination, collect all abnormal (up to 24) 
and 12 normals.  Include samples of each type of 
abnormal or container defect observed.  If products 
may be partially preserved through control of aw, 
collect 6 more normal containers.  See IOM, Sample 
Schedule 2 at: 
 
http://www.fda.gov/ora/inspect_ref/iom/ChapterText/ssc
hedule2.html
 
*NOTE:  When collecting swollen or leaking cans, place 
in plastic bags to prevent leakage before final 
packing for shipment to field laboratory for 
analysis.* 
 
2. 
Acidified Foods (AF)
 
Acidified foods not hermetically sealed in containers or not 
thermally processed are included under 21 CFR 114 
(http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx_02/21cfr114_02.h
tml).  Most acidified foods are in hermetically sealed 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART III 
PAGE 7 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
containers. Refer to "Investigator's Guide to Inspection of 
Acidified Foods" 
(http://www.fda.gov/ora/inspect_ref/igs/iglist.html#FOODS).  
 
a. 
*Field examinations of acidified products should 
include checking for damaged or destructive container 
closures (non-destructive).* 
 
b. 
Sample Collection - Collect samples for pH testing.  
Random sampling is essential to reveal pH variations. 
 
1) 
For containers larger than 28 oz. net weight, 
select one normal container from each of 12 
randomly selected cases. 
 
2) 
For all other containers, 28 oz. net weight or 
less, select 2 normal containers from each of 12 
randomly selected cases. 
 
If abnormal containers are encountered, follow 
IOM, Sample Schedule 2 at: 
 
http://www.fda.gov/ora/inspect_ref/iom/ChapterTe
xt/sschedule2.html
 
Collect all abnormal containers (up to 24) in 
addition to the normal containers collected for 
pH testing. 
 
3) 
AF where pH is a critical factor in the 
scheduled process at pH greater than 4.6 should 
be treated according to instructions for LACF 
and sampled for pH to confirm the product pH is 
not higher than the maximum value specified in 
the scheduled process.   
 
4) 
Questionable Products 
 
a) 
When in doubt as to whether a product is LACF 
or AF, contact CFSAN/Division of 
Enforcement/Imports Branch/HFS-606 for 
guidance.  Label ingredients listings may 
help identify acidified or partially 
acidified products and enable a regulatory 
decision to be made without laboratory 
analysis.  When possible, obtain shipping 
documents, labels and other information to 
identify the actual manufacturer and the 
actual name of the product.  Also attempt to 
obtain processing information.  If a decision 
cannot be made based on this information, 
sampling for pH, water activity, and possibly 
water phase salt or soluble solids may be 
necessary.  Samples to determine a product’s 
status should consist of 3-6 containers. 
 
b) 
An acid food that contains a small amount of 
low-acid ingredient(s) and has an equilibrium 
pH that does not differ significantly from 
the pH of the predominant acid or acid food 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART III 
PAGE 8 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
ingredient (i.e., formulated acid food) is 
not covered under 21 CFR 114.  Examples of 
formulated acid foods are some salsas, 
dressings, and condiment sauces. 
 
• 
To determine whether the small amounts of 
low-acid ingredient(s) result in a 
significant pH difference, obtain: 
 
1. Quantitative formulation (obtain 
quantitative information using the same 
units of measurement or percentages). 
 
2. pH of each ingredient in the 
quantitative formulation or other 
evidence that determines whether 
ingredients being used are acid or low-
acid components (i.e., raw chopped 
vegetables used as ingredient(s)). 
 
3. Complete description of the formulation 
process (how ingredients are processed 
and formulated together).   
 
4. pH of the acid(s) and/or food(s) 
ingredients mixed together in the same 
proportion in which the acid(s) and/or 
acid food(s) ingredients appear in the 
product formulation. 
 
5. pH (minimum of six units when obtaining 
information  to determine if product is 
covered) of the finished product 
(obtain from the firm, if available, or 
through sampling). Relate these samples 
to the mixed acid ingredients pH and 
the individual ingredient pH levels. 
 
• 
Finished products collected to determine 
pH for the purpose of supporting 
regulatory action should be collected per 
IOM sample schedule chart 2. 
 
• 
Submit the information to CFSAN/Division 
of Enforcement/Imports Branch/HFS-606 for 
review to determine if there is a 
significant difference between the pH of 
the finished product and the predominant 
acid(s) or acid food(s). 
 
c) 
If a shipment contains numerous questionable 
products (unclear whether many products are 
AF or LACF), call CFSAN/Division of 
Enforcement/Imports Branch/HFS-606 to arrange 
for a review of the invoice and guidance on 
product status and/or appropriate sample 
collection and analyses to determine product 
status. 
 
5) 
Aseptically Packaged LACF/AF 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART III 
PAGE 9 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
 
Some new aseptic packaging systems use high 
temperature for a relatively short period of time 
to render the product commercially sterile and 
use various means (chemicals, irradiation, etc.) 
for container sterilization.  Containers used for 
these products are usually flexible or semi-rigid 
cartons which cannot tolerate high temperature 
(e.g., multi-layer, fiberboard, laminated boxes; 
molded-form/fill/seal cups). 
 
Most of those products will be liquids or semi-
solids, e.g., milk, soy bean products (drinks, 
TOFU), teas, puddings, fruit purees, etc.  *If 
any products are encountered which appear to 
contain small pieces of food (e.g., cream of 
mushroom soup), collect documentary evidence for 
particulate size determination and photos of the 
suspect product and submit to CFSAN/Division of 
Enforcement/Imports Branch/HFS-606, 5100 Paint 
Branch Parkway, College Park, MD 20740.  Hold the 
entry pending CFSAN, HFS-606 review.* 
 
NOTE:  The LACF Web Application System can be 
used to determine whether a product is 
LACF, AF, aseptically processed or aw 
controlled. 
 
The “Process File Menu” link provides some of the 
information contained on the process filing forms 
and can be used to determine whether the process 
was filed as LACF or AF, the container type and 
sizes, the processing method and whether water 
activity or maximum pH are critical factors.  
Authorized FDA employees can obtain facsimiles of 
process filing forms directly from the LACF Web 
Application System. 
 
NOTE - SECURITY/CONFIDENTIALITY MEASURES: 
  
Due to the confidential information contained 
in the LACF Process File, special precautions 
should be taken to maintain the 
confidentiality and to ensure the security of 
the data generated from the system.  The 
reports generated from this system should be 
handled with discretion, secured when not in 
use and destroyed in an appropriate manner 
when no longer needed, i.e., 
 
• 
Only FDA employees are to have access to 
these reports. 
 
• 
These reports may not be reproduced or 
copied in any way. 
 
• 
These reports should be secured in a 
locked cabinet when not in use or awaiting 
distribution. 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART III 
PAGE 10 
• 
These reports may be placed in the case 
files, in the section which is not for 
public information or distribution. 
 
• 
These reports should be destroyed after 
use, including reports generated in error. 
 
6) 
Reporting 
 
a. 
Products Released Without Field 
Examination or Sample Collection. 
 
*Report time spent determining that a 
product meets registration and filing 
requirements, including measuring 
containers, as “Entry Review” and ensure 
that the appropriate PAC is used (e.g. 
03003 for Import LACF or 03003A for Import 
AF)* 
 
b. 
LACF/AF or Samples Collected for Abnormal 
Containers 
 
Report the total number of containers 
examined and estimate the percentage of 
abnormal in the lot. 
 
Report the number of each type of abnormal 
(hard swell, etc., refer to IOM, Sample 
Schedule 2 at: 
http://www.fda.gov/ora/inspect_ref/iom/Cha
pterText/sschedule2.html
or defective containers observed (leaker, 
seam defects or other abnormalities). 
E. 
Fraudulent Entries
 
*Entry reviewers should look for suspicious entries; for example, 
mushrooms from one country shipped by an exporter in another 
country.  Fraudulent entries of other mushroom products, bamboo 
shoots, and water chestnuts have also been found.  If fraud is 
suspected, it should immediately be brought to the attention of 
the district compliance branch via supervisory channels.  
Appropriate evidence needs to be collected such as documents, 
product samples and interviews of involved personnel.  OCI should 
be consulted early in the investigation.  Any suspicious entries 
should also be brought to the attention of CFSAN/Division of 
Enforcement/Imports Branch/HFS-606 for further instructions. 
 
Report time under OASIS Activity Code #23 – Field Exam (FEX) when 
conducting review of can codes to verify the actual manufacturer 
and use the appropriate PAC (e.g. 03003 or 03003A).* 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART IV 
PAGE 1 
 
PART IV - ANALYTICAL
 
 
I. 
ANALYTICAL LABORATORIES
 
A. 
pH Determination - Normal servicing laboratories 
 
B. 
Microbiological and Physical 
 
1. 
Initial Analysis - Normal servicing laboratories 
 
2. 
C. botulinum confirmation - SRL for NE, CR, and SE Regions, 
PRL-NW for SW, and PA Regions. 
 
C. 
Toxin Confirmation - Division of Microbiological Studies, HFS-515. 
 
D. 
Cover chemical contaminants and food additives under CP 7309.006, 
Import Food and Color Additives, not under the AF/LACF program. 
 
E. 
Heat Resistance - SRL for all Districts. 
 
F. 
Filth and Extraneous Matter - Normal servicing laboratories 
 
G. 
Headspace Gas Analysis by Gas Chromatograph (GC) - Normal 
servicing laboratories 
 
H. 
Water Activity (aw) - Normal servicing laboratories 
 
 
II. 
ANALYSIS
 
A. 
Low-Acid Canned Foods (LACF)
 
1. 
Microbiological and Physical:  Refer to Bacteriological 
Analytical Manual for Foods (BAM), Rev A, 8th Ed. or most 
current (http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~ebam/bam-toc.html). 
 
• 
Districts so equipped and trained should use the gas 
chromatography (GC) method for headspace gas provided in 
the BAM, *8th Ed.* 
 
• 
Laboratories that do not have the necessary equipment 
(GC) should perform headspace gas analysis according to 
the BAM, *8th Ed.* 
 
• 
Perform teardown seam evaluations on abnormal cans (to 
the extent that the data obtained are meaningful) and on 
a representative number of normal cans (see CPG 7120.16) 
(http://www.fda.gov/ora/compliance_ref/cpg/cpgfod/cpg520-
200.html).  Perform microleak examinations where 
appropriate.  Perform vacuum tests aseptically (LIB No. 
2723) on the normal cans selected for culturing and seam 
teardown exams. 
 
• 
Send sample portions and cultures to the appropriate 
servicing laboratory for C. botulinum confirmation. 
 
All preformed C. botulinum tests for toxin in samples and 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART IV 
PAGE 2 
production of toxin by cultures should be confirmed by 
CFSAN. 
 
NOTE: If examination shows gram-positive or gram- 
variable rods typical of either the Bacillus or 
Clostridium genus, in the absence of other 
morphological types and microleaks, and if no 
defective can seams are found, or if no can seam 
measurements are outside of can manufacturers' 
specifications, heat resistance studies may be 
required.  Follow this procedure: 
 
a. Immediately notify CFSAN/Low-Acid and Acidified Canned 
Foods Team, HFS-617 with a summary of the cultural 
findings as well as can seam and microleak data.  
RFPTB will instruct the District if heat resistance 
studies are needed. 
 
b. Submit a completed Heat Resistance Report (Attachment 
B) and the culture(s) to SRL if heat resistance 
studies are necessary.  Also, send copy of analytical 
worksheet and collection report. 
 
c. SRL should start analysis of the cultures immediately 
upon receipt. If closer worksheet review by HFS-617 
reveals that heat resistance studies are not needed, 
SRL will be told to stop the analysis. 
 
NOTE: The Home District will notify SRL to destroy the 
cultures. 
 
2. 
Water Activity (aw)
 
Please refer to the most current AOAC Methods available, 
unless stated otherwise. 
 
In products having a pH above 4.6, when aw may be a part of 
the preservation means, determine aw using "Official Methods 
of Analysis of the Association of Official Analytical 
Chemists (AOAC)," *16th Edition (1995) 42.1.03 (978.18)*. 
 
• 
Where the product status is in doubt (i.e., LACF/AF or 
exempt) it may be necessary to determine the aw to 
classify the products.  Products with aw values at or 
below 0.85 are neither LACF nor acidified.  Measurement 
systems specified in b) below should always be used. 
 
• 
If sugar may be controlling aw, determine the percent 
sucrose (Brix) or soluble solids.  If salt content may 
be controlling aw, determine and report the percent salt 
as water phase salt. 
 
"Water phase salt" means the percent salt (sodium 
chloride) in finished product as determined by the 
method described in the AOAC, *16th Ed., 35.1.18 
(937.09)*, under "Volumetric Method - Official Final 
Action," which is incorporated by reference, multiplied 
by 100 and divided by the percent salt (sodium chloride) 
plus the percent moisture in the finished products as 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART IV 
PAGE 3 
determined by the method described in AOAC, *16th Ed., 
35.1.13 (952.08)*, under "Total Solids for all Marine 
Products, Except Raw Oysters - Official Final Action." 
 
a. 
Initial Screening:  For all size containers, 
determine the aw of 3 units using the Abbeon aw 
Value Analyzer or other approved analyzer (AOAC, 
16th Ed., 42.1.03 (978.18B)*. The Decagon Aqualab 
Hygrometer is faster than the Abbeon analyzer. 
NRL, SRL, and SAN will also determine the aw for 
samples receiving an initial aw screening in 
their laboratories by measurement of 
microcrystalline cellulose weight change.  
Standardize the instrument using salt slush, 
AOAC, *16th Ed., 42.1.03(978.18D, E)*. 
 
b. 
Confirmation:  Determine the aw of 3 containers 
using the: 
 
• 
Beckman Hygroline Moisture/Humidity Meter, 
• 
Decagon Aqualab Hygrometer, 
• 
Weather Measure Relative Humidity System, 
or 
• 
Rotronic AG. 
 
If aw is confirmed at or above 0.90, refer the 
results of analysis to the District Compliance 
Branch of the collecting District.  The Lab or 
District Compliance Branch may contact the to 
Low-Acid and Acidified Canned Foods Team, HFS-
617, for any direct questions concerning analysis 
of foods in which water activity or salt content 
may be at least in part a means of preservation. 
 
B. 
Acidified Foods
 
pH Analysis
 
1. 
Use normal containers.  Refer to AOAC *16th Ed., 42.1.04 
(981.12)* except: 
 
Determine the pH on the container mixture only, by opening 
the container, inserting the electrode(s) and measuring the 
pH.  Do not make separate pH determinations on both the 
liquid and the solid.  If the product is freshly packed and 
not in equilibrium, blend entire contents of can and test 
pH. 
 
• 
Carry out all pH determinations to two decimal 
places, e.g., 4.40. 
 
2. 
Number of containers for pH analysis: 
 
The total sample size for containers 28 oz. net weight or 
smaller is 24 containers.  The total sample size for all 
others is 12 containers. 
 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART IV 
PAGE 4 
a. 
One analyst will determine the pH of half of the 
sample containers and record the name, model and 
serial number of the pH meter on the Analyst 
Worksheet. 
 
b. 
If one or more containers have pH values equal to or 
greater than 4.40, or if the mean pH plus 2 standard 
deviations is equal to or greater than 4.40, a second 
analyst should promptly (same day) re-determine the pH 
values of the same containers using a different pH 
meter, and record the name, model, and serial number 
of the pH meter on the Analyst Worksheet. 
 
c. 
If one or more containers have pH values above 4.65, 
or if the mean pH plus 2 standard deviations (as 
determined separately from either analyst's results) 
is above 4.65, both analysts will analyze the 
remaining half of the sample using the same respective 
pH meters as were used on the first half of the 
sample. 
 
d. 
When the analysis is complete, regardless of whether 
it was necessary to analyze all containers in the 
sample or only half of them, consider all of the pH 
values determined by the first analyst together as the 
"original analysis." If a second analyst was required, 
consider all of the pH values determined by the second 
analyst together as the "check analysis." Never 
average the two analysts’ results together. 
 
C. 
Acidified and LACF 
 
 
Toxin Confirmation
 
For confirmation of preformed and/or cultured C. botulinum 
toxin, send a portion of the product and the subculture 
enrichment to the CFSAN/ Office of Plant and Dairy Foods/ 
Division of Microbiological Studies/ Microbiological Methods 
Development Branch, HFS-516, along with copies of the 
analyst worksheets, collection report, etc. 
 
D. 
Container Integrity/Abnormal Containers 
 
Container Integrity 
 
Container integrity problems, especially seam defects, are 
most significant with low-acid canned foods.  They are of 
primary importance from a public health standpoint when 
canned seafood is involved.  Seam defects are less important 
from a public health standpoint with acidified foods unless 
contamination has resulted in elevated pH levels at or above 
4.75. 
 
In examining canned foods for container integrity, the 
analyst should examine each can for visible can seam defects 
and describe these defects.  Guidance in describing visible 
defects is available in the AOAC chart, 2000, Classification 
of Visible Can Defects (Exterior).
 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART IV 
PAGE 5 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
When visible can seam defects are found, the analyst should 
attempt to determine the severity of the defects.  This is 
done by determining the amount of overlap remaining in the 
seam at the point of the defect.  The defect rating 
procedure provided below was devised as a means to judge the 
severity of “droops” and “vees” encountered in the cover 
hook of can double seams: 
 
Rate the defects in the cover hook (“droops”, “vees”) in the 
same manner as the juncture on cylindrical cans.  Defects 
should be rated on a percentage scale, in ten (10) percent 
increments, from 100 to 0%.  If the cover hook at the defect 
is even with the rest of the cover hook on the torn-down 
seam, it is given a 100% rating.  If the cover hook is 
reduced by 70% the defect is given a 30% rating.  When the 
cover hook at the defect is reduced to a point where it is 
even with or below the bottom of the seam and there would be 
no overlap between the cover hook and body hook, the defect 
is given a 0% rating. 
 
• 
Abnormal Containers 
 
Conduct the following additional analyses on the 
abnormal containers:  gas, odor and appearance, 
net weight, drained weight, can seam teardown 
and condition of container interior.  If the pH 
of abnormal containers is greater than 4.65, 
analyze for C. botulinum toxin. 
 
• 
Glass containers and Semirigid and Flexible 
Packaging 
 
Perform visual examinations, microleak 
examinations and destructive testing where 
appropriate.  Refer to the BAM, Chapter 22B 
(http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~ebam/bam-22b.html), 
"Examination of Containers for Integrity", pages 
22.35 - 22.85, for methods of analysis.  When 
necessary, questions should be referred to 
CFSAN, Office of Compliance, Low-Acid and 
Acidified Canned Foods Team (HFS-617), phone 
(301) 436-2411. 
 
E.  *Staphylococcal Enterotoxin In Canned Mushrooms 
 
General Instructions: 
 
Perform enterotoxin testing if: 
 
1. Product abuse (e.g. temperature, outbreaks, etc.) is 
suspected. 
 
OR 
 
2. Instructed by Compliance Program or Field Assignment to 
analyze the sample for Staphylococcus. 
 
If viable Staphylococcus sp. colonies are observed by: 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART IV 
PAGE 6 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
• 
most probable number (MPN) when performed as directed 
per BAM Chapter 12 
(http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~ebam/bam-12.html)where the 
results are >11,000  
 
AND 
 
• 
direct plate counts when performed as directed per BAM 
chapter 2 (http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~ebam/bam-
2.html)indicates a level of 10,000/ gram  
 
*Enterotoxin Analysis: 
 
Follow the methodology outlined in BAM 8th Ed., Revision A, 
1998 or most current Ed., Ch. 13, “Staphylococcal Enterotoxins” 
(http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~ebam/bam-toc.html), beginning on 
page 13.01. 
 
The laboratory will individually test each sub-sample using the 
TECRATM ELISA with proper procedures followed accordingly. 
 
NOTE: Under no circumstances should positive TECRATM ELISA 
results be conveyed to a regulated firm or consumer 
without confirmation. The TECRATM ELISA is intended as a 
screening method only. 
 
NOTE: The total contents of each subsample should be retained 
until the original analyses are completed to ensure that 
a sufficient amount of product is available for 
subsequent additional and confirmation tests, if 
necessary. 
 
TECRATM ELISA Test Results 
 
1. Negative result - the laboratory need not conduct further 
analysis for enterotoxin. The sample is considered 
“negative” and no other regulatory or follow-up action is 
warranted. The laboratory should classify this particular 
analysis as lab class 1, in compliance.  
 
2. Positive result – the laboratory should analyze the 
original sample using the VIDAS method for confirmation 
refer to BAM 8th Ed., Revision A, 1998 or most current 
Ed., Ch. 13A, “Staphylococcal Enterotoxins: Micro-slide 
Double Diffusion and ELISA Based Methods”(i.e., VIDAS)”. 
See (http://www.cfsan.fda.gov/~ebam/bam-toc.html) 
 
TECRATM ELISA and the VIDAS Tests Results 
 
1. When the TECRATM ELISA and the VIDAS Tests are positive, the 
following should be sent to CFSAN for re-confirmation 
analysis: 
 
(a) 
The remaining portion of the original TECRATM ELISA 
positive tested extract(s) 
 
(b) 
The remaining portion of the positive tested 
extract(s) from the VIDAS System 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART IV 
PAGE 7 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
(c) 
If possible, send at least 100 grams of the remaining 
reserve portion of the positive subsample(s) 
 
(d) 
A copy of the analytical worksheets 
 
(e) 
A copy of the collection report 
 
to 
 
FDA/ CFSAN/ Microbiology Methods Research Branch 
Attention: Reginald Bennett, HFS-516 
5100 Paint Branch Parkway 
College Park, MD 20740. 
 
NOTE: If additional information concerning sample 
preparation, handling or shipping to CFSAN is needed 
contact Reginald Bennett at (301) 436-2009. 
 
Confirmation analyses will be performed on the extract 
and reserve subsample(s) as appropriate. 
 
Districts should wait for Center confirmation before 
finalizing any regulatory action. 
 
2. When the result of the TECRATM ELISA is positive and the 
VIDAS is negative then: 
 
Check for presence of peroxidase. 
 
NOTE: Some foods contain peroxidase which can cause a false-
positive reaction with the TECRATM ELISA; therefore if 
this scenario presents itself the analyst should 
inactivate the peroxidase and retest.  
 
To determine peroxidase presence, refer to the method 
outlined in BAM chapter 13A “Staphylococcal Enterotoxins: 
Micro-slide Double Diffusion and ELISA-based Methods”, 
Section “Extraction of Enterotoxins from Foods for ELISA 
Assays”, A. General Precautions.  If peroxidase is present, 
inactivate the peroxidase using the methods outlined in the 
General Precautions section and retest. 
 
NOTE: Under no circumstances should positive TECRATM ELISA 
results be conveyed to a regulated firm or consumer 
without confirmation. The TECRATM ELISA is intended as 
a screening method only. 
 
If the TECRATM ELISA retest remains positive, send the 
extract used for the TECRATM ELISA and the reserve portion 
for all of the original sub-samples to: 
 
FDA/ CFSAN/ Microbiology Methods Research Branch 
Attention: Reginald Bennett, HFS-516 
5100 Paint Branch Parkway 
College Park, MD 20740.* 
 
Methods Contact 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART IV 
PAGE 8 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
• 
Reginald Bennett, CFSAN/Office of Plant and Dairy Foods/ 
Division of Microbiological Studies/ Microbiological Methods 
Research Branch/HFS-516, (301) 436-2009, 
RBennett@CFSAN.FDA.GOV  
 
• 
Marsha Hayden, ORO/Division of Field Science/HFC-140, (301) 
827-1039, MHayden@ORA.FDA.GOV  
 
CFSAN’s Microbiological Methods Research Branch will provide 
results to CFSAN/Office of Compliance/Division of Enforcement.  
The Division of Enforcement will contact the District’s 
Compliance Branch with the results for appropriate follow-up.* 
 
III. REPORTING
 
 
pH Determination
 
If any normal container of acidified product has a pH at or above 
4.65 or the mean plus two standard deviations (as determined by 
either analyst's total result(s) is at or above 4.65, immediately 
refer the results of analysis to the District Compliance Branch.  
Do not average the two analysts' pH results. 
 
 
FACTS Reporting
 
The analyzing laboratory will report results for each sample of 
low acid and acidified products into FACTS using PAF = ACD. 
 
The following Problem Area Flags should be used: 
 
AFD = Acid Food Analysis 
 
ACF = Acidified Food Analysis 
 
LAF = Low-Acid Canned Food Analysis 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART V 
PAGE 1 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
PART V - REGULATORY/ADMINISTRATIVE STRATEGY
 
 
If the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition determines that a health 
hazard exists, determine the disposition of the lot after it has been refused 
admission and inform, CFSAN, HFS-606. If the lot has been re-exported, HFS-606 
will inform the International Affairs Staff (HFY-50), who will notify 
appropriate authorities of the countries to which the lot was shipped. 
 
Products which meet the following criteria shall be considered for detention: 
  
1. 
LACF Products Based on Microbiological Findings 
 
Advise HFS-606 of any detentions. Follow instructions in the Regulatory 
Procedures Manual (Import Alerts) 
(http://www.fda.gov/ora/compliance_ref/rpm_new2/ch9dirs.html) and 
Compliance Policy Guide Section 520.200 "Canned Foods - Seam Defects" 
(http://www.fda.gov/ora/compliance_ref/cpg/cpgfod/cpg520-200.html). 
 
2. 
Water Activity Controlled Products Based on pH and aw Findings
 
*When analysis identifies a water activity controlled product with pH 
above 4.6 for which there is no process filing or the water activity is 
confirmed above the maximum aw listed in the filed scheduled process, 
contact HFS-606 for further instructions.  
 
In addition, when a sample is collected for water activity, the district 
import branches should either check the LACF Web Application System to 
determine whether a process has been filed or the maximum water activity 
value filed should be reported to the laboratory with the collection 
information. The reason for analyses should be noted either “analyses to 
determine if LACF” or if known “to confirm compliance with a filed 
maximum water activity value”.* 
 
3. 
Acidified Products Based on pH Findings
 
*Consult “CPG Section 520.300 Acidified Low-Acid Canned Foods – 
Adulteration Due to High pH (CPG 7120.25)” 
(http://www.fda.gov/ora/compliance_ref/cpg/cpgfod/cpg520-300.html).* 
 
If sample results meet criteria stated in CPG Section 520.300, send all 
pertinent documents, such as the analytical worksheets, collection 
report, entry package and complete labeling, to HFS-606 along with 
Detention Request. List the FCE number on the documents. 
 
4. 
Abnormal Containers (Acidified, LACF, and aw controlled Products)
 
• 
If the abnormal rate is 1% or greater, send a Detention Request 
in addition to all pertinent documents as listed above to 
CFSAN, HFS-606.  (IOM Sample Schedule Chart 2 describes the 
different types of abnormal containers). 
 
• 
When submitting any collection reports or analytical worksheets 
always send copies of labels, invoices/packaging lists or other 
documents which may identify the manufacturer. 
 
5. 
Firm's Failure to Register or to have Process on File
 
In most cases, this decision will be based on a DTR or DER, rather than 
a physical sample.  
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART V 
PAGE 2 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
 
a. 
Detain the shipment if the steps in PART III, pages 1 and 2 have 
been completed and the firm has not registered and has not filed 
the necessary processing information with FDA.  
 
Consider providing the importer with: 
 
• 
The FDA Importer's Guide/Low Acid Canned and Acidified 
Foods, and/or 
 
• 
Importing Foods into the United States. 
 
• 
Also refer them to the Center’s Webpage “Acidified and Low-
Acid Canned Foods” at http://vm.CFSAN.fda.gov/~comm/Lacf-
Toc.html. At this site, they can download the regulations, 
registration and process filing forms, instructions for 
completing the forms and there are links to FDA inspection 
Guides, Import Alerts, Import Procedures and Importer’s 
Guide.  
 
These publications are available in each District or on-line at 
the above site.  Additional copies may also be obtained through 
HFS-565 (301) 436-1727.  
 
b. 
While evaluating the disposition of an entry, check the LACF Web 
Application System. If the process filing form has been accepted 
as indicated in the tracking file or the LACF Process File, the 
entry may be released.  An accepted form in the tracking file will 
have a date in the "Ready" slot. 
 
6. 
Import Alerts, Including #99-04
 
Follow the criteria, instructions, and guidance contained in the Import 
Alerts.  Release of products should only be given with concurrence of 
CFSAN/Imports Branch, HFS-606 and DIOP HFC-170 should also be notified. 
 
Import Alert # 99-04 "Detention Without Physical Examination Of 
Manufacturers of Low-Acid Canned Foods and Acidified Foods" was designed 
only for companies that have already registered with FDA (have an FCE 
number). Do not recommend firms/products for inclusion in this alert if 
the firm does not have an FCE number.  
 
*Do not recommend firm/products for an Import Alert/DWPE solely based on 
firm/product not registered and/or filed processes with FDA since all 
LACF and acidified foods should be checked for registration and process 
filing. However, it may be appropriate to recommend to CFSAN/DIOP an 
Alert or Import Bulletin for non-registration and/or process filing if 
the product may not readily be identified as a LACF or an acidified 
food. It may also be appropriate to recommend a separate Import 
Alert/DWPE of an LACF or acidified product if the violation involves a 
health hazard and it does not fit into the criteria for being included 
in Import Alert # 99-04. Recommendations may be made directly to 
CFSAN/Import Branch (HFS-606) and an info copy sent to DIOP, HFC-170. 
Follow the procedures in Chapter 9 of the Regulatory Procedures Manual* 
 
 
7. 
*Fraudulent Entries 
 
When fraud is suspected, it should immediately be brought to the 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART V 
PAGE 3 
 
FORM 2438 g (10/91) 
attention of the district compliance branch via supervisory channels.  
Appropriate evidence needs to be collected, including documents, product 
samples, and interviews of involved personnel.  OCI should be consulted 
early in the investigation. Regulatory actions that can be taken for 
fraudulent entries include refusal or may proceed after consultation 
with the district compliance branch, CFSAN and OCI.* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART VI 
PAGE 1 
 
FORM FDA 2438c (5/84)  
 
 
PART VI - ATTACHMENTS, REFERENCES, AND PROGRAM CONTACTS
 
 
ATTACHMENTS
 
Attachment A - Product Code List 
Attachment B - Heat Resistance Report Form 
Attachment C - Can Sizes 
 
PROGRAM CONTACTS
General Program Directions: 
*Robyn Jones, CFSAN/ Office of 
Compliance/ Division of Field 
Program/ Compliance Program 
Branch, HFS-636, (301) 436-2575, 
Fax (301) 436-2657, 
Robyn.Jones@FDA.HHS.GOV* 
 
Regulatory, compliance matters or 
interpretation of regulations/ what products 
are covered: 
*Angel Suarez, CFSAN/ Office of 
Compliance/ Division of 
Enforcement/ Import Branch, HFS-
606, (301) 436-2146, ASuarez@ 
FDA.HHS.GOV;  
 
LACF Registration Control Coordinator (Plant 
registration and filed scheduled processes):
CFSAN/ Office of Compliance/ 
Division of Field Programs/ 
Regulatory Food Processing and 
Technology Branch , HFS-618, 
(301) 436-2411, LACF@FDA.HHS.GOV 
 
Accounts for the Intranet LACF Web 
Application System can be obtained from 
http://intranet.cfsan.fda.gov/LACF/login.cfm
If there are any problems, contact: 
*Sharon Macuci, CFSAN/ Office of 
Management System, HFS-676, 
(301) 436-1865, 
SMacuci@FDA.HHS.GOV
 
Celines Roberts, CFSAN/ Office 
of Management System, HFS-676, 
(301) 436-1476, 
CRoberts@FDA.HHS.GOV* 
 
Questions regarding the preservation, 
processing or packaging of LACF/AF or 
analysis of foods in which pH, water 
activity, or salt content may be at least in 
part a means or preservation: 
 
 
Susan Brecher, CFSAN/Office of 
Compliance/ Division of Field 
Programs/ Low-Acid and Acidified 
Canned Foods Team,  HFS-617, 
(301) 436-1781, 
SBrecher@FDA.HHS.GOV  
Import Procedures, Joint BCBP Compliance 
Enforcement Actions and Coverage: 
ORO/ Division of Import 
Operations and Policy, HFC-170, 
(301) 443-6553 
Inspectional History: 
ORO/ Division of Field 
Investigations, HFC-130, (301) 
827-6691 
Confirmation of Preformed and/or Cultured C. 
botulinum toxin: 
*Richard C. Whiting, 
CFSAN/Office of Plant and Dairy 
Foods, HFS-301, (301) 436-1925, 
Rwhiting@FDA.HHS.GOV
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART VI 
PAGE 2 
 
FORM FDA 2438c (5/84)  
 
Confirmation of Staphylococcal enterotoxin: 
*Reginald Bennett, CFSAN/Office 
of Plant and Dairy Foods/ 
Division of Microbiological 
Studies/ Microbiological Methods 
Research Branch, HFS-516, (301) 
436-2009, Rbennett@FDA.HHS.GOV * 
 
Industry Education: 
CFSAN/Office of Constituent 
Operations/ International Policy 
in Industry Outreach Branch, 
HFS-585, (301) 436-1714 
 
Analytical Methods Inquiries: 
 
*Marsha Hayden, ORO/ Division of 
Field Science, HFC-140, (301) 
827-1039, MHayden@FDA.HHS.GOV* 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PART VII 
PAGE 1 
 
FORM FDA 2438c (5/84)  
 
 
PART VII - CENTER RESPONSIBILITIES
 
1. 
Center Analyses for Program Support
 
*Confirmation of preformed toxin samples and toxin production by culture 
isolates and Staphylococcal Enterotoxin, CFSAN, Office of Plant and 
Dairy Foods/ Division of Microbiological Studies/ Microbiological 
Methods Research Branch, HFS-516, R.C. Whiting, S. Sharma, and R.W. 
Bennett (SET).* 
 
2. 
Evaluation Requirements
 
The Office of Compliance has the responsibility to prepare periodic 
formal evaluations of this compliance program.  When completed and 
cleared, the evaluations will be available for Agency personnel on 
CFSAN’s OC Intranet site 
(http://intranet.cfsan.fda.gov/OC/pages/panda.htm).  Additionally, the 
evaluations should appear on CFSAN’s Internet website. 
 
3. 
Foreign Inspection Program
 
On receipt of information from the foreign inspection program (Division 
of Field Investigational, HFC-130), of noncompliant firms, the Center 
will modify the lists of registered firms with filed processes and/or 
submit a recommendation to DIOP to revise Import Alert #99-04 and 
reflect the findings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
ATTACHMENT A 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
PAGE 1 
 
FORM FDA 2438g (10/91) 
Import Acidified and Low-Acid Canned Foods Program 
 
 
PRODUCT CODE LIST 
 
The following product codes include both LACF and acidified products. These 
codes are not all inclusive for LACF and Acidified products. Additionally, 
some of the codes can be used for products which are either LACF or Acidified 
foods. 
 
PRODUCT DESCRIPTION
INDUSTRY 
CODE
PRODUCT 
CLASS
Bakery Products, dough, mixes and icings 
03 
A, T,  
U, Y 
Macaroni and noodle products 
04 
C 
Milk, Butter and Dried Milk Products 
09 
C, D, E, 
F, G, Y 
Cheese and Cheese Products 
12 
B, C, Y 
Ice Cream and Related Products  
13 
G 
Milk Substitutes and Imitation Milk Products 
14 
All 
Egg and egg products 
15 
All but A 
Fishery/ Seafood Products  
16 
All 
Meat, Meat Products and Poultry (include only 
game animals and birds, NOT APHIS inspected 
products) 
17 
All 
Vegetable Protein Products (Simulated meats) 
18 
All 
Fruits and Fruit Products (Limited to avocado, 
banana, black olives, exotic fruits, guava, 
melon, papaya and other low-acid fruits) 
20 – 22  
All 
Nuts and Edible Seeds 
23 
D, E,  
F, Y 
Vegetables and Vegetable Products (Exclude high 
acid tomatoes, sauerkraut, fermented salt 
stock pickles) 
24 - 25 
All 
Dressing and Condiments (e.g. chili, puree, 
chutney, pepper sauce, etc) 
27 
Y 
Soft Drinks and Water (Only banana, chocolate, 
coconut and other low-acid beverages) 
29 
A, Y 
Beverages Bases, Concentrates and Nectars (Only 
banana, coconut and other low-acid products) 
30 
B, G, K, 
P, Y 
Coffee and Tea (liquids only) 
31 
A, E, K, 
P 
Toppings, Non-fruit or Nut Origin 
33 
T, Y 
Chocolate and Cocoa Products 
34 
H, J, Y 
Gelatin, Rennet, Pudding Mixes and Pie fillings 
(Only low-acid products) 
35 
C, D, E, 
F 
Food sweeteners (syrups and molasses and 
imitation syrups, molasses and Honey) 
36 
B, D, Y 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
ATTACHMENT A 
 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
    PA GE 2 
 
FORM FDA 2438c (5/84)  
 
Multiple Food Dinners, Gravies, Sauces and 
Specialties 
37 
A, B, C, 
D, G, J, 
Y 
Soups 
38 
All 
Prepared Salad Products  
39 
All 
Baby (Infant and Junior) Food Products  
40 
All but X 
Dietary Conventional Foods and Meal Replacements 
41 
All 
. 
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
ATTACHMENT B 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:                                                                                         PAGE 1 
 
FORM FDA 2438g (10/91) 
HEAT RESISTANCE REPORTING FORM
 
 
 
 
DISTRICT 
 
 
SAMPLE NUMBER 
 
 
DATE SENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PRODUCT 
 
 
MANUFACTURER AND/OR DISTRIBUTOR 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SUBSAMPLE # 
 
   CODE 
 
 
CULTURE # 
 
 TYPE OF CULTURE 
 
 VERIFICATION 
 
 
D240
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
ATTACHMENT C 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:                                                    PAGE 1 
 
FORM FDA 2438g (10/91) 
CAN SIZES 
 
In the canning trade can sizes are commonly referred to by symbols and 
common names, e.g. 307 x 409 = No. 2 can.  The actual size is measured 
in whole inches and fractions of 1/16th inches in diameter and height. 
In the 307 x 409 example, the 3 = 3 inches & the 07 = 7/16th of an inch; 
the 4 = 4 inches & the 09 = 9/16th of an inch, the 307 x 409 can is 3 
7/16 inches in diameter & 4 7/16 inches in height. 
 
 
Can Number 
Inches 
Can Dimensions 
in Millimeters 
(Diameter x 
Height) 
Common Name 
202 x 202 
2 2/16 x 2 2/16 
54.0 x 54.0 
None 
202 x 204 
2 2/16 x 2 4/16 
54.0 x 57.2 
2oz Mushroom 
202 x 214 
2 2/16 x 2 14/16 
54.0 x 73.0 
5oz Baby food 
202 x 308 
2 2/16 x 3 8/16 
54.0 x 88.9 
6oz Jitney 
202 x 314 
2 2/16 x 3 14/16 
54.0 x 98.4 
6oz 
211 x 109 
2 11/16 x 1 9/16 
68.3 x 39.7 
¼ lb tuna 
211 x 200 
2 11/16 x 2 
68.3 x 50.8 
4oz Pimiento – 
211 Baby Food 
211 x 210 
2 11/16 x 2 10/16 
68.3 x 66.7 
6oz Junior Food 
211 x 212 
2 11/16 x 2 12/16 
68.3 x 69.9 
4oz Mushroom 
211 x 214 
2 11/16 x 2 14/16 
68.3 x 73.0 
None 
211 x 300 
2 11/16 x 3 
68.3 x 76.2 
8oz Short 
211 x 304 
2 11/16 x 3 4/16 
68.3 x 82.5 
8oz Tall 
211 x 400 
2 11/16 x 4 
68.3 x 101.6 
No.1 (Picnic) 
211 x 414 
2 11/16 x 4 14/16 
68.3 x 123.8 
No.211 Cylinder 
211 x 600 
2 11/16 x 6 
68.3 x 152.4 
Pint Olive 
300 x 109 
3 x 1 9/16 
76.2 x 39.7 
None 
300 x 206 
3 x 2 6/16 
76.3 x 60.3 
7oz Pimiento 
300 x 308 
3 x 3 8/16 
76.2 x 88.9 
None 
300 x 400 
3 x 4 
76.2 x 101.6 
8oz Mushroom 
300 x 407 
3 x 4 7/16 
76.2 x 112.7 
No. 300 
300 x 409 
3 x 4 9/16 
76.2 x 115.9 
None 
301 x 106 
3 1/16 x 1 6/16 
77.8 x 34.9 
¼lb Salmon  
301 x 208 
3 1/16 x 2 8/16 
77.8 x 63.5 
8oz Pimiento 
301 x 408 
3 1/16 x 4 8/16 
77.8 x 114.3 
No.1 Tall 
301 x 411 
3 1/16 x 4 11/16 
77.8 x 119 
No.1 Tall 
303 x 406 
3 3/16 x 4 6/16 
81.0 x 111.1 
No. 303 
303 x 509 
3 3/16 x 5 9/16 
81.0 x 141.3 
No. 303 Cylinder 
307 x 113 
3 7/16 x 1 13/16 
87.3 x 46.0 
1/2 lb Tuna 
307 x 200.25 
3 7/16 x 2 1/64 
87.3 x 51.2 
½ lb Salmon 
307 x 202 
3 7/16 x 2 2/16 
87.3 x 54.0 
None 
307 x 203 
3 7/16 x 2 3/16 
87.3 x 55.6 
No.1 Flat 
307 x 208 
3 7/16 x 2 8/16 
87.3 x 63.5 
None 
307 x 214 
3 7/16 x 2 14/16 
87.3 x 73.0 
Kitchenette 
307 x 306 
3 7/16 x 3 6/16 
87.3 x 85.7 
 No. 2 Vacuum 
307 x 400 
3 7/16 x 4 
87.3 x 101.6 
No.95 
307 x 409 
3 7/16 x 4 9/16 
87.3 x 115.9 
No. 2 
307 x 509 
3 7/16 x 5 9/16 
87.3 x 141.3  
None 
307 x 510 
3 7/16 x 5 10/16 
87.3 x 142.9 
Jumbo 
307 x 512 
3 7/16 x 5 12/16 
87.3 x 146.1 
No. 2 Cylinder 
307 x 704 
3 7/16 x 7 4/16 
87.3 x 184.2 
Quart Olive 
307 x 710 
3 7/16 x 7 10/16 
87.4 x 193.7 
32oz (Quart) 
 
 
 
 
PROGRAM 
7303.003 
ATTACHMENT C 
 
 
TRANSMITTAL NO:  
    PA GE 2 
 
FORM FDA 2438c (5/84)  
 
401 x 205.5 
4 1/16 x 2 11/32 
103.2 x 59.5 
No. 1 Tuna 
401 x 206 
4 1/16 X 2 6/16 
103.2 x 60.3 
No.1¼ (Veg.)  
401 x 207.5 
4 1/16 x 2 15/32 
103.2 x 62.7 
No.1¼ 
401 x 211 
4 1/16 x 2 11/16 
103.2 x 68.3 
No.1 Flat 
401 x 411 
4 1/16 x 4 11/16 
103.2 x 119.1 
No. 2½  
404 x 307  
4 4/16 x 3 7/16 
108.0 x 87.3 
No. 3 Vac. 
404 x 414 
4 4/16 x 4 14/16 
108.0 x 123.8 
No. 3 
404 x 700 
4 4/16 x 7 
108.0 x 177.8 
No. 3 Cyl (46oz) 
502 x 510 
5 2/16 x 5 10/16 
130.2 x 142.9 
No. 5 
603 x 405 
6 3/16 x 4 5/16 
157.2 x 109.5 
None 
603 x 408 
6 3/16 x 4 8/16 
157.2 x 114.3 
No. 5 Squat 
603 x 700 
6 3/16 x 7 
157.2 x 177.8 
No. 10 
603 x 812 
6 3/16 x 8 12/16 
157.2 x 222.3 
No. 12 (Gal.) 
 
