‘'‘‘Z Department of
Veterans Affairs
Journal of Rehabilitation Research
and Development Vol . 31 No. 1, 1994
Pages 42—49
Automated fabrication of mobility aids : Review of the AFMA
process and VA/Seattle ShapeMaker software design
David A . Boone, CP; J. S. Harlan, BSME; Ernest M. Burgess, MD
Prosthetics Research Study, Seattle, WA 98122
Abstract—Computer-aided design and manufacture of
prosthetic and orthotic devices has recently moved out of
the laboratory into clinical use . The Department of
Veterans Affairs Rehabilitation Research and Develop-
ment Service has directed coordinated evaluation and
development projects of this emerging technology under
the name: Automated Fabrication of Mobility Aids or
AFMA . One of the major results of the effort was the
creation of mobility aid design software (ShapeMakerTM)
concurrent with AFMA clinical testing of preexisting
systems and development efforts . In order to provide a
foundation for future discussions regarding AFMA, this
paper provides a descriptive review of the AFMA
processes and a review of the conceptual basis for the
ShapeMaker AFMA software development.
Key words : AFMA, computer-aided design, computer-
aided manufacturing, computer aided socket design,
orthotics, prosthetics.
INTRODUCTION
Computer software and computer controlled
machinery have been developed expressly to facili-
tate the design and fabrication of prostheses and
orthoses . Computer-Aided Design and Computer-
Aided Manufacturing (CAD/CAM) (1) are parts of
this new clinical development known as the Auto-
Address all correspondence and requests for reprints to : David A.
Boone, CP; Prosthetics Research Study; 720 Broadway; Seattle, WA
98122.
This work was supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs
Rehabilitation Research and Development Service, Washington, DC .
mated Fabrication of Mobility Aids, or AFMA . ,
The term AFMA was coined in January of 1987 by
Ernest M. Burgess, MD at a joint VA/NASA
research meeting convened at the Langley NASA
research center . AFMA has been our preferred term
for all related projects supported by the VA, since
CAD/CAM is closely associated with an engineering
context which does not reflect the breadth and
uniqueness of this clinical application . AFMA tech-
nology is intended to improve service to the disabled
in need of a mobility aid by increasing production
efficiency of the prosthetist/orthotist, thereby reduc-
ing the time and financial burdens of fabricating
custom prosthetic and orthotic devices . AFMA also
provides prosthetists and orthotists with a new tool
that has the benefit of numerical accuracy, consis-
tency, and reproducibility that are essential to
advancing the science of mobility aid design.
The first comprehensive effort to develop a
CAD/CAM prosthetic design system was begun by
Mr. Jim Foort, Director of the Medical Engineering
Resource Unit (MERU) of the University of British
Columbia . Foort is considered the progenitor of the
entire concept (2) . The MERU group, in collabora-
tion with the Bioengineering Centre of University
College London (UCL) in England demonstrated a
complete working AFMA system at the World
Congress of the International Society for Prosthetics
and Orthotics in London in 1983 . At the 1986 ISPO
World Congress in Copenhagen, the UCL group
demonstrated a newly developed Computer Aided
Socket Design (CASD) software and hardware sys-
' Prosthetics Research Study Report listed in the Rehabilitation R&D
Progress Reports-1987.
42
43
BOONE et at .
AFMA: Review of Process and Software Designs
tern that would be later tested in the VA Rehabilita-
tion Research and Development Service (Rehab
R&D) National AFMA Research Project (3) . De-
spite limitations, this generation of design software
showed promise in VA sponsored clinical trials (4)
(Figure 1).
In 1985, the US Veterans Administration (VA),
sponsored an international AFMA workshop which
brought together the leading AFMA researchers
from Canada, England, and the United States,
along with interested investigators working with the
VA Rehab R&D Service . Following the meeting, VA
Rehab R&D accelerated support for a wide range of
projects pertaining to AFMA. The centrally directed
research culminated in a national cooperative effort
among Prosthetics Research Study (PRS) in Seattle,
the Prosthetics Research Laboratory of Northwest-
ern University in Chicago, and Rehabilitation Engi-
neering Research Program of the New York VA
Medical Center, (NYVAMC) . One primary objective
of the National AFMA Research Program was
clinical use and evaluation of the UCL CASD, and,
to a limited degree, the MERU CANFIT systems.
This testing program resulted in the development of
a stand-alone prosthetic cast digitizer and design
software dubbed ShapeMaker (5).
This is the brief lineage of VA AFMA software
and hardware development and is not intended to be
a complete historical review of the field . Rather, we
present a discussion of the conceptual and practical
considerations that are the foundation upon which
AFMA and the VA/ShapeMaker software is based .
METHODS
It will be helpful to the reader to review the
AFMA process using the example of prosthetics as a
basis for later discussion of AFMA software design.
The basic principles may be extended to the design
and fabrication of a wide range of mobility aids
such as custom seating and foot orthotics.
In the design stage of the AFMA process there
are three main tasks : input of the anatomical form,
design of the prosthesis, and output of the finished
design to a fabrication system (Figure 2).
First, the residual limb geometry is entered into
the computer so that an accurate graphical represen-
tation of the limb is displayed on the computer
screen. This process is called digitizing . Typically,
digitizing begins by taking a plaster negative cast of
the residual limb using standard plaster casting
bandage (Figure 3) . The cast of the limb is then
placed in a device (digitizer) that digitally measures a
series of horizontal profiles on the inner surface of
the cast as well as anatomical landmarks labeled by
the prosthetist (Figure 4) . A computer in communi-
cation with the digitizer translates the numerical
measurements into a three-dimensional representa-
tion of the limb. Other technologies for digitizing
the limb shape directly are available, but to date the
method of digitizing casts has been incorporated
into AFMA because of lower cost and applicability
to digitizing many levels of lower and upper extrem-
ity residual limbs.
After digitizing, the second step in the process
is to sculpt the residual limb geometry seen on the
Figure 1.
Schematic screen representation of prosthetic socket design
parameters in UCL CASD software .
Figure 2.
Diagram of the three primary steps in the AFMA process .
44
Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development Vol . 31 No. 1 1994
Figure 3.
Plaster wrap cast being made of a below-knee residual limb.
Figure 4.
Plaster wrap cast in electromechanical digitizer designed by
PRS.
computer screen into an acceptable prosthetic
socket. Modifications to the digitized limb shape are
necessary to design a socket capable of comfortably
supporting the amputee . Following traditional prac-
tice, specific alterations to contours and volumes of
the digitized limb are made to create a comfortable
socket by supporting the body with compressing
forces in areas of the residual limb which can
tolerate this stress and relief over those areas which
are stress intolerant (Figure 5). In both cases, the
shape modification is in the form of a smooth
deformation contour, either a depression or a relief.
This should not suggest that we believe that the
deformations based on traditional clinical practice
create ideal tissue loading characteristics. Lacking
knowledge concerning optimal tissue loading pat-
terns, the software mimics current practice as a
matter of expediency. Using AFMA systems to
control for design variables may be an important
tool for further research in optimizing stress distri-
butions in mobility aid design.
The third computer-based task is to translate
the completed socket design shown on the computer
screen into a "real object," in this case the
prosthetic socket. This manufacturing process is
accomplished through computer-controlled carving
of a solid model of the socket design shown on the
computer screen (Figure 6). Once this model is
complete, a thermoplastic prosthetic socket is
formed over the positive using a standard vacuum
forming process (Figure 7) . After the plastic has
cooled, the solid model is removed leaving the
negative plastic impression for the socket . The
formed plastic socket is attached to the rest of the
modular endoskeletal structure of the prosthesis
(Figure 8). The amputee dons the prosthesis and
with the addition of a suspension aid is ready for
ambulation.
Figure 5.
Modifications to contour to provide supporting or relieving
forces within a prosthetic socket are coded as colors on the
computer screen .
45
BOONE et at .
AFMA: Review of Process and Software Designs
Figure 6.
A three-dimensional model being carved from a plaster and corn
starch mixture that duplicates the form on the computer screen.
Figure 7.
Thermoplastic socket being formed over the carved model in an
automated process oven.
The clinician uses AFMA software such as
ShapeMaker to accomplish all three of the tasks
mentioned above : digitizing the residual limb shape,
rapid design of a custom mobility aid based on
clinical assessment and judgment, and, finally,
computer-controlled fabrication .
Figure 8.
The modular DVA/Seattle Limb System with AFMA socket.
DISCUSSION
The VA National AFMA Research Program
resulted in the validation of the AFMA methods and
identification of areas needing further research and
development (4,5). For example, Houston, et al . has
shown that the method of using standard patterns of
modifications superimposed on an individual digi-
tized residual limb form coupled with prosthetist
manipulation of the shape using only the computer
was more effective in creating prosthetic sockets
that, in the amputee subjects' estimation were,
"better fitting" and "more comfortable" than
manually manipulated socket designs (5) . These
standardized modifications within the UCL-CASD
system being tested were called rectification pat-
terns. They contained regions in which the contour
of a limb shape digitized in a cylindrical coordinate
system were deformed inward or outward by mathe-
matical addition or subtraction of radius values at
coordinates and in amounts predetermined in the
definition of the rectification pattern. These altered
regions corresponded to areas where the prosthetist
traditionally modifies the plaster positive model of
the socket using manual sculpting tools and wet
plaster. However, while the magnitude of modifica-
tion over each region could be changed in the CASD
46
Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development Vol . 31 No . 1 1994
system, position, orientation, and contour of the
region could not be changed by the user . Addition-
ally, the definition of new rectification patterns was
difficult with this system (6). Based on this and
other observations of the National AFMA Research
Program, a "wish-list" pertaining to software was
created, thus providing the basis for the AFMA
software development project initiated by Prosthet-
ics Research Study in March of 1989 . 2 Some of the
many software requirements outlined were: 1) the
software should run on a standard computer plat-
form without requiring additional hardware or
software; 2) the application should be designed to be
capable of creating most mobility aid forms; 3) the
software should be as unobtrusive as possible in
achieving clinical results ; 4) the prosthetist/orthotist
should be able to modify the surface as a realistic
three-dimensional projection rather than as a cross-
sectional or schematic representation ; 5) the user
should have non-modal access to surface manipula-
tion tools with varying degrees of fineness ; and, 6)
the software should have an easy method for
automating replication of the technique of an
individual user. Software intended to meet these
objectives has been completed by PRS and is
currently in clinical use under the name of
ShapeMaker . Following is a discussion of the
AFMA software design considerations which forged
ShapeMaker into its present form.
User Interface
One of the most important goals in developing
ShapeMaker was to limit the amount of new
learning that was required of the clinician . It was
our intent that aside from the mechanics of interact-
ing with the computer using a mouse cursor control-
ler, the prosthetist should not have to become a
computer expert to utilize the computer for pros-
thetics . This is what is commonly called "user-
friendly ." Our basic premise with regard to user
interface considerations was that the patient's
prosthetist/orthotist already knew what to do clini-
cally for him or her and that the software should aid
rather than interfere with that process.
The goal of developing easy to use software
also governed the choice of a computing platform.
Our investigation considered the options of using a
high-end UNIX-based graphics workstation, a DOS-
based PC, and the Macintosh II series. The
Macintosh II was selected for its wide availability,
consistent and "user-friendly" interface, and excel-
lent graphics performance without additional hard-
ware or software. The choice of the Macintosh 3 in
turn had a profound effect on the design of the
software by providing a consistent user-interface (7).
Input and Output
The first and third tasks of the AFMA process
described above pertain to the input of the limb
shape into the computer and output of the modified
shape for fabrication . ShapeMaker has been pro-
grammed to be "machine and resolution indepen-
dent" and is able to communicate with most
commercially available digitizing and carving devices
through serial and parallel interfaces . In addition,
ShapeMaker can also communicate with equipment
located at a remote site via modem connection over
telephone lines . To extend the utility of the soft-
ware, newly developed digitizing and carving hard-
ware is similarly interfaced directly to the
ShapeMaker program through the addition of ma-
chine specific modular software drivers . The task of
mobility aid design accounts for most of the
programming that comprise ShapeMaker, and the
rest of this discussion is devoted to this task of the
process.
Generic Modification
One goal in AFMA software design has been to
create a software paradigm in which clinicians relate
to the graphical representation of prosthetic and
orthotic shapes in the same way they relate to the
hand-sculpted solid plaster models where material is
either removed or built up, using tools to modify the
original limb shape . This is one way in which to ease
the transfer of clinical skills from the traditional
fabrication system to a computer-based one.
ShapeMaker acts as a generic tool chest allow-
ing the user to sculpt general three-dimensional
anatomical forms. Since it is not simply an above-
knee prosthetics program or an orthopedic shoe
program, ShapeMaker helps to fulfill the concept
that AFMA technology is applicable to nearly all
mobility aids . As such, our laboratory has used the
program for most levels of prosthetic sockets as well
3 A version of ShapeMaker has also been developed using the
2 Report listed in the Rehabilitation R&D Progress Reports-1989.
Macintosh-like Windows TM graphical user interface .
47
BOONE et at,
AFMA: Review of Process and Software Designs
as the design of prosthetic cosmesis, knee braces,
body jackets, wheelchair seating, shoe insoles, shoe
lasts, and maxillofacial modeling. ShapeMaker is
appropriate for all of these different applications
because each process requires the basic task of
three-dimensional shape deformation for which the
software was designed . Also, because the same
software can be used for all of these different
applications, the user interface is the same for each.
Levels of Control
Automated creation of mobility aids for
broadly defined patient populations was necessary
to achieve the goals of efficiency and consistency
afforded through automation . However, in practice
there is variation between individual patient anat-
omy that we feel is most efficiently accommodated
through the exercise of clinical judgment and skill to
individualize a patient's custom mobility aid design.
And so, a dilemma of control versus efficiency arose
in the design of ShapeMaker . The program is
designed to allow the user to very quickly apply
broad modifications to the mobility aid design;
however, the user also needs to have tools available
for very fine, detailed manipulation of the shape.
With global controls, clinicians might feel too
restricted at times, while in other cases they might
find detailed controls too time-consuming or cum-
bersome for general use . This defines a trade-off
between flexibility and structure . In order to satisfy
such divergent design requirements, ShapeMaker
was developed around the concept of making differ-
ent "levels of control" available to the clinician at
all times.
ShapeMaker provides three distinct levels of
control which could be labeled Automation, Modifi-
cation, and Creation. Each successive level of
control requires more interaction with the software
tool, yet yields finer control over the finished
product. A good analogy would be different grades
of sandpaper . Rougher grades are used for shaping,
while finer grades are used for finishing details.
ShapeMaker utilizes a non-modal design which
allows the user to use functions from any level of
control at any time.
The most general controls generally involve
creating predefined modifications very quickly, what
we term automation. The user does not need to
think about fine details, but rather about the "big
picture." Automation completes a large part of the
work toward a finished result with only a very small
effort on the part of the user, such as complete
socket modification at the selection of a single
computer command. For example, the rectification
patterns in the UCL CASD software and the
analogous Template commands in ShapeMaker pro-
vide this broad level of control . The result of a
command at the Automation level of control may
encompass many different actions that could also be
accomplished individually using finer levels of con-
trol, but that at this level are completed automati-
cally. The complex quantitative modification can be
described qualitatively in just a few words, "Create
a PTB socket for this particular Trans-Tibial limb
shape" (Figure 9) . Because of individual variation
among patients, we anticipate that only a small
percentage of mobility aids will be finished using
only the Automation level of control. The software
may also be programmed to take individual patient
characteristics into account at this level to achieve a
degree of automated customization . For example,
ShapeMaker automatically interprets the angular
orientation of the long bones relative to the surface
topology in order to orient modifications more
accurately.
At a finer level of control, the user can take
more direct control of the finished product by
modifying the results created using the Automation
tools. For instance, after applying a socket design
template for a below-knee prosthesis, the user might
Figure 9.
The Automation level of control is used to produce all the
changes between the two shapes shown using the single software
command: Apply Template .
48
Journal of Rehabilitation Research and Development Vol . 31 No. 1 1994
wish to increase the depth of the patellar tendon
modification or to change the volume, smoothness,
or length of the prosthetic socket . Again, the
modification can be readily and accurately described
in a few words, as in : "Give 2 mm more relief over
the head of the fibula" (Figure 10) . Surface alter-
ations of this type are generally quantitative or
spatial orientation adjustments to modifications
made using Automation tools . This level of control
will achieve further gains toward the desired end
product with only a small increase in the effort
required by the user . As demonstrated in an evalua-
tion of the UCL CASD system, many prosthetic
socket modifications can be finished using the
second level of control (4).
A third level of control gives the user more
complete creative control over the finished product.
New modifications of the surface may be freely
created using dozens of specialized commands in
ShapeMaker. The user may manipulate the shape
with detailed control limited only by the resolution
of the surface data, which in itself may be manipu-
lated in software by resampling the surface at a
different coordinate resolution. The most important
and powerful command at this level of control is
creation of templates that would easily and com-
pletely replicate a clinician's own modification tech-
nique in a way similar to the UCL CASD rectifica-
tion patterns . One of the principle shortcomings of
previous software developments was that each pro-
gram included only a small number of automated
socket design techniques from which to choose.
Figure 10.
A ShapeMaker modification region highlighted on the three-di-
mensional socket model .
Every time the prosthetist designed a socket on the
computer, the program would modify the socket
according to one of the limited techniques . Unfortu-
nately, this scheme forced the prosthetist to adapt to
a foreign technique that might be subtly or even
radically different from his own design style . To
solve this problem, software that would learn from
the clinician's own technique was required . Because
different clinical situations require different tech-
niques, the prosthetist or orthotist is able to create a
library of personally created techniques, or Tem-
plates, appropriate for each particular situation.
These templates then provide the basis for the
Automation level of control.
Early experiences with software for mobility aid
design often encountered vocal opposition from
practitioners who exclaimed, "No computer is ever
going to make a socket as good as one made by a
skilled hand!" Given the conceptualization of the
software tool as an extension of clinical decision-
making, this sentiment was misplaced because the
computer is not creating the socket. One may use
the analogy of the software as a tool and the
computer as a workbench that the clinician uses to
create a mobility aid. With all of its levels of
control, ShapeMaker allows the clinician to auto-
matically apply his/her own techniques to the design
of the mobility aid and then gives the clinician the
responsibility and capability of fine-tuning the
socket shape to suit the individual patient. And
finally, using the creative level of control, the users,
can take as much time as they are willing to spend to
create an optimal design and then store the design as
a template for future use. The time required at this
level is generally longer than use of simpler levels of
control, and creation of surface modifications gen-
erally requires more time than using tools at more
generally levels. But as in the Modification level of
control, the emphasis is still the translation of a
clinical skill to the computer tool, and not the
learning of an entirely new skill.
CONCLUSIONS
From the outset, AFMA software development
has occurred in order to provide clinicians and
researchers with control over the variables inherent
in mobility aid design . Design software necessarily
interacts with a user, and as it is used and the user
49
BOONE et al .
AFMA: Review of Process and Software Designs
gains competency and insight in use of the software
tools, the relationship of user to how software is
used changes. We conclude that the CASD and
CANFIT software which prompted development of
the VA/ShapeMaker software were too limiting to
the experienced clinician and did not adequately
account for the creative aspects of individualizing
mobility aid design . Because of this, AFMA soft-
ware should be constructed within a paradigm of the
multiple levels of control which accounts for auto-
mation as well as fine artistic manipulation.
Computer-aided design and fabrication, as it is
described in this paper, is probably only a beginning
for the use of computers in prosthetics and
orthotics. This goal has been achieved to some
degree, but software development rarely has a
distinct end-point. Current and future developments
promise to assist clinicians with tasks other than
design, such as static and dynamic alignment,
integrated digital video, and tissue stress analysis.
Clinician access to user-friendly computer-based
tools will give more information and control to the
rehabilitation team and will benefit the many people
who require mobility aids.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank all of the members of the
VA National AFMA Research Group in Seattle, Chicago,
and New York for their input and encouragement during
the development of DVA/Seattle ShapeMaker . We are
also indebted to the amputee research subjects and the
prosthetists across the nation who through their participa-
tion ensured that software development was always based
in the reality of clinical necessity.
REFERENCES
Klasson B. Computer aided design, computer aided
manufacture and other computer aids in prosthetics and
orthotics. Prosthet Orthot Int 1985:9:3-11.
2.
Foort J. The Knud Jansen Lecture: Innovation in pros-
thetics and orthotics. Pros Orthot Int 1986:10:61-71.
3.
Dewar M, Jarman P, Reynolds D, Jones K . Clinical trial
of the UCL computer aided socket design system.
Bioengineering Centre Report 1986, University College
London, 1986 :13-16.
4.
Boone D, Burgess E . Automated fabrication of mobility
aids: clinical demonstration of the UCL computer aided
socket design system . J Prosthet Orthot 1989 :1(3):187-90.
5.
Houston, V, Burgess, E, Childress D et al . National
program for the automated fabrication of mobility aids
(AFMA) : below-knee CASD/CAD testing and evaluation
program results . J Rehabil Res Dev 1992:29(4) :78-124.
6.
Dewar M, Reynolds D . Development of The UCL
computer aided socket design system . Bioengineering
Centre Report 1986, University College London, 1986 :11-
12.
7.
Human interface guidelines: the Apple desktop inter-
face. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley Publishing Co . Inc.,
1986 .
