8:30 a.m. - 9:00 a.m. Welcome & Opening Remarks
Rose A. McMurray, Associate Administrator
Traffic Safety Programs
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
Good morning.
On behalf of Secretary of Transportation Slater, welcome to Washington, D.C. and the Transportation
Research Board Annual Meeting's Speed Management Workshop.
All of us at the US Department of Transportation, especially those of us with the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration and the Federal Highway Administration, are proud to be partners in
convening this diverse group of experts who share an interest in traffic safety, and a specific interest in
speed management.
This workshop is an important step forward in finding new solutions to reduce the number of speed
related crashes, and obtaining voluntary motorist compliance of speed laws and other traffic laws.
Dedicating a day workshop to speed management is long overdue. It is an issue that affects every
highway user, every day. This issue could easily consume several days of the TRB Annual Meeting.
Nevertheless, this workshop is important because we know that sensible, realistically set speed limits
which are firmly, and fairly enforced will lead to:
a reduction in vehicle crashes,
G   
fewer injuries and fatalities,
G   
reduced economic losses,
G   
reduced need to enforce,
G   
restoring credibility and public confidence, and
G   
an increase in voluntary compliance.
G   
Today's workshop brings a new approach to speed management--a holistic-systems approach--bringing
to the table various management, research and operational levels from each discipline concerned with
traffic safety.
During the workshop, we will discuss:
the methodologies used for setting realistic speed limits;
G   
the public's perception and acceptance of speed limits and enforcement efforts;
G   
existing and new--advanced--speed setting and enforcement technologies;
G   
engineering issues;
G   
judicial considerations; and,
G   
lessons learned through both domestic and foreign experiences in speed management.
G   
Today's workshop is about developing a partnership with experts from all these groups, both public and
private, to discuss the issues and identify actions that you can take back to your communities and apply
8:30 a
as you determine necessary to accomplish your specific goals and to meet your specific needs in reducing
traffic crashes and the resulting death and injury.
 
This will be a hard working day. You the participants will do the work and the product of this workshop
will be accomplished solely through your efforts.
 
The messages today from the speakers are not instructions or recommendations, but are intended to
provoke and stimulate you to think about the issues in a new way.
Isn't it strange that here we are today, the beginning of a new century, discussing speed issues?
Especially since speed limits are one of the oldest strategies for controlling driver behaviors.
 
In fact, speed limits outdate the automobile.
 
Many early cities had laws that prohibited riding a horse faster that a "trot" on city streets. Much like
today's speed laws, I am sure they were considered unrealistic and unfair, and were almost impossible to
enforce.
 
Recall the scenes from the ol' westerns of the cowhands coming into town Saturday night, riding their
horses at full speed, six-guns a blazing. Doesn't really look much different from today except that now its
cars, not horses.
Recall the marshals in those movies? Were their efforts to bring "traffic" safety to the streets of the old
west really appreciated?
 
Imagine how history would have been changed if Paul Revere had been stopped for violating
Massachusetts's "trot" law!
Connecticut was the first state to impose the first maximum speed limit for automobiles of 8 mph within
cities in 1901.
Since then, with the exception of 21 years of a federally mandated maximum speed limit, the primary
responsibility for setting speed limits has remained with state and local governments. This is where the
responsibility belongs.
 
In 1995, with the repeal of the National Maximum Speed Limit, state and local officials asked the federal
government for guidance in speed setting criteria. In response to these requests, a study--jointly funded
by NHTSA, FHWA and the Centers for Disease Control--was conducted by the National Academy of
8:30 a
Sciences.
 
In 1998, the Transportation Research Board (TRB) Committee for Guidance on Setting and Enforcing
Speed Limits, a 17-member panel of multi disciplinary experts, published a review of existing criteria
and summary of new criteria to be considered when establishing and enforcing speed limits in the United
States.
 
The TRB Special Report # 254, shown here, (Managing Speed: Review of Current Practice for Setting
and Enforcing Speed Limits) identifies and discusses the most effective methods and practices used to set
speed limits.
So that we all start this workshop with the same frame of reference, let me talk briefly about what the
report says.
The current framework for setting speed limits was developed in the 1920s and 1930s.
Each state has a basic speed law that requires drivers to operate their vehicles at a speed which is
"reasonable and prudent for the existing conditions." While these laws are very vague, they
provide a lot of enforcement flexibility.
G   
Speed limits are legislated by road class and geographic area.
They generally apply to all roads of a particular class throughout the jurisdiction. Most states and
local governments have the authority to set speed limits to fit specific road or traffic conditions. As
an example, in most states, secondary two lane rural roads are posted at 55 miles per hour
regardless of the surrounding environment or the volume of traffic.
G   
Speed limits are generally set based on judgments about appropriate tradeoffs among public
safety, community concerns and travel efficiency.
These speed limits are for ideal conditions, where you have good weather, free-flowing traffic and
good visibility, and drivers are expected to slow down, often operating under the posted speed,
when the conditions deteriorate.
G   
These methods of setting speed limits assume that all drivers are capable of deciding the speed at which
they can safely travel. So, if we assume that drivers are capable of making reasonable decisions about
safe driving speeds, why are speed limits even necessary?
 
Anyone who drives the overly congested Interstate 95 south between Washington and Richmond, VA, or
north to Baltimore, MD, can tell you why. Despite extraordinary congestion and extremely hazardous
conditions, I've seen drivers out there at speeds out that would make Richard Petty envious.
The primary reason for setting speed limits is to regulate those drivers who do not use, or will not use,
good judgement, those drivers who do not make good decisions about safe speeds and consequently pose
a significant risk to other drivers.
 
Drivers like these, with a high tolerance for risk, may decide to drive fast, accepting implicitly, a higher
8:30 a
probability of a crash without consideration of injury or death, in exchange for a shorter trip time. This
type of driver does not seem to take into consideration the risk he or she is posing on other highway
users, including pedestrians and cyclists.
 
Every vehicle crash causes medical and property damage costs on society that are not fully, and often
never, reimbursed by the driver.
 
Another reason for regulating speed comes from the inability of many drivers to judge the capabilities of
their vehicles correctly and to anticipate roadway geometry and roadside conditions well enough to
determine appropriate driving speeds.
 
This reason may not be as relevant for experienced drivers under familiar circumstances.
However, inexperienced drivers or experienced drivers operating in unfamiliar surroundings may
underestimate risk and make a bad speed decision. Even a driver familiar with a particular road can make
a bad decision because of impairment, fatigue or other factors, as an example, they are shift workers
driving to and from work each day, parents driving children to school or other routine driving activities.
 
Finally, a major reason for regulating speed is the tendency of some drivers to underestimate, or
misjudge, the effect their vehicle's speed has on crash probability and injury severity. We see this
particularly in young and inexperienced drivers who may never have been involved in a motor vehicle
crash and consequently, cannot relate to the trauma these crashes may cause themselves and other
drivers.
 
But if we are going to realistically manage speed, then we must consider the elements involved. As we
do our work today, we must consider how speed affects each of these elements and discuss how they
impact traffic safety.
The roadway--its characteristics, its design and safety features. We also must consider how
weather impacts the roadway during rain, snow and icy conditions. Within the US DOT, this
element is primarily the responsibility of the FHWA.
G   
The vehicle–performance and safety standards and crash worthiness of the vehicle. This includes
safety features such as seat belts and air bags. Within the US DOT, this element is primarily the
responsibility of NHTSA.
G   
Both of these, the roadway and the vehicle, are relatively easy to regulate and manage.
Lastly, but the most important element, is the driver. This one element of the driving system is
responsible for the largest percentage of crashes and is the hardest element to manage and the hardest
element to change. This element, the driver, is every ones' responsibility.
8:30 a
Therefore, driver behavior is crucial to any speed management program. Without public attitudes that
restore credibility for speed limits and personal behaviors to comply with those limits, a speed
management program cannot be successful.
 
Without these two critical factors, public credibility and personal compliance, we will continue to
struggle in our efforts for reducing speed related driving behaviors and speed related crashes.
At the US Department of Transportation, we formed a Speed Management Team to address the issue of
speed as it relates to each of these elements and how it impacts traffic safety.
 
The Speed Management Team, a multi modal team consisting of members from NHTSA, FHWA and
other Department of Transportation agencies, meets regularly to carry out DOT's commitment to speed
management.
Since I've mentioned the US Department of Transportation's Speed Management Team, this would be an
excellent opportunity to recognize and publicly thank those individuals responsible for organizing this
workshop.
First, I want to thank the workshop organizers:
Suzanne Stack a Highway Safety Specialist with the Federal Highway Administration Office of
Highway Safety Infrastructure and a Co-Leader for the US DOT Speed Management Team;
G   
Dr. Donna Nelson, Director of the Maryland Transportation Technology Transfer Center at the
University of Maryland and the Safety and Enforcement Team Leader for the ITS America
Benefits, Evaluation, and Cost Committee;
G   
and lastly, Earl Hardy of my staff. Earl is a Highway Safety Specialist with the Traffic Law
Enforcement Division and the NHTSA Co-Leader for the US DOT Speed Management Team.
G   
In addition to the workshop organizers, I want to extend my appreciation to the members of the Agenda
Setting Committee for their outstanding work in establishing today's agenda. This Committee worked
with the organizers in determining the topic areas for today's presentations and in selecting today's
speakers.
Unfortunately, not all of the Agenda Setting Committee members could be here today, however, I would
like for those present to stand and be recognized as I call your name.
 
Agenda Setting Committee
K. Craig Allred, Director, Highway Safety Office, Utah Department of Public Safety.
Judge Peter M. Evans, County Court Judge, Palm Beach, Florida.
Judge Karl Grube, County Court Judge, St. Petersburg, Florida, and, currently serving as the NHTSA
Judicial Fellow.
8:30 a
Earl Hardy
Thomas Hicks, Director, Office of Traffic and Safety, Maryland State Highway Administration
Garrett Morford, Special Assistant to the Associate Administrator, Office of Traffic Safety Programs,
NHTSA.
Dr. Donna C. Nelson
Charles "Chuck" Peltier, Division Chief, Traffic Law Enforcement Division, NHTSA.
Suzanne J. Stack
Roy Sumner, Senior Vice President, PB Farradyne.
Dr. William C. Taylor, Professor, College of Engineering, Michigan State University.
Colonel W. R. Whittington, Louisiana State Police, Louisiana Department of Public Safety.
These individuals are dedicated traffic safety advocates and have worked hard to ensure that today's
workshop will be a success.
 
Finally, I would like to recognize other members of the US DOT Staff and Speed Management Team
present and here to support this workshop:
Richard Compton, Jim Onder, Joe Ann O'Hara, Sandy Richardson, Barbara Rhea, and Elza Chapa
with NHTSA;
G   
Larry Brown and Jim McCauley with the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration; and,
G   
Joe Peters and Amy Polk with FHWA.
G   
Back to the issue.
 
Speeding--exceeding the posted speed limit or driving too fast for conditions--is one of the most
prevalent factors contributing to traffic crashes in the United States.
In 1998, speeding was a contributing factor in 30 percent of all fatal crashes. Over 12,000 people were
killed and 600,000 were injured in speeding-related crashes. In addition, the economic cost to society in
terms of medical expenses and lost-work time of speeding-related crashes was estimated to be $27.7
billion.
 
Some may argue that the number traffic deaths are declining despite the end of the National Maximum
Speed Limit.
However, we must also remember that during this same period of time, we have seen a significant
improvement in vehicle integrity and an increase in seat belt usage making crashes more survivable.
But speed related death and injury has remained a consistent problem during this same period. Those of
8:30 a
us in the transportation industry must continue to devote our efforts to find new solutions and new ways
to provide a safe traffic system.
 
While the principle objective of speed limits is to improve safety, we know that simply posting a speed
limit does not guarantee the desired behavior or an improvement in crash statistics.
Managing speeds through speed limits requires a system of speed laws and a process for establishing
reasonable speed limits, as well as active and effective enforcement efforts, meaningful sanctions, and
public information and education--ideally all working together.
 
Again, why is today's workshop important? It is important because the information you gain by
participating in this workshop can guide you in developing, or improving, your communities' speed
management program.
Let me close with a reminder of why today's work is so critical:
restoring credibility and public confidence
G   
increasing voluntary compliance
G   
reducing the need for enforcement
G   
reducing economic losses
G   
reducing vehicle crashes
G   
and SAVING LIVES
G   
This workshop is about what you give each other. We know that we will not solve this problem today--in
one eight-hour workshop--but we hope that this workshop starts a movement toward improving speed
management. A movement in this new millennium that seeks new partnerships and establishes new
programs that leads to a restoration of credibility, not only to speed laws and regulations, but for all
traffic laws.
 
Thank you.
 
8:30 a
