A Guide on 
Hazardous Waste Management 
for Florida’s
Pharmacies
Step 1
Hazardous Waste (RCRA) 
Compliance Assistance Program
With Support from:
David Struhs, FDEP Secretary
Kirby Green, FDEP Deputy Secretary
John Rudell, FDEP Waste Division Director
Bill Hinkley, FDEP Bureau Chief, Solid and
Hazardous Waste Section
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Region IV
Prepared by:
Florida Department of Environmental
Protection Hazardous Waste
Compliance Assistance Program
Satish Kastury, Administrator
Janet Ashwood, Compliance Assistance
Project Manager
Mike Redig, Tallahassee
Glen Perrigan, Tallahassee
John Fusco, Northwest District
Pamela Green, Northeast District
Richard Sykes, Northeast District
Luis Campos, Northeast District
John White, Central District
Lu Burson, Central District
Beth Knauss, Southwest District
Jeff Smith, Southeast District
Charles Emery, South District
Karen Bayly, South District
and
John Schert, Executive Director
Maria Hall, Project Coordinator
Stephen Bissonnette, Research Assistant
GBS Production Graphics, Layout and Design
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Bill Kappler, Florida Department of
Environmental Protection-Central District
Thank you for the assistance and expertise 
you provided toward the preparation of this
brochure.  Your materials were extremely
valuable and helped to produce an “easy to
read” guidance brochure.
Florida Pharmacy Association and Capital
Returns, Inc.
We would like to express our gratitude for your
assistance and enthusiasm in the preparation
of this brochure.  We greatly appreciate the 
use of your materials as a guideline for the
production of this brochure and for letting us
use your best management practices within 
this publication. 
Other RCRApublications produced by the
Center for the Florida Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) include:
Guides on Hazardous Waste Management 
for Florida’s 
Agricultural Pesticide Users
Automotive Repair Shops
Dry Cleaners
Fiber-Reinforced Plastic Manufacturers
Furniture Finishers
Laboratories
Paint and Body Shops
Photo Shops
Printed Wiring Board Manufacturers
Printers
Managing Mercury:Best Management 
Practices for Florida’s Medical Facilities
These publications are available from your
County Environmental Protection Department,
the DEP, or the Center.  These publications can
also be downloaded from the Center’s web site.
Visit the Center’s web site at
http://www.floridacenter.org
This document was printed at a cost of $0.47 per copy on
recycled paper. November 1999.
This document was published to assist businesses with hazardous waste management issues and regulatory
compliance.  The suggested best management practices (BMPs) may help businesses to operate in an environ-
mentally appropriate manner.  Some of the BMPs may go beyond what is required to remain in compliance with
regulations.  This information is offered only as guidance.  Specific requirements may vary with individual processes
and/or businesses.  Business owners are responsible for obtaining complete information about applicable regula-
tions.  The Florida Department of Environmental Protection and Florida Center for Solid and Hazardous Waste
Management are not authorized to relieve any person from any requirement of federal regulations or Florida law.
Florida Center for Solid and Hazardous
Waste Management
1
WHY SHOULD I CARE ABOUT HAZARDOUS WASTES?
Some of the materials produced in everyday pharmacy operations may 
be harmful to people or the environment.
This booklet suggests a five-step management plan with tips 
on how to:
Comply with federal and state hazardous waste regulations.
Avoid penalties by properly managing pharmaceuticals.
Save money on disposal costs by reducing pharmaceutical wastes.
Health and the Environment
Hazardous pharmaceutical wastes disposed of improperly may
contaminate soil or seep into the groundwater and contaminate 
drinking water supplies.
Hazardous pharmaceutical wastes disposed of improperly may run 
off into the nearest body of water where they may poison or kill fish 
and other wildlife.
Hazardous pharmaceutical wastes pose a health risk to you, 
your employees and your community.
Cost Savings
State and county environmental compliance 
inspectors may visit your pharmacy to ensure 
that pharmaceutical wastes are being managed
properly.  State penalties may involve fines from 
$100 to $25,000 per violation per day.
Implementing an effective pharmaceutical waste
control plan can reduce production and disposal costs
and reduce your liability risk.
Public Image
Your customers will appreciate your efforts to prevent pollution.  
Your community will recognize your pharmacy as a good neighbor.
2
WHAT STEPS SHOULD I FOLLOW TO MANAGE MY 
PHARMACEUTICAL WASTES? 
Some of the following practices may not be required for your pharmacy to
remain in compliance with regulations.  Even if they are not required, they
are good waste management practices.  Additional information is available
from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP).
ESTABLISH A PHARMACY 
MANAGEMENT PLAN 
General Pharmaceutical
Management
Conduct random expired phar-
maceutical audits and remove
outdated products from inventory.
Be sure to inspect all medication
storage areas for outdated
products.
Remember that pharmaceuticals
include the samples provided by
pharmaceutical representatives or your suppliers.
Designate a clearly marked outdated pharmaceutical quarantine 
area to accumulate outdated pharmaceuticals or pharmaceutical
products that cannot be sold.
All pharmaceuticals discarded by the facility must be reviewed for
hazardous waste status and a determination must be made as to
whether or not the discarded pharmaceuticals are hazardous waste. 
Never discharge hazardous waste to a drain that is connected 
to a publicly owned treatment works facility (POTW) without written 
permission from the POTW. 
Never discharge hazardous waste to a septic tank.
Never mix hazardous pharmaceutical waste with biomedical 
waste for disposal.
Train all employees according to your outdate management 
program and ensure that employees can identify, reduce and 
properly handle wastes.
Step 1
3
General Pharmaceutical Management (continued)
The Pharmacy has two options for managing outdated 
pharmaceuticals for credit through the return process:
1. Use a Reverse Distributor, or
2. Process all returns and waste Internally.
Procedures for Managing Outdated 
Pharmaceuticals for Reverse Distribution
Implement the outdate management procedures provided by your
reverse distributor or create a written outdate management program
and initiate it as standard operating procedure. It is important to
ensure that your reverse distributor is properly permitted and
insured. Check with the Florida Department of Health at (850) 
487-1257 for a list of permitted reverse distributors in Florida. For 
a list of National Reverse Distributors, check with your Regional 
DEAOffice or the Returns Industry Association (See page 20 for
contact information).
Your outdate management plan should include container, storage,
labeling, shipping, and recordkeeping guidelines.
Procedures for Managing Outdated 
Pharmaceuticals Internally
Separate and store outdated pharmaceuticals by manufacturer 
and by the manufacturer’s return policy for possible return to the
manufacturer.
Using the manufacturer’s return policy, distinguish between products
eligible for credit and products that are not returnable for credit.
Store and segregate these products according to the container 
and storage guidelines on page 10. 
Waste management procedures should include container, storage,
labeling, shipping, and recordkeeping guidelines. Follow the
hazardous waste and non-hazardous waste guidelines included 
in steps 2-5 of this brochure.
4
ESTABLISH A PHARMACY 
MANAGEMENT PLAN (continued)
Management Scenarios:
Internal Management: Apharmacy separates returnable
from non-returnable pharmaceuticals and inventories all pharma-
ceuticals.  The pharmacy ships only the returnable pharmaceuticals
to a manufacturer, wholesaler or reverse distributor and retains 
the non-returnable pharmaceuticals for disposal. The pharmacy
is the hazardous waste generator upon determining that the non-
returnable pharmaceuticals are hazardous waste.
Reverse Distribution: Apharmacy does not separate returnable
from non-returnable pharmaceuticals, inventories all pharma-
ceuticals, and ships the pharmaceuticals as a product to a 
manufacturer or a reverse distributor.  The manufacturer or
reverse distributor is the hazardous waste generator upon 
determining that the non-returnable pharmaceuticals are 
hazardous waste.
Reverse Distribution: A pharmacy contracts with
a reverse distributor to work onsite.  The reverse 
distributor does not separate returnable 
from non-returnable pharmaceuticals 
onsite, but inventories all pharma-
ceuticals, and ships the product 
to the reverse distribution 
facility.  The reverse
distribution facility is the
hazardous waste generator 
upon determining that non-
returnable pharmaceuticals 
are hazardous waste.
Step 1
5
IDENTIFY YOUR HAZARDOUS AND 
NON-HAZARDOUS WASTES 
WHEN ARE PHARMACEUTICALS CONSIDERED WASTE?
Be aware of the Federal and State interpretation.
An outdated product is generally considered waste at the time
and place the decision is made to discard it.
According to the EPA, unsorted, outdated pharmaceuticals may 
be shipped as a product (rather than as a waste) if the outdated
pharmaceuticals are being shipped to a reverse distributor or a
manufacturer with the intent to return the outdated pharmaceu-
ticals to the manufacturer for credit.
Waste pharmaceuticals include all pharmaceuticals that have been
identified as:
Outdated but not returnable for credit,
Used in compounding or IV preparation, 
Spilled or Broken Product no longer useable for intended 
purpose, and 
Any items used in cleaning up a spill (vermiculite, paper 
towels, etc.) must be treated as a waste pharmaceutical, 
either hazardous or non-hazardous.
WHAT IS A HAZARDOUS WASTE?
A waste is defined as being HAZARDOUS if:
It has any of the characteristics described on page 8.
It is listed as a hazardous waste in the Code of Federal Regulations, 
40 CFR Part 261.
Step 2
6
IDENTIFY YOUR HAZARDOUS AND 
NON-HAZARDOUS WASTES (continued)
Characteristic Wastes
Acharacteristic hazardous waste is a solid waste that exhibits any 
of the properties included in the definitions of ignitability, corrosivity, 
reactivity, and toxicity according to the Code of Federal Regulations, 
40 CFR Part 261.
Listed Wastes 
In addition to characteristic hazardous wastes, a waste is hazardous 
if it is identified as a Listed Waste in the Code of Federal Regulations, 
40 CFR Part 261.  There are numerous listed wastes, a partial list 
is provided on page 9.  For details on listed wastes and waste 
code numbers, contact the DEP (See page 21 for DEP phone 
numbers).  The Code of Federal Regulations is available online at
http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/, or you can obtain information 
by calling the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s RCRAhotline 
at (800) 424-9346.
Acutely Hazardous Wastes
Acutely hazardous wastes are extremely dangerous wastes.  Small
amounts of these wastes, such as arsenic and cyanide compounds, 
are regulated in the same way as large amounts of other wastes.  A
pharmacy that generates 2.2 pounds (1 kilogram) or more of these 
acutely toxic wastes per month is subject to full regulation under the
hazardous waste rules. Contact the DEP for more information on the
proper management of acutely Hazardous Wastes.
Identifying Your Hazardous Wastes
Once it has been determined that an outdated pharmaceutical cannot 
be returned to the manufacturer, that pharmaceutical is classified as 
a waste.  If this determination has been made at the pharmacy, it is very
important to determine whether the waste is hazardous or non-hazardous.
There are several ways to identify hazardous wastes.
Step 2
Identifying Your Hazardous Wastes (continued)
Obtain and read Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS).
Talk to product suppliers and manufacturers.
Read product labels.
Compare product to hazardous waste characteristics and to wastes 
listed in federal regulations.
If product information is not available or is inconclusive, have a
commercial lab sample and test the waste using the Toxicity
Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TCLP).
Anon-hazardous material or product may become a hazardous
waste due to contaminants added during use.  Lab testing may be
necessary to determine whether or not the waste is hazardous.
This is called a “waste determination.”
Additional Resources for Identifying Hazardous Wastes
American Hospital Formulary Service (AHFS Drug Information)
Remington’s Pharmaceutical Sciences
Merck Manual
The Pill Book – OTC Medications
The Pill Book – Most Prescribed Drugs
Red Book – Pharmacy Fundamental Reference
CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics
Drug Facts and Comparisons
Information on the Internet
http://www.RX@RXLIST.COM
7
8
CHARACTERISTIC WASTES
Ignitable (Amajority of the hazardous wastes that pharmacies handle
are hazardous because they are ignitable.  These wastes often pose the
greatest management problems for pharmacies.)
Ignitable wastes are easily combustible or flammable.  If they
have a flashpoint of 140° F or less or an alcohol content of
24% or more, they are hazardous wastes.  Examples include:
alcohol (denatured ethyl, ethyl, isopropyl alcohol, and etc.),
ammonia inhalants, amyl nitrite, Anbesol®, AquaNet®
aerosol spray, benoxyl peroxide, Benzoin Tincture, Collodion Based
Preparations, Bronchial Dilators (Tornalate), Compound W®, Cleocin T
Topical Solution®, Erythromycin Topical Solution, Merthiolate Tincture,
mouthwash (alcohol content >24%), Peppermint Spirit, Retin A Gel®, Right
Guard® aerosol spray, Silver Nitrate (oxidizer), Solarcaine® aerosol
spray, and some cough medicines (Nyquil®). 
Corrosive
Corrosive wastes corrode metals or other materials or burn
the skin.  These liquids have a pH of 2 or lower or 12.5 or
higher.  Examples of acids that exhibit a pH of 2 or lower
include glacial acetic acid and Liquid Phenol (Carbolic Acid).
Examples of bases that exhibit a pH of 12.5 or higher include
Potassium Hydroxide and Sodium Hydroxide. 
Reactive
Reactive wastes are unstable and may explode or react
rapidly or violently with water or other materials.  Examples
include Clinatest (a test tablet to determine sugar in urine)
and some nitroglycerin formulations. 
Toxic
Wastes are toxic if they contain toxic organic chemicals 
or certain heavy metals, such as chromium, lead, mercury, 
or cadmium. Examples of potential toxic pharmaceuticals
include: Arsenic, Barium, Barium Enemas, Cadmium,
Chloroform, Chromium, Fluogen, Fluzone, Insulin with
Cresol, Lindane, Merbromin, Mercury, Mercurochrome, Mixture of Trace
Elements, Selenium, Silver, Silver Nitrate, Thimerosal (contains Mercury),
and vaccines containing mercury as a preservative. Approximately 40
chemicals meet specific leaching concentrations which classify them 
as toxic.
9
LISTED WASTES
There are two types of listed pharmaceutical hazardous wastes.  These
are known as acutely hazardous (P-listed) and toxic (U-listed).
P-listed Pharmaceutical Wastes –
These wastes are known as 
acutely hazardous.
NAME
HW# 
Epinephrine (Adrenaline)
P042
Nicotine
P075
Nitroglycerine
P081
Physostigmine
P204
Physostigmine salicylate
P188
Sodium Azide
P105
Strychnine
P108
Warfarin >.3%
P001
U-listed Pharmaceutical 
Wastes – These wastes are 
known as toxic.
NAME
HW# 
Acetone
U002
Chlorambucil
U035
Chloroform
U044
Cyclophosphamide
U058
Daunomycin
U059
Dichlorodifluromethane
U075
Diethylstilbestrol
U089
Formaldehyde
U122
Hexachlorophene
U132
Lindane
U129
Melphalan
U150
Mercury
U151
Mitomycin C
U010
Paraldehyde
U182
Phenacetin
U187
Phenol
U188
Reserpine
U200
Resorcinol
U201
Saccharin
U202
Selenium sulfide
U205
Streptozotocin
U206
Trichloromonofluromethane U121
Uracil mustard
U237
Warfarin <.3%, (Coumadin) U248
NOTE: These are not comprehensive lists of “P” and “U” listed chemicals.
For a complete list, refer to: 40CFR§261.33. The Code of Federal
Regulations is available online at http://www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/,
or you can obtain information by calling the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency’s RCRA hotline at (800) 424-9346.
10
Container Maintenance
Maintain containers in good condition.
Never place incompatible wastes, such as wastes that react with
each other, in the same container.  (e.g. Do not store acids and 
bases in the same container.)
Wastes must be compatible with the container that they are being
stored in (plastic or metal).  (e.g. Do not store strong acids or bases 
in metal containers.) 
Storage
Separate waste by hazardous waste 
classification: P- or U-Listed, Toxicity, 
Ignitability, Corrosivity, and Reactivity.
Don’t combine hazardous waste with 
non-hazardous waste.
Maintain aisle space between 
containers to allow for inspection.
Inspect medication storage area.
Be aware of allowable time 
limits for storage.
IMPLEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT 
PRACTICES (BMPS) FOR:
Step 3
Label
11
Labels
Label every container with the contents (type of pharmaceutical 
or waste).
Label every container with whether it is a hazardous waste 
or a non-hazardous waste.
Include any federal waste code numbers that apply.
Include the accumulation start date (the date when waste 
pharmaceuticals were first stored in the container).
Include your pharmacy name and address.
Use the following words on labels for hazardous wastes:
HAZARDOUS WASTE
FEDERAL LAW PROHIBITS IMPROPER DISPOSAL
If found, please contact the nearest police or public 
safety authority or the U.S. EPA
(Your business’s name, address and
manifest document number)
Use the following words on labels for non-hazardous wastes:
NON-REGULATED WASTE
Optional Information
Shipper
Address
City, State, Zip
Proper DOT Shipping Name
U.N. or N.A. No. 
Contents
THIS WASTE IS NOT REGULATED BY THE U.S. EPA
12
Recordkeeping 
Inspect containers at least once a week and keep a written log 
of container inspections.
Total weight of P-listed waste generated monthly must be
documented on a monthly basis (Weight of the Container/
Solvent Included).
Total weights of U-listed and characteristic waste generated 
monthly must be documented on a monthly basis.
Keep training and inspection records for 3 years.
Keep manifests and shipping receipts for 3 years.
Keep records of completed inventories/audits regarding the 
distribution or shipment of prescription drugs for 2 years.
Keep records of lab tests for 3 years.
Keep completed land disposal restriction forms for 3 years.
Spills
Keep spill cleanup materials readily accessible including: fire 
extinguishers; safety equipment such as rubber or latex gloves 
and safety glasses; spill cleanup products such as absorbents, 
rags, towels, brooms, shovels and dust pans to pick up materials;
and containers to hold spill waste.
Observe the safety precautions associated with the material 
spilled.
Stop the source of the spill immediately and cleanup the spill 
right away.
Recover the spilled substance while observing safety precautions.
Contain the spilled material.
Call your local fire and/or police departments if fire or public 
safety hazards are created.
IMPLEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT 
PRACTICES (BMPS) FOR: (continued)
Step 3
13
You must determine how much hazardous waste you generate each
month.  The set of rules you must follow depends on how much waste 
you generate, how much you store, and how long you store it.
If you generate less than 220 pounds of hazardous waste 
(100 kilograms or about half a drum) per month or you generate
less than 1 kilogram of an acute hazardous waste per month: 
you are a “Conditionally Exempt Small Quantity Generator.”
If you generate 220 - 2,200 pounds of hazardous waste 
(100 – 1,000 kilograms or about half a drum to 5 drums) 
per month: you are a “Small Quantity Generator.”
If you generate more than 2,200 pounds of hazardous 
waste (1000 kilograms or more than about 5 drums) per 
month or you generate 1 kilogram or more of an acute 
hazardous waste per month: you are a “Large Quantity
Generator.”
DETERMINE YOUR WASTE 
GENERATOR STATUS
Step 4
14
TRANSPORT GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING OUTDATED 
PHARMACEUTICALS INTERNALLY
Shipping Guidelines for Waste Transport & Disposal
Conduct a complete inventory/audit of all pharmaceuticals or 
wastes being shipped offsite.  Keep records of completed
inventories/audits for 2 years.
Make sure your transporter is properly permitted and has an 
EPA identification number.
Make sure that the treatment, storage and disposal facility
receiving your shipment has an EPA identification number and 
is properly permitted to dispose of the waste you are shipping.
Use manifests for all hazardous wastes shipped offsite.
Follow container, storage and label guidelines described 
on pages 10-11.
Federal Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA) Regulations
If you are shipping Controlled Substances for disposal/destruction,
be sure to follow DEA Regulations. For more information on
shipping controlled substances for disposal/destruction, contact
your Regional DEA office (see page 20). 
If any of your controlled substances are hazardous waste and are
destined for disposal/destruction, contact the DEP (see page 21).
COMPLY WITH GUIDELINES 
FOR TRANSPORT AND DISPOSAL
Step 5
TRANSPORT GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING OUTDATED 
PHARMACEUTICALS FOR REVERSE DISTRIBUTION
Shipping Guidelines for Waste Transport & Disposal
Wrap glass/vials/ampules carefully.
Segregate Controlled Substances in tamper-proof pouches 
with no external indication of what is being shipped.
Apply DOT Hazardous Materials Label:
ORM-D Consumer Commodity, and
Up arrows if over 1 liter.
Federal Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA) Regulations 
(For contact  information see page 20.)
If you are shipping Controlled Substances, be sure that all 
DEA regulations are followed.
Be sure your reverse distributor is registered to accept the 
products being shipped.  The DEA requires that all transfers 
be made between registrants.
Inventory all Controlled Substances in Schedules III - V:
Include one copy in the shipment.
Retain one copy for your records at the pharmacy.
If you are shipping Schedule II products, the reverse distribu-
tor must provide you with a Form 222 for the products being
shipped prior to the shipment.  Follow the procedures of your
reverse distributor.
DO NOT indicate that the contents of the shipment contain
controlled substances.
DO NOT request or accept a Form 41.
15
16
HOW CAN I REDUCE PHARMACEUTICAL 
WASTE GENERATION?
Make a commitment to reducing waste in every area of your 
pharmacy’s operations.
Evaluate your pharmacy’s waste and identify areas where changes 
can be made.
Facilitate and encourage the participation of all pharmacy personnel
through education, training, and incentives.
Apply Inventory 
Management Techniques.
Dispense older pharmaceuticals
first.
Create an effective inventory 
system to reduce outdate
accumulation.
After inventory is reduced, 
prevent the accumulation 
of new inventory.
Save money by ordering smaller
quantities of pharmaceuticals 
and reducing the need to dispose
of outdated pharmaceuticals.
Purchase pharmaceuticals from suppliers who will accept 
returns of unopened pharmaceuticals.
Purchase pharmaceuticals from vendors who promote 
small quantity purchases and who will accept returns of 
unopened bottles.
If a constant stock is required, perform an inventory 
review at least once a year to evaluate ordering trends 
and pharmacy inventory needs.
Summary
17
Reverse Distribution 
If you inventory and ship all unsorted outdated pharmaceuticals as
products to a qualified and properly permitted reverse distributor;
OR
If you contract a reverse distributor to inventory and ship all
unsorted, outdated pharmaceuticals as products to the reverse
distribution facility; THEN
The reverse distribution facility becomes the Hazardous 
Waste Generator upon determining that the non-returnable
pharmaceuticals are hazardous waste. 
Your reverse distributor should:
Inventory and review all items for return eligibility at the
reverse distribution facility, and
Properly manage all non-returnable items as either
hazardous or non-hazardous waste.
It is your RESPONSIBILITY to ensure that the reverse distri-
butor is properly handling your outdated pharmaceuticals.
WHAT ARE THE END RESULTS?
These steps will help to ensure that your pharmacy is able to effectively:
Develop a consistent outdate reduction and management program,
Develop and implement a waste reduction program,
Understand and apply RCRAand State environmental regulations, 
and
Assure compliance in all departments to successfully avoid 
regulatory fines. 
Reducing wastes in your pharmacy makes sense. Benefits include:
Maximizing profits,
Saving money on waste management costs,
Earning a greater return on investments,
Reducing concerns about penalties and liability,
Creating a safer and healthier workplace, and
Promoting positive public relations with clients, customers and 
the local community.
18
CHECKLIST
This checklist will help you to prevent the most common hazardous 
waste violations. For more detailed information on hazardous waste
management requirements, contact the DEP.
❍Identify types and quantities of hazardous wastes.
❍Notify the Florida DEP of your monthly hazardous waste
generation, and obtain an EPA identification number from the DEP.
❍Use proper containers to collect and store wastes.
❍Separate waste by classification: Toxicity, Ignitibility, Corrosivity, 
and Reactivity.
❍Don’t combine hazardous waste with non-hazardous waste.
❍Label all containers as hazardous or non-hazardous waste.
❍Include the accumulation start dates on labels.
❍Maintain aisle space between containers for inspection.
❍Inspect containers weekly for rust, leaks or damage and keep 
inspection records for three years.
❍Total weight of P-Listed waste must be documented monthly.
❍Total weights of U-Listed and characteristic waste must be 
documented monthly.
❍Never discharge hazardous wastes to a drain or a septic tank 
unless you have an DEP permit that allows you to do so.
❍Train employees to properly handle hazardous wastes.
❍Make sure your transporter and disposal facility have EPA
identification numbers.
❍Make sure your reverse distributor is properly licensed 
and registered.
❍Use Manifests for all waste transported for disposal.
❍Keep all records for at least three years.
19
WHERE CAN I GET MORE INFORMATION?
Additional information on hazardous waste reduction and regulations is
available from many sources.
Florida Department of Environmental Protection
District offices and the Tallahassee office offer technical assistance, 
fact sheets and other publications on hazardous waste regulations.
Web site: http://www.dep.state.fl.us/
Hazardous Waste Compliance Assistance Program
Phone: (800) 741-4337
(850) 488-0300
Fax:
(850) 921-8018
Publications available:
Summary of Hazardous Waste Regulations
Requirements for Conditionally Exempt Small Quantity Generators
Requirements for Small Quantity Generators
Handbook for Small Quantity Generators of Hazardous Waste
Florida Board of Pharmacy
Web site: http://www.doh.state.fl.us/mqa/pharmacy/pshome.htm
Address:
Board of Pharmacy
2020 Capital Circle SE, Bin #C04
Tallahassee, FL 32399-3254
Phone: 
(850) 414-2969
Email: 
bobbie_sawner@doh.state.fl.us
Florida Small Business Assistance Program
The Small Business Assistance Program helps businesses with
environmental concerns. Assistance is confidential and staff experts 
have business experience.
Phone:
(800) 722-7457
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
The EPAhas published a series of industry-specific guidelines and handbooks
on preventing pollution and complying with hazardous waste regulations.  The
RCRAHotline will provide answers to your hazardous waste management
questions. Calls and questions will be kept anonymous at your request. 
RCRA Hotline
Phone:
(800) 424-9346
20
DEA CONTACTS IN FLORIDA
MIAMI DIVISION 
8400 Northwest 53rd Street
Miami, Florida 33166
(305) 590-4870
ORLANDO DIVISION
300 International Parkway, Suite 424
Heathrow, Florida 32746
(407) 333-7046
TAMPA DIVISION
4950 West Kennedy Boulevard, Suite 400 
Tampa, Florida 33609 
(813) 288-1290
YOUR TRADE & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS
Many trade and professional associations have published guides to help
you find solutions to your hazardous waste management problems.
AMERICAN PHARMACEUTICAL
ASSOCIATION
2215 Constitution Avenue,
Northwest
Washington, DC 20037-2985
(202) 628-4410
AMERICAN ACADEMY OF 
PHARMACEUTICAL
PHYSICIANS
1135 Kildare Farm Road 
Suite 200-8
Cary, North Carolina 25711
(919) 469-9906
AMERICAN ASSOCIATION 
OF PHARMACEUTICAL 
SCIENTISTS
1650 King Street, Suite 200
Alexandria, Virginia 22314-2747
(703) 548-3000
FLORIDA PHARMACY 
ASSOCIATION
610, North Adams Street
Tallahassee, Florida 32301
(850) 222-2400 
RETURNS INDUSTRY 
ASSOCIATION
8000 Towers Crescent Drive
Suite 1350
Vienna, VA 22182
(703) 847-3696
Email: riawash@aol.com
21
OFFICES OF THE FLORIDA DEPARTMENT 
OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
Hazardous Waste Regulation Section
Twin Towers Office Building • 2600 Blair Stone Road
Tallahassee, FL 32399-2400
(850) 488-0300
The Florida Department of Environmental Protection is an equal opportunity agency and does 
not discriminate on the basis of race, creed, color, disability, age, religion, national origin, sex, 
marital status, disabled veteran’s status, Vietnam Era veteran’s status or sexual orientation.
Northwest District
160 Government Center
Pensacola, FL 32501
(850) 695-8360
Northeast District
7825 Baymeadows Way, Suite 200B
Jacksonville, FL 32256
(904) 448-4300
Central District
3319 Maguire Blvd.
Orlando, FL 32803
(407) 894-7555
Southwest District
3804 Coconut Palm Dr.
Tampa, FL 33619
(813) 744-6100
South District
2295 Victoria Ave., Suite 364
Fort Myers, FL 33901
(941) 332-6975
Escambia
Santa
Rosa
Oka-
loosa
Walton
Holmes
Wash-
ington
Jackson
Bay
Gulf
Cal-
houn
Franklin
Liberty
Gadsden
Leon
Wakulla
Jeffer-
son
Taylor
Madison
Hamilton
Lafay-
ette
Dixie
Levy
Levy
Gil-
christ
Union
Brad-
ford
Alachua
Columbia
Baker
Nassau
Duval
Clay
Putnam
Citrus
Hern-
ando
Pasco
Hills-
borough
Pinellas
Sumter
Polk
St. Johns
Flagler
Manatee Hardee
High-
lands
Lake
Volusia
Semi-
nole
Orange
Osceola
Brevard
Indian
River
St.
Lucie
Martin
Palm
Beach
Broward
Hendry
Glades
Char-
lotte
De Soto
Sara-
sota
Lee
Collier
Dade
Mon-
roe
Suwan-
nee
Marion
Marion
Okee-
chobee
Jeffer-
son
Area
shown
Southeast District
400 N. Congress Ave.
West Palm Beach, FL 33401
(561) 681-6600
University of Florida
Florida Center for Solid and 
Hazardous Waste Management
2207-D NW 13th Street
Gainesville, FL 32609
Phone: (352) 392-6264
Fax:
(352) 846-0183
Email: floridacenter@floridacenter.org
For additional information contact: 
Janet Ashwood
Florida Department of Environmental Protection 
Hazardous Waste Compliance Assistance Program
2600 Blair Stone Road, MS #4560
Tallahassee, FL 32399-2400
Phone: (850) 488-0300
Fax:
(850) 921-8018
Non-Profit
Organization
U.S. POSTAGE
P A I D
Gainesville, FL
Permit No. 94
