STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURE - 4013 
 
PRODUCT SHELF LIFE – MONITORING AND ACTION 
 
 
PURPOSE: To establish a standard operating procedure to insure expired items are being 
removed from patient use. 
 
POLICY: All healthcare workers must check to see if the product is still within its stated shelf 
life before dispensing and before being used in patient care.  Shelf life has to do with the safe use 
of a product and pertains to both sterile and non-sterile product. Sterility is event related; 
however, there are other variables that contribute to shelf life. 
 
PROCEDURE:  
 
1. For commercially sterilized products the expiration dates may be communicated in  
several different ways. The manufacturer should be called if there is any question about the 
location of the outdate. 
 
2. It is important to become familiar with each product, note the way the expiration  
date is assigned, and the use of the universal hour glass symbol.  Manufacturers use expiration 
dating, such as stating, “use by” while another will state, “product expires 1 year from date of 
manufacture”, or “use by” date specified. 
 
3.  Commercial items that are expired or near expiration should be returned to the company for 
credit if possible prior to being discarded. 
 
4.  For reusable items sterilized, the expiration dates are assigned as follows:  
 
a. Items double wrapped in muslin and paper, spun-bond fabrics or non-woven materials 
have a shelf life of 30 days. 
b. Items placed and sealed in peel packs have a shelf life of 1 year. 
c. Items placed in rigid containers have a shelf life of 1 year. 
d. Items dust covered have a shelf life of 1 year.  
 
5.  Reusable items that have reached the expiration date must be returned to the decontamination 
area for cleaning and then for reprocessing. As items outdate they should be evaluated to 
determine if there is a need for continued sterilization of the product. 
 
6.  All items must be checked for expiration dates and package integrity on a regular schedule, 
preferably weekly, and prior to dispensing. 
 
References: VA Handbook 7176, Supply, Processing and Distribution Operational Requirements 
                    SPD Training Manual 
 
4/30/2003 
SPD Advisory Group, Best Practices 
Page 1 of 1   9/24/02 
