 
Department of Veterans Affairs 
Office of Inspector General 
 
 
Combined Assessment Program  
Review of the VA Medical Center 
Chillicothe, Ohio 
 
 
 
 
Report No.  04-00928-164                                                                                July 15, 2004 
VA Office of Inspector General 
Washington, DC  20420 
 
 
Office of Inspector General 
Combined Assessment Program Reviews 
Combined Assessment Program (CAP) reviews are part of the Office of Inspector 
General's (OIG's) efforts to ensure that high quality health care and benefits services are 
provided to our Nation's veterans.  CAP reviews combine the knowledge and skills of the 
OIG's Offices of Healthcare Inspections, Audit, and Investigations to provide 
collaborative assessments of VA medical facilities and regional offices on a cyclical 
basis.  The purposes of CAP reviews are to: 
• 
Evaluate how well VA facilities are accomplishing their missions of providing 
veterans convenient access to high quality medical and benefits services. 
• 
Determine if management controls ensure compliance with regulations and VA 
policies, assist management in achieving program goals, and minimize vulnerability 
to fraud, waste, and abuse. 
• 
Conduct fraud and integrity awareness training for facility staff. 
In addition to this typical coverage, CAP reviews may examine issues or allegations 
referred by VA employees, patients, Members of Congress, or others. 
 
To Report Suspected Wrongdoing in VA Programs and Operations 
Call the OIG Hotline – (800) 488-8244 
 
 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Contents 
 
Page 
Executive Summary ....................................................................................................... i 
Introduction ................................................................................................................... 1 
Facility Profile .............................................................................................................................1 
Objectives and Scope of the CAP Review...................................................................................1 
Results of Review.......................................................................................................... 3 
Organizational Strength...............................................................................................................3 
Opportunities for Improvement ...................................................................................................3 
Environment of Care................................................................................................................3 
Information Technology Security............................................................................................4 
Medical Care Collections Fund ...............................................................................................6 
Supply Inventory Management................................................................................................8 
Controlled Substances Accountability.....................................................................................9 
Moderate Sedation .................................................................................................................10 
Contracts ................................................................................................................................11 
Computer Equipment Accountability ....................................................................................12 
Appendices 
A.  VISN 10 Director Comments...............................................................................................14 
B.  VA Medical Center Director Comments..............................................................................15 
C.  Monetary Benefits in Accordance with IG Act Amendments .............................................23 
D.  OIG Contact and Staff Acknowledgments ..........................................................................24 
E.  Report Distribution...............................................................................................................25 
 
 
VA Office of Inspector General 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Executive Summary 
Introduction 
During the week of February 23-27, 2004, the Office of Inspector General (OIG) conducted a 
Combined Assessment Program (CAP) review of VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio (the 
medical center) which is part of Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN) 10.  The purpose 
of the review was to evaluate selected operations, focusing on patient care administration, quality 
management (QM), and financial and administrative controls.  During the review, we also 
provided fraud and integrity awareness training to 137 employees. 
Results of Review 
This CAP review focused on 12 areas.  As indicated below, there were no concerns identified in 
four of the areas.  The medical center complied with selected standards in the following areas: 
• 
Government Purchase Card Program 
• 
Means Tests 
• 
Pharmacy Security 
• 
Quality Management 
Based on our review of these four areas, the following organizational strength was identified: 
• 
Means tests procedures were effective. 
We identified eight areas which needed additional management attention.  To improve 
operations, the following recommendations were made: 
• 
Correct environment of care deficiencies. 
• 
Improve information technology (IT) security. 
• 
Enhance billing procedures and improve physician documentation of care provided. 
• 
Reduce excess supply inventories and strengthen inventory management controls. 
• 
Strengthen monthly controlled substances inspections. 
• 
Aggregate and analyze moderate sedation outcome data. 
Suggestions for improvement were made in the following areas: 
• 
Fully document price reasonableness determinations and ensure services are validated in 
accordance with contract terms prior to payment. 
• 
Ensure computer equipment inventories are completed timely, inventory lists are updated 
when needed, and the local policy on loaning laptop computers is revised. 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
i 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
This report was prepared under the direction of Mr. William H. Withrow, Director, Kansas City 
Audit Operations Division, and Mr. Joseph T. Janasz, Jr., CAP Review Coordinator, Kansas City 
Audit Operations Division. 
VISN 10 and Medical Center Directors’ Comments 
The VISN 10 Director and Medical Center Director agreed with the CAP review findings, 
recommendations, and suggestions, and provided acceptable improvement plans.  (See 
Appendices A and B, pages 14-22 for the full text of the Directors’ comments.)  We will follow 
up on the implementation of recommended improvement actions until they are completed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (original signed by:) 
RICHARD J. GRIFFIN 
Inspector General 
 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
ii 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Introduction 
Facility Profile 
Organization.  Located in Chillicothe, Ohio, the medical center provides acute and chronic 
mental health services, primary and secondary medical services, and a wide range of nursing 
home care services.  Outpatient care is also provided at four community-based outpatient clinics 
(CBOCs) located in Athens, Lancaster, Marietta, and Portsmouth, Ohio.  The medical center is 
part of VISN 10 and serves a veteran population of about 71,000 in a primary service area that 
includes 15 counties in southeastern and south central Ohio. 
Programs.  The medical center provides medical, surgical, and mental health services and 
maintains 35 acute medical care; 25 acute psychiatric; 25 psychosocial residential rehabilitation 
treatment; 50 domiciliary; and 162 nursing home beds.  The medical center also has 17 sharing 
agreements with 12 provider organizations to provide various services such as ophthalmology, 
diagnostic radiology, and mammography. 
Affiliations and Research.  The medical center has affiliation agreements with Ohio State 
University, the University of Cincinnati, and the University College of Osteopathic Medicine in 
Athens for the purposes of education, training, and research with major emphasis on psychiatric 
services.  There are 38 other program affiliations with 19 institutions, representing various health 
care programs. 
Resources.  The medical center’s Fiscal Year (FY) 2003 medical care budget was $94.1 million, 
a .3 percent increase over the FY 2002 budget of $93.8 million.  FY 2003 staffing was 1076.2 
full-time equivalent employees (FTEE), including 41.5 physician and 332.7 nursing FTEE.  FY 
2002 staffing was 1090.9 FTEE, including 40.2 physician and 351.9 nursing FTEE. 
Workload.  In FY 2003, the medical center treated 17,392 unique patients, a 5.5 percent increase 
over FY 2002.  The patient care workload for FY 2003 totaled 4,335 inpatients treated and 
199,378 outpatient visits, which represented a 8.1 percent decrease and a 4.5 percent increase, 
respectively, from FY 2002 workload. 
Objectives and Scope of the CAP Review 
Objectives.  CAP reviews are one element of the OIG’s efforts to ensure that our Nation’s 
veterans receive high-quality VA health care services.  The objectives of the CAP review 
program are to:  
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
1 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
• 
Conduct recurring evaluations of selected health care facility operations, focusing on patient 
care, QM, and financial and administrative controls. 
• 
Provide fraud and integrity awareness training to increase employee understanding of the 
potential for program fraud and the requirement to refer suspected criminal activity to the 
OIG. 
Scope.  We reviewed selected clinical, financial, and administrative activities to evaluate the 
effectiveness of patient care administration, QM, and general management controls.  Patient care 
administration is the process of planning and delivering patient care.  QM is the process of 
monitoring the quality of patient care to identify and correct harmful or potentially harmful 
practices or conditions.  Management controls are the policies, procedures, and information 
systems used to safeguard assets, prevent errors and fraud, and ensure that organizational goals 
are met.  The review covered medical center operations for FYs 2003 and 2004 through January 
2004, and was conducted in accordance with OIG standard operating procedures for CAP 
reviews. 
In performing the review, we inspected work areas; interviewed managers, employees, and 
patients; and reviewed clinical, financial, and administrative records.  The review covered the 
following activities: 
Contract Award and Administration 
Controlled Substances Accountability 
Environment of Care  
Equipment Accountability  
Government Purchase Card Program 
Information Technology Security 
Means Tests 
Medical Care Collections Fund 
Moderate Sedation Practices 
Pharmacy Security  
Quality Management 
Supply Inventory Management 
As part of the review, we used questionnaires and interviews to survey patient satisfaction with 
the timeliness of service and the quality of care.  We also interviewed 15 inpatients and 15 
outpatients during the review.  The full survey results were provided to medical center 
management. 
During the review, we presented three fraud and integrity awareness briefings for medical center 
employees.  These briefings, attended by 137 employees, covered procedures for reporting 
suspected criminal activity to the OIG and included case-specific examples illustrating 
procurement fraud, false claims, conflict of interest, and bribery. 
An activity that was particularly effective or otherwise noteworthy is recognized in the 
Organizational Strength section of the report (page 3).  Activities needing improvement are 
discussed in the Opportunities for Improvement section (pages 3-13).  For these activities, we 
make recommendations or suggestions.  Recommendations pertain to issues that are significant 
enough to be monitored by the OIG until corrective actions are implemented.  Suggestions 
pertain to issues that should be monitored by VISN and medical center management until 
corrective actions are completed.  For the activities not discussed in the Organizational Strength 
or Opportunities for Improvement sections, there were no reportable deficiencies. 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
2 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Results of Review 
Organizational Strength 
Means Tests Procedures Were Effective.  Means tests are administered to obtain income 
information from certain veterans in order to determine whether they are subject to medical co-
payments.  Veterans Health Administration (VHA) facilities are required to retain signed means 
test forms in patients’ administrative records.  We reviewed means test forms for 30 veterans and 
found that all were completed and signed appropriately. 
Opportunities for Improvement 
Environment of Care – Areas Needed Management Attention 
Condition Needing Improvement. We inspected inpatient units, outpatient primary care and 
specialty clinic areas, dining areas, and the gymnasium of the medical center and found the 
environment of care to be generally acceptable.  However, we identified several areas requiring 
corrective action.  VHA regulations require that the hospital environment present minimal risk to 
patients, employees, and visitors.  The following areas required management attention.   
Housekeeping and Maintenance. We found unlocked dirty utility rooms, dirty employee 
refrigerators and microwave ovens, food in a procedure room in the Surgery/Urology Clinic, 
Asian beetles throughout the medical center, hallways damaged by motorized carts used to 
transport items, areas in need of painting and ceiling tile replacement, and an unsafe loading 
zone near the Building 24 smoking hut.  
Outdated Supplies.  Supply Processing and Distribution (SPD) staff cleans, processes, stores, and 
distributes sterile and non-sterile supplies, instruments, and medical equipment for clinical use.  
SPD staff are responsible for ensuring that all necessary supplies and equipment are sterilized 
and readily available for operative procedures.  We inspected seven sterile supply items and 
found that all items were outdated.  VHA policy requires outdated sterile supply items be 
reprocessed to ensure sterility and reduce the risk of hospital acquired infection. 
Patient Confidentiality.  Federal law requires the safeguarding of confidential patient 
information.  Confidential patient information was found in a hallway adjacent to a Specialty 
Care Unit and in a clinic hallway in Building 210.  
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
3 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Handicap Access.  Federal law prohibits discrimination against individuals with disabilities in 
such areas as public accommodations, recreation, health services, and access to public services.  
Based on a patient interview and an inspection of the gymnasium in Building 247, we found that 
the female locker room and showers were inaccessible to wheelchair-dependent female veterans.  
While we were onsite, managers took immediate steps to correct deficiencies and the Medical 
Center Associate Director submitted a plan of action to address the unresolved issues. 
Recommended Improvement Action(s) 1.  We recommended that the VISN Director ensure 
that the Medical Center Director requires that:  a) the Medical Center Associate Director’s action 
plan for housekeeping and maintenance issues is implemented, b) SPD supplies are reprocessed 
when outdated, c) confidential patient information is secured, and d) access to the female locker 
room and showers in the gymnasium in Building 247 is provided for wheelchair-dependent 
female veterans. 
The VISN and Medical Center Directors agreed with the findings and recommendations and 
reported that corrective actions are being taken for housekeeping and maintenance issues, SPD 
instituted an Outdate Checklist for daily checks of sterile supplies, patient information was 
secured and discussed with staff while we were onsite, and the barrier identified by the review 
team has been removed and a project to make the entire building handicap accessible has been 
submitted for FY 2005.  The improvement plan is acceptable, and we will follow up on the 
planned actions until they are completed. 
Information Technology Security – Improvements Needed To Comply 
With VA and Local Policies 
Condition Needing Improvement. Medical center managers needed to strengthen IT security.  
We evaluated IT security to determine if controls adequately protected information system 
resources from unauthorized access, disclosure, modification, destruction, and misuse.  We 
found that annual security awareness training was provided, password controls were adequate, 
and critical data were backed up on a regular basis.  However, we identified three areas that 
required management attention. 
Security Plans.  The Veterans Health Integrated Systems and Technology Architecture (Vista) 
and telecommunications security plans were adequate.  However, the Local Area Network 
(LAN) Security Plan needed improvement.  This plan discussed certain potential physical 
security risks associated with the computer room, which are normally found in risk assessments.  
It did not follow Government standards for a security plan.  For example, the plan did not 
include items such as system identification, rules of behavior, assignment of security 
responsibility, system environment, sensitivity of information handled, or management controls. 
Contingency Plans.  The medical center’s contingency plans for Vista, LAN, and 
telecommunications needed improvement.  These plans did not properly address the annual 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
4 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
testing requirements, contact information for key personnel, or storage of backup tapes.  
Government IT standards require contingency plans to be tested at least annually.  The annual 
test requirement was included in the VISTA and telecommunications contingency plans, but was 
omitted from the LAN Contingency Plan.   
Contact information for key personnel in the case of an emergency was incomplete.  Personnel 
were listed without phone numbers or with only their extension numbers.  In some cases, 
alternate contact numbers were not provided.  Also, the “Notification Cascade,” which listed 
contact information for key personnel and identified staff responsible for notifying personnel, 
had not been updated since August 2001. 
The Vista Contingency Plan required that the backup tapes be stored in the basement of the same 
building where the computer room is located.  VHA policy requires that data be backed up and 
stored in a location physically separate from the computer room so as to not be affected by the 
same contingency or threat.  While the VHA policy does not provide a specific distance 
requirement for the backup storage location, the medical center Information Security Officer 
(ISO) agreed that storage in the basement of the computer room building did not satisfy VHA 
policy.  After our review, managers in the Chief Information Officer (CIO) Office updated the 
contingency plans to require annual testing of the plans and to include full contact information 
for key personnel.  Also, they initiated plans to move the backup tapes to a location away from 
the computer room building. 
Physical Security.  Physical security and access controls needed improvements in the following 
areas.   
• 
VHA policy states that there will be no signs informing the public that an information system 
is located in a particular building or area.  We found that communication closets and 
computer storage rooms had signage identifying their contents. 
• 
During our tour of the outpatient clinics with the medical center ISO, we found five 
unattended computers that were on and not locked.  On one computer, patient information 
was on the screen.  The ISO immediately locked the computers and left notifications of the 
security violations. 
• 
The computer room did not have smoke detectors as recommended by VA policy.  Smoke 
detectors can serve as an early warning detection prior to activation of the sprinkler system, 
which could cause water damage to the equipment.  Medical center management had smoke 
detectors installed while we were onsite. 
• 
New computers were initially stored in Building 35 until they were configured and deployed 
to a using service.  The room in which the computers were stored was kept locked.  However, 
the building was located on one end of campus and the storage room was on the ground level 
with windows that had no protective barriers.  Also, the room did not have an alarm system.  
On a regular basis, new computers valued from $100,000 to $200,000 were stored in this 
room. 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
5 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
• 
CIO Office management identified potential physical security risks in the computer room.  In 
the LAN Security Plan, CIO Office management noted that the air conditioning unit was 
leaking and did not work properly causing the computer room to be shut down four times in 
2003 due to the excessive temperatures.  Also, the uninterruptible power supply (UPS) 
system is easily overloaded.  Medical center management stated that these deficiencies will 
be remedied as part of a project to relocate the computer room from the second floor to the 
first floor of Building 18.  The expected completion date for this project is June 2005.  In the 
interim, Engineering Service staff has installed new compressors to the air conditioning unit 
and is currently reviewing options to repair the UPS system. 
Recommended Improvement Action(s) 2. We recommended that the VISN Director ensure 
that the Medical Center Director takes the following actions to improve IT security:  a) revise the 
LAN Security Plan and medical center contingency plans in accordance with Government IT 
standards, b) store backup tapes in a location away from the computer room building, c) remove 
signage identifying the locations of sensitive information and automated systems, d) remind 
employees of the need to secure patient information by ensuring computers are properly locked 
or logged off when left unattended, e) upgrade the physical security of the new computer storage 
room, and f) ensure plans to remedy potential risks associated with the air conditioning unit and 
the UPS system for the computer room are carried out timely. 
The VISN and Medical Center Directors agreed with the findings and recommendations and 
reported that the LAN Security Plan has been revised.  Backup tapes have been moved to a 
separate building, signs identifying the location of sensitive information and automated systems 
have been removed.  Further, instructions were sent to all employees for securing computers 
when left unattended.  Interim measures are being taken to upgrade the physical security of the 
existing new computer storage room and the medical center Space Committee is developing 
plans for a new location for new computer storage.  The new location will include all required 
security features and a construction project has been submitted to address concerns with the air 
conditioning and the UPS system.  The improvement plan is acceptable, and we will follow up 
on the planned actions until they are completed. 
Medical Care Collections Fund – Third Party Billings Needed 
Improvement 
Condition Needing Improvement. The medical center increased Medical Care Collections 
Fund (MCCF) collections from $4.5 million in FY 2002 to $5.3 million in FY 2003 and met its 
MCCF collection goal both years.  Our review of a judgment sample of outpatient visits and 
inpatient discharges for November 2003 found that MCCF staff issued bills appropriately.  
However, medical center management could further improve MCCF program results by 
strengthening billing procedures for fee-basis care, establishing procedures to ensure bills for 
outpatient and inpatient care provided prior to July 2003 are processed before insurance filing 
deadlines expire, billing for optometry services, and ensuring physicians adequately document 
care provided in the medical records.  We found additional billing opportunities totaling at least 
$27,000 with estimated collections of $13,095 ($27,000 x 48.5 percent medical center historical 
collection rate). 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
6 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Fee-Basis Care.  From October 1, 2003, to December 31, 2003, the medical center paid 84 fee-
basis claims totaling $76,363 to non-VA providers who provided medical care to veterans who 
had health insurance.  Payments included claims for outpatient care, inpatient care, and ancillary 
services related to inpatient care.  To determine whether the fee-basis medical care was billed to 
patients’ insurance carriers, we reviewed a judgment sample of 32 claims totaling $57,295.  Of 
these 32 claims, 23 were not billable to the insurance carriers either because the fee-basis care 
was for service-connected conditions or the care was not billable under the terms of the 
insurance plans.  The remaining nine fee-basis claims were for care that was billable to the 
insurance carriers.  MCCF staff had appropriately issued bills totaling $5,246 for five claims.  
However, we found additional billing opportunities totaling $13,297 for the other four claims.  
MCCF staff took immediate action as a result of our review and issued bills for these four 
claims.   
Unbilled Care Report.  The Unbilled Care Report dated February 18, 2004, covering the time 
period of October 1, 2002, through December 31, 2003, listed 242 outpatient visits prior to     
July 1, 2003, with potential billable care totaling $42,214 that had not been billed.  We reviewed 
10 of these visits and found that 7 involved medical care totaling $2,876 that should have been 
billed.  The medical care for six of these visits was still billable; however, medical care totaling 
$328 for the other visit was no longer billable because the deadline to file a claim with the 
insurance carrier had expired. 
MCCF managers explained that these bills had not been issued when the care was provided 
because, at that time, the billing software had not identified these cases as billable.  For example, 
in some cases the veterans’ insurance status may not have been determined until after the care 
was provided.  In other cases, updates to the reasonable charges in the billing software package 
can create new billing opportunities for care previously provided.   MCCF staff prints the 
Unbilled Care Report each month to identify potential bills for care previously provided.  
However, current care was their first priority and in most months the older care cases listed on 
the Unbilled Care Report were not reviewed.  With the filing deadlines imposed by insurance 
carriers, the older bills needed to be processed before deadlines expire. 
Reasons Not Billable Report.  The Reasons Not Billable Report dated February 2, 2004, covering 
the time period of July 1, 2003, through December 31, 2003, listed 166 potential billable cases 
totaling $35,904 that were unbilled for 1 of 3 reasons – insufficient documentation, no 
documentation, or non-billable provider (resident).  We reviewed 24 potential billable cases 
totaling $18,222 and found that 12 were not billable because the care was for service-connected 
conditions or was not billable under the terms of the insurance plans.  However, the other 12 
potential billable cases were billable as discussed below. 
In nine cases totaling $7,870, billings for optometry services were missed.   MCCF staff had not 
issued bills for these cases because they considered care provided by optometry residents as non-
billable.  However, VHA’s Revenue Office provided guidance stating that optometry residents 
are considered to be licensed practitioners.  As long as they are licensed in the State in which the 
services are performed and they are authorized to perform such services in that State, their 
services are billable as physician services.  MCCF staff agreed and began issuing bills for these 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
7 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
services.  MCCF staff is also reviewing all cases identified as non-billable provider (resident) to 
identify any other bills that needed to be issued. 
In three cases, MCCF staff could have billed $2,957 for the care provided but medical care 
providers did not provide adequate documentation in the medical records.  This occurred because 
providers did not complete progress notes in two cases or sign a cardiology report in the other 
case.  
Recommended Improvement Action(s) 3. We recommended that the VISN Director ensure 
that the Medical Center Director requires that MCCF staff: a) strengthen the billing process to 
ensure all billable fee-basis claims are identified, b) establish procedures to ensure bills are 
processed before insurance carrier filing deadlines expire, c) bill for optometry services provided 
by licensed optometry residents, d) ensure physicians adequately document care provided in the 
medical records, and e) prepare bills for the cases identified in our review. 
The VISN and Medical Center Directors agreed with the findings and recommendations and 
reported that processes are now in place to ensure appropriate billing of all fee-basis claims, 
claims listed on the Unbilled Care Report, and claims for optometry services.  An employee has 
been designated as a liaison with clinic staff to address documentation issues that impact the 
coding and billing of care provided.  Also, all cases identified in our review have been billed.  
The improvement plan is acceptable, and we will follow up on the planned actions until they are 
completed. 
Supply Inventory Management – Excess Inventory Needed To Be 
Reduced and Controls Strengthened 
Condition Needing Improvement. The medical center needed to reduce excess inventories and 
make better use of automated controls to more effectively manage supply inventory.  VHA 
established a 30-day supply goal and requires that medical facilities use VA’s Generic Inventory 
Package (GIP) to manage inventories of most types of supplies.  Inventory managers can use GIP 
reports to establish normal stock levels, analyze usage patterns to determine optimum order 
quantities, and conduct periodic physical inventories. 
Inventory managers used GIP to manage and control supply inventory, but did not use GIP 
features to meet the 30-day supply goal.  As of December 31, 2003, the 6 primary inventory 
control points included 4,321 line items with a reported value of $256,617. 
To test the accuracy of the value of stock on hand and reasonableness of inventory levels, we 
reviewed 30 items (15 items in the Warehouse/Engineering, 10 items in the SPD, and 5 items in 
the Laboratory Service) and found 2 deficiencies.  First, the GIP value of stock was overstated.  
We conducted a physical inventory of the 30 items and found that for 5 items (2 items in the 
Warehouse/Engineering and 3 items in the SPD inventories) the counts did not agree with the 
balances shown in GIP.  For the 30 items reviewed, the GIP reported value was $51,938.  
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
8 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
However, the actual value of this stock was $35,780, which was only 69 percent of the GIP 
reported value.  Applying the 69 percent figure to the $256,617 value for the entire supply stock 
shown in GIP would yield an estimated value of $177,066.   
Additionally, for 15 of the 30 items reviewed, stock on hand exceeded a 30-day supply or was no 
longer needed.  For 13 items, the estimated value of stock exceeding 30 days was $16,578.  For 
two items totaling $1,643, medical center staff determined that the items were no longer needed.  
The estimated value of stock exceeding 30 days or no longer needed was $18,221 ($16,578 + 
$1,643), or 51 percent of the total value of the 30 items reviewed ($35,780).   
The inaccuracies in GIP and excess stock on hand occurred because medical center staff did not 
always record usage and in some instances recorded receipts incorrectly.  Also, the Chief, 
Materiel Management Section and the SPD Item Manager stated that the required annual wall-to-
wall physical inventory of SPD had not been performed in 3 years.  Because GIP data was 
inaccurate, we could not determine the value of stock on hand or the value of excess stock for the 
entire inventory.  However, by applying the 51 percent of excess stock for the 30 items reviewed 
to the entire stock, we estimated that the value of excess stock was $90,304 (51 percent x 
$177,066 estimated value of stock).  
Recommended Improvement Action(s) 4. We recommended that the VISN Director ensure 
that the Medical Center Director requires: a) inventory managers to reduce supply inventory to 
the 30-day supply goal and improve the accuracy of GIP, and b) SPD to conduct and document 
annual wall-to-wall physical inventories. 
The VISN and Medical Center Directors agreed with the findings and recommendations and 
reported that supply inventory levels will be reduced to a 30-day supply by March 2005, actions 
are being taken to resolve inventory discrepancies, and a wall-to-wall inventory has been 
conducted and others are planned.  The improvement plan is acceptable, and we will follow up 
on the planned actions until they are completed. 
Controlled Substances Accountability – Required Aspects Should Be 
Addressed in the Monthly Inspection Report 
Condition Needing Improvement. Controlled substances inspectors reviewed all areas 
containing controlled substances each month and inspectors were properly rotated.  However, the 
Controlled Substances Coordinator needed to strengthen the monthly inspections to fully comply 
with VHA policy and help ensure accountability of controlled substances.  We reviewed the 
monthly controlled substance inspection reports for the 13-month period ending January 2004 
and found two controls that needed improvement. 
First, as part of the monthly inspections, VA policy requires the inspectors to certify the accuracy 
of pharmacy records for all controlled substances held for destruction, verify that controlled 
substances destructions are completed at least quarterly, and document this verification in the 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
9 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
monthly inspection reports.  According to the Controlled Substances Coordinator, prior to June 
2003, the inspectors did not certify the amount of controlled substances awaiting destruction or 
verify that controlled substances destructions occurred in the prior quarter as required.  The 
Controlled Substances Coordinator said that since June 2003, these controlled substances were 
counted and controlled substances destructions were verified.  However, these reviews were not 
documented in the monthly inspection reports for 4 of 7 months from July 2003 to January 2004. 
Second, dispensing activities were not properly verified to medical records.  VHA policy 
requires inspectors to verify a sample of dispensing activities to physicians’ orders in the medical 
records.  This policy did not address the size of the sample.  VHA revised this policy on    
August 29, 2003, requiring inspectors to verify five randomly selected dispensing activities on 
each unit (inpatient ward or outpatient clinic). 
We reviewed the inspections for the 13-month period ending January 2004 and found that 
inspectors did not consistently follow VHA policy.  During the 8-month period ending August 
2003, the inspectors did not verify any dispensing activities in 4 months and verified only one 
dispensing activity on each unit in the other 4 months.  During the 5-month period after VHA 
revised it’s policy in August 2003, the inspectors did not verify any dispensing activities in 2 
months and verified only one dispensing activity on each unit in the other 3 months.  
Recommended Improvement Action(s) 5. We recommended that the VISN Director ensure 
that the Medical Center Director provides training to controlled substances inspectors to: a) 
certify the accuracy of pharmacy records of controlled substances awaiting destruction, b) 
document in the monthly controlled substances inspection reports whether controlled substances 
awaiting destruction were destroyed in the prior quarter, and c) verify five randomly selected 
dispensing activities on each unit to the medical records during each monthly controlled 
substances inspection. 
The VISN and Medical Center Directors agreed with the findings and recommendations and 
reported that medical center policy has been revised and procedures are in place to comply with 
VHA policy for the monthly controlled substances inspections.  The improvement plan is 
acceptable, and we will follow up on the planned actions until they are completed. 
Moderate Sedation – Outcome Data Needed Local Reporting and 
Analysis 
Condition Needing Improvement. Outcome data collected by clinicians on moderate sedation 
needed to be reported to a medical center committee designated by medical center management 
to be responsible for analyzing the information. 
The Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations requires systematic 
aggregation and analysis of moderate sedation outcome data.  While the Tissue and Transfusion 
Committee reviewed the appropriateness of procedures performed under moderate sedation and 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
10 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
outcome data from moderate sedation were collected and reported to VISN 10, medical center 
management had not designated a committee to aggregate and analyze the data.  This prevented 
medical center management from identifying patterns or trends, and recognizing areas needing 
improvement. 
Recommended Improvement Action(s) 6. We recommended that the VISN Director ensure 
that the Medical Center Director designates a committee to aggregate and analyze moderate 
sedation outcome data and requires clinicians to report outcome data to this committee. 
The VISN and Medical Center Directors agreed with the findings and recommendations and 
reported that outcome data is now reported to the Medical Executive Committee, with abnormal 
outcomes reported to and reviewed by the Peer Review Committee.  The improvement plan is 
acceptable, and we will follow up on the planned actions until they are completed. 
Contracts – Price Reasonableness Determinations and Contract 
Administration Controls Need Improvement 
Condition Needing Improvement. To determine if contracts were properly awarded and 
administered, we reviewed 13 contracts valued at $3 million.  Overall contracting activities were 
adequate; however, we identified two areas that needed improvement. 
Price Reasonableness Determinations.  The Federal Acquisition Regulation requires the 
contracting officer to determine that a contract price is fair and reasonable prior to awarding a 
contract and to document this determination in the Price Negotiation Memorandums (PNM) the 
contract file.  We found two contracts for physician services valued at $546,308 in which the 
basis for the award amounts were not adequately documented in PNMs.  Both contracts were 
awarded at higher rates than the established Federal Supply Schedule (FSS) rates.  In the first 
contract, the FSS rate for a part-time physician was $87 per hour, but the contract rate was 
$103.50 per hour.  In the second contract, the FSS rate for two full-time and one part-time 
physicians was $79.37 per hour, but the contract rate was $87.50 per hour.  The contracting 
officer stated that the price differences were due to relocation costs, housing, malpractice 
insurance, travel to CBOCs, and the qualifications and experience of the physicians and that she 
had determined that the contract prices were fair and reasonable.  However, there were no 
estimates for these additional costs or any documentation in the contract files showing the 
contracting officer’s fair and reasonableness determinations.  As a result of our review, the 
contracting officer prepared a PNM for each of these contracts. 
Contract Administration.  Contracting Officer’s Technical Representatives (COTRs) are required 
to review the contractor’s invoices to ensure that they accurately reflect the work completed in 
accordance with the requirements of the contract before certifying acceptance.  For three 
contracts valued at $571,710, the COTRs did not properly certify acceptance.  One contract was 
for a temporary warehouse employee at a cost of $25,402 and the other two were for physician 
services valued at $546,308.  All three contracts stipulated that the medical center would 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
11 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
maintain logs for the contract employees to sign-in and sign-out.  Further, the logs were to be 
used to certify invoices.  However, we found that these logs were not maintained and the COTRs 
certified payments by only using time cards submitted by the contractors.  This occurred because 
staff performing the COTR duties were not aware of the contracts’ provisions.  We also found 
that for two of these contracts, required letters designating a COTR and describing their 
responsibilities and duties had not been prepared. 
Suggested Improvement Action(s) 1. We suggested that the VISN Director ensure that the 
Medical Center Director requires: a) contracting officers to document their determinations of fair 
and reasonable prices in PNMs, b) that sign-in and sign-out logs are maintained and used to 
certify invoices as required by the contracts, and c) that COTRs be designated in writing. 
The VISN and Medical Center Directors agreed with the findings and suggestions and reported 
that PNMs have been completed for the contracts identified in the review and PNMs will be 
prepared for all future contract negotiations.  Staff have been reminded of the requirement to 
maintain sign-in and sign-out logs for contract employees and to use these logs to certify 
invoices, and COTR designation letters have been prepared for the contracts identified in the 
review.  The improvement plan is acceptable, and we consider the issues resolved. 
Computer Equipment Accountability – Inventory Controls and 
Procedures For Loaning Laptop Computers to Staff Should Be 
Improved 
Condition Needing Improvement. Medical center management needed to improve procedures 
for performing physical inventories and updating equipment inventory lists (EILs) of 
nonexpendable computer equipment.  Also, procedures for loaning laptop computers to staff 
needed to be improved to ensure laptops were loaned only for official purposes.  VA policy 
requires that EIL inventories be performed at least every 2 years.  Acquisition and Materiel 
Management Service (A&MMS) and using services with nonexpendable equipment are 
responsible for ensuring EIL inventories are completed and EIL records are accurate.  As of 
February 25, 2004, Information Resource Management’s (IRM’s) EIL contained 3,323 line items 
valued at $6 million.  EIL inventories were performed by IRM in FYs 2001 and 2003.  As a 
result of these inventories, computer equipment totaling $235,000 was written off because it 
could not be located.  We identified four deficiencies with equipment accountability procedures. 
Timeliness of IRM EIL Inventories.  EIL inventories of IRM equipment were not performed 
timely.  VA policy establishes timeliness standards for completing EIL inventories based on the 
number of items on the EILs.  When an inventory is due, A&MMS staff notifies the responsible 
official.  Based on the size of IRM’s EIL, the responsible official should conduct a physical 
count of all nonexpendable computer equipment within 20 days after receipt of the notice that an 
inventory is due.  We found that the last inventory took 6 months, from January to July 2003, to 
complete.  Also, another inventory was initiated January 12, 2004, with the hiring of a new CIO.  
However, as of February 27, 2004, this inventory had not been completed. 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
12 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Quarterly Spot Checks.  A&MMS staff had not performed VA-required quarterly spot checks of 
the completed IRM EIL inventories to ensure the accuracy of reported information. 
Accuracy of EILs.  To verify the accuracy of information on the IRM EIL, we reviewed a 
judgment sample of 14 items with a total value of $16,199.  We found that seven were not in the 
locations indicated on the EIL.  Four items were found in other rooms; however, a search of 
nearby rooms did not locate the other three items.  This problem occurred because the EIL was 
not updated when equipment was moved or excessed. 
Loaning Laptop Computers to Staff.  Controls over loaning laptop computers to staff to perform 
official duties away from the medical center needed improvement.  Prior to February 2004, the 
medical center had no written policy or procedures for loaning laptop computers to staff.  Local 
policy issued on February 23, 2004, provided procedures for requesting and borrowing laptop 
computers.  However, it did not require supervisory approvals or explanations as to why the 
laptop computers were needed or how long they would be needed. 
As of February 26, 2004, IRM maintained a pool of 68 laptops of which 34 were on loan to staff.  
Although IRM maintained a log showing to whom these laptops were loaned, there was no 
record of supervisors authorizing the need for the loans, nor any explanations as to why the 
laptops were needed.  IRM staff stated that generally laptops were loaned to staff that travel to 
CBOCs or make home visits.  Our review of the log of loaned laptop computers disclosed two 
laptop computers loaned to physicians who live and work at the medical center.  Also, one social 
worker had two laptop computers signed out in his name. 
Suggested Improvement Action(s) 2. We suggested that the VISN Director ensure that the 
Medical Center Director requires: a) IRM to complete EIL inventories timely, b) A&MMS staff 
to perform quarterly EIL inventory spot checks, c) A&MMS and IRM staff to update EIL 
records when equipment is moved or excessed, and d) IRM to revise local policy on loaning 
laptop computers to staff to ensure loans are only made for official purposes. 
The VISN and Medical Center Directors agreed with the findings and suggestions and reported 
that an inventory management position has been created to assist in inventories, quarterly EIL 
inventories were initiated in May 2004, a more efficient process was developed by IRM to better 
track IT equipment, and new processes are in place for loaning laptop computers and medical 
center policy is being updated to include these changes.  The improvement plan is acceptable, 
and we consider the issues resolved. 
 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
13 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Appendix A 
  
VISN 10 Director Comments 
Department of  
Veterans Affairs 
Memorandum 
Date: 
May 24, 2004 
From: 
Network Director, VA Healthcare System of Ohio, VISN 10 (10N10) 
Subject: Combined Assessment Program (CAP) Review of the VA Medical Center 
Chillicothe, Ohio 
To: 
Assistanct Inspector General for Auditing (52) 
 
1.  I concur with the comments and action plans submitted by the Medical 
Center Director at Chillicothe, Ohio, in response to the OIG CAP Review 
conducted in February 2004.  The staff found the review educational and 
appreciated the professionalism of the OIG Team. 
 
 
2.  If you have questions regarding the response, please contact Douglas A. 
Moorman, Medical Center Director, at (740)773-1141, extension 7002. 
 
 
 
                  (original signed by:)
 
CLYDE PARKIS 
Director, Veterans Integrated Service Network 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
14 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Appendix B 
 
VA Medical Center Director Comments 
Department of  
Veterans Affairs 
Memorandum 
Date: 
May 24, 2004      
From: 
Director, VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio (538/00) 
Subject: Combined Assessment Program (CAP) Review of the VA Medical Center 
Chillicothe, Ohio 
To: 
Director, Veterans Integrated Service Network 10 (10N10) 
1. Attached is the response from the VA Medical Center, Chillicothe, Ohio, in 
regard to the OIG CAP Review in February 2004.  I concur with the findings 
and recommendations/suggestions made by the review team.  We found the 
review educational and helpful in preparation for our upcoming JCAHO Survey 
in August.  We also appreciated the professionalism of the review team. 
2. If you have any questions about the attached response, please feel free to 
contact me. 
(original signed by:) 
DOUGLAS A. MOORMAN 
Medical Center Director 
 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
15 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
 
 
 
Director’s Comments 
to Office of Inspector General’s Report  
 
The following Director’s comments are submitted in response to the 
recommendation and suggestions in the Office of Inspector General Report: 
OIG Recommendation(s) 
1. Correct environment of care deficiencies 
a) The Medical Center Associate Director’s action plan for housekeeping and 
maintenance issues is implemented. 
Work orders have been submitted for button (keyless) entry for soiled utility 
rooms.  Until new locks are installed, staff have been reminded that these doors 
must remain locked at all times.  Staff break rooms and associated equipment 
(refrigerators, microwave ovens, etc.) are now included routinely in 
environmental and infection control rounds.  Improvements have already been 
noted.  The noted food in the procedure room was an anomaly and the incident 
is not standard practice.  The Asian Multi-Colored Lady Beetle was introduced 
into the United States from Asia to control aphids, scale and other crop pests 
from 1978 to 1981.  They are now widely distributed east of the Mississippi and 
have been documented in areas of the Midwest, Southwest and Pacific 
Northwest.  Asian Lady Beetles enter homes and buildings in large numbers and 
although they are harmless to humans, they have become persistent over-
wintering pests in buildings in some parts of the United States. They are usually 
recognized as typical ladybugs, but they are slightly larger than the native 
species.  This beetle (6 to 10 mm) is also a little larger than the two-spotted lady 
beetle (4 to 5 mm).  This species is a voracious predator of crop pests and 
produces several generations per year.  Their tendency to aggregate and ability 
to enter structures may cause this insect to become a significant structural pest.  
They may be found in attics, wall voids, on siding and other such places and 
may be attracted to light.  The Chillicothe VA Medical Center is a campus style 
facility with multiple buildings and is approximately 80 years of age.  We are 
located in a rural setting with woods, farms and crops surrounding the facility. 
As stated above, there are multiple entry points in structures for this aggressive 
pest to enter.  Their nature is to seek shelter throughout the winter months when 
weather transitions from warm to cold i.e., they literally swarm to buildings 
when this transition occurs.  Our pest controllers continue to seal off entry points 
when observed i.e., cracks in windows, screens, doors, around ceilings, etc.  
Works orders are generated to replace screens on an as-needed basis and are 
ongoing.  Employees are requested to keep windows and doors closed at all 
times.  It should be noted that there is little, if any, food source available to 
Asian Beetles once they are in the medical center and they die off relatively 
quickly, i.e., within a few days.  However, they do swarm for days at a time and 
require the repeated cleaning of most light diffusers throughout the facility by 
housekeeping personnel.  In terms of the scope of the problem, please note that 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
16 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
 
 
you can clean a particular light diffuser and find them there again within 
minutes.  They mostly congregate in light fixtures and around windows where 
warmth can be obtained.  Fumigation or chemical treatments to eradicate this 
pest are not an option.  Their continued removal requires a great deal of man-
hours by housekeeping staff as the weather changes as previously noted.  Staff 
monitor daily when weather patterns dictate, and they are targeted for immediate 
removal when conducting building inspections by EMS personnel.  We will 
continue to aggressively remove this target pest when necessary.  Regarding 
hallway damage from motorized carts, operator training is conducted by the 
safety manager and a card is issued to each employee who completes training.  
Reporting of damage is encouraged and factors leading up to the incidents are 
discussed for improvement of processes.  Ceiling tiles have been replaced (this 
is a continual process) and painting is being accomplished as manpower permits 
(this is also a continual process).  Safety procedures have been implemented in 
the loading area near Building 24.  The lift gate has been modified to reduce the 
risk of carts rolling off the platform, the most level area is used for unloading, 
the area is closed to other traffic during loading, and employees are not 
permitted to ride the lift when there is a load on it. 
b) SPD supplies are reprocessed when outdated 
SPD routinely reprocesses outdated supplies.  As a QA measure (implemented 
in March), SPD instituted an Outdate Checklist for daily checks of sterile 
supplies.  This is also spot checked by the Chief, SPD and the Associate Central 
Hub A&MMS Manager. 
c) Confidential patient information is secured 
The medical center continually monitors computer terminals that are “walked 
away from” without being locked or logged off.  Messages are left on these 
machines to remind the user to lock or log off the terminal before leaving.  
Repeat offenders are referred to the service chief/care line manager, or higher if 
necessary.  Information was sent to all employees with complete instructions for 
logging off, locking workstations, shutting down, changing passwords and using 
the task manager. 
d) Access to the female locker room and showers in the gymnasium in Building 
247 is provided for wheelchair-dependent female veterans 
The threshold (lip at shower entry) constituting the identified barrier has already 
been removed and the area tiled.  A project to make the entire building ADA 
compliant has been submitted for FY05. 
2. Improve information technology security 
a) Revise the LAN Security Plan and medical center contingency plans in 
accordance with Government IT guidelines 
 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
17 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
 
 
Completed May 10, 2004. 
b) Store backup tapes in a location away from the computer room building 
A new room has been located in Building 1 (Room BA101A) and backup tapes 
are being moved on May 21, 2004. 
c) Remove signage identifying the locations of sensitive information and 
automated systems 
Signs have been removed. 
d) Remind employees of the need to secure patient information by ensuring 
computers are properly locked or logged off when left unattended 
See 1.c. above. 
e) Upgrade the physical security of the new computer storage room 
Smoke detectors were installed before the OIG team left the medical center.  An 
appropriate location (out of Building 35) to store new computers is being 
developed by the medical center Space Committee and will include all required 
security features.  An action plan is expected to be completed by June 2004.  In 
the interim, a temporary motion detection system is being installed in the 
existing rooms. 
f) Ensure plans to remedy potential risks associated with the air conditioning and 
UPS system for the computer room are carried out timely. 
There is an NRM project approved to construct a new computer room on the 
first floor of Building 18.  This will include new air conditioning systems and a 
new UPS.  Award of the project is anticipated in September 2004.  In the 
interim, compressors in the existing air conditioning units have been replaced 
for improved reliability and capacity.  The existing UPS has been put under a 
service contract for improved response to any future repair needs.  The vendor 
replaced the battery charging board, which has restored battery charge level to 
full capacity. 
3. Enhance billing procedures and improve physician documentation of care 
provided. 
a) Strengthen the billing process to ensure all billable fee-basis claims are 
identified 
 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
18 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
 
 
The four claims identified in the audit have been billed.  Two claims were for a 
CNHC veteran treated at a private emergency room for G tube placement and 
swallowing evaluation and two claims were for services provided for labor and 
delivery.  These were different than bills normally seen and the Lead Biller 
assisted in processing the claims.  Processes are now in place for timely 
processing of all fee-basis claims. 
b) Establish procedures to ensure bills are processed before insurance carrier 
filing deadlines expire. 
Unbilled Reports are run monthly back two years to ensure that all billable 
episodes are reviewed for possible billing.  Contracted Billers (Preferred 
Medical Billing and Consulting) follow up on current year cases and our billing 
staff review prior year cases. 
c) Bill for optometry services provided by licensed optometry residents. 
Are now billing and have back-billed appropriate cases. 
d) Ensure physicians adequately document care provided in the medical records. 
We continue to run the Reasons not Billable Report monthly to identify cases 
canceled because of inadequate documentation.  Coding refers cases to Care 
Line Managers and supervisors for necessary corrective action.  An employee 
has been detailed as a training instructor and liaison with clinic staff to address 
documentation issues that directly impact on our ability to code accurately and 
bill correctly and timely. 
e) Prepare bills for the cases identified in the OIG review. 
All cases identified have been billed. 
4. Reduce excess supply inventories and strengthen inventory management 
controls. 
a) Inventory managers to reduce supply inventory to the 30-day supply goal and 
improve the accuracy of GIP. 
Each Item Manager assigned the function of managing a GIP for an area is 
currently working with the end user to reduce inventory to the 30 day on hand 
mandate.  They are reviewing the past history usage, the current level, and 
determining where adjustments are necessary.  In addition, there is a Goal 
Sharing team working with SPD to identify long/inactive items and make 
recommendations to reduce or excess items. There is also a group of 
Engineering staff identified to work together with A&MMS reviewing items in 
the Tool Room to determine if there are items being stocked which should be 
excessed or the level reduced.  
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
19 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
 
 
 
At this time it is estimated GIP will be at a 30 day level as follows: 
Environmental Management  August 30, 2004 
Dental   September 30, 2004 
Laboratory  September 30, 2004 
Radiology  September 30, 2004 
SPD September 30, 2004 
Warehouse  March 2005 
An inventory management tool (the monthly GIP Inventory Report) was 
developed, which lists the various GIP inventory accounts, the inventory due 
dates, the date the inventory was completed, discrepancies found, and summary 
of actions to be taken.  The report is completed by the Chief, Materiel 
Management, reviewed by the Associate Central Hub A&MMS Manager, and 
provided to the Associate Medical Center Director.  Adequate number of staff 
are available to complete inventories in a timely fashion. 
b) SPD to conduct and document annual wall-to-wall physical inventories. 
An inventory was completed on March 18, with a 68 percent accuracy rate.  
Procedures were reviewed and adjustments made.  Another inventory was 
conducted on April 15, 2004, with an accuracy rate of 84 percent.  A third 
inventory was completed on May 13, 2004, with an accuracy rate of 88 percent.  
Another inventory is being scheduled and they will continue until an accuracy 
rate of at least 95 percent is achieved. 
5. Strengthen monthly controlled substances inspections. 
a) Certify the accuracy of pharmacy records of controlled substances awaiting 
destruction. 
Completed.  New policy was published February 23, 2004 and procedures are in 
place and being used. 
b) Document in the monthly controlled substances inspection reports whether 
excess and outdated controlled substances were destroyed in the prior quarter. 
Completed.  New policy was published February 23, 2004 and procedures are in 
place and being used. 
c) Verify five randomly selected dispensing activities on each unit to the 
medical records during each monthly controlled substances inspection. 
Completed.  New policy was published February 23, 2004 and procedures are in 
place and being used. 
6. Aggregate and analyze moderate sedation outcome data. 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
20 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
 
 
a) Designate a committee to aggregate and analyze moderate sedation outcome 
data 
Data go to the Medical Staff Executive Committee and any outliers are 
forwarded to the Peer Review Committee.  
OIG Suggestion(s) 
1. Fully document price reasonableness determinations and ensure services are 
validated in accordance with contract terms prior to payment. 
a) Contracting officers to document their determinations of fair and reasonable 
prices in PNMs 
The contracting Officer completed the Price Negotiation Memoranda (PNMs) 
on both contracts in question on February 27, 2004.  Appropriate PNMs will be 
prepared on all future contract negotiations and negotiations will be documented 
in the contract files. 
b) That sign-in and sign-out logs are maintained and used to certify invoices as 
required by the contracts. 
All service chiefs/care line managers using contract employees have been 
reminded in writing of the requirement to maintain a sign-in and sign-out log at 
each facility where contract employees are providing services.  A sheet for this 
purpose was developed and implemented on May 1, 2004.  These sheets will be 
maintained and will be the only documents used to verify services performed 
and to certify invoices. 
c) That COTRs be designated in writing. 
Appropriate COTR designations were prepared on February 27, 2004 for the 
two contracts in question.  As appropriate and as provided for under applicable 
FAR and VA regulations, COTR designations will be properly prepared for all 
future contracts. 
2. Ensure computer equipment inventories are completed timely, inventory 
lists are updated when needed, and the local policy on loaning laptop computers 
is revised. 
a) IRM to complete EIL inventories timely. 
A&MMS has created a dedicated inventory management position to assist in 
IRM EIL inventories.  IRM has developed a more efficient process to be used 
not only during the annual inventory, but daily in an effort to better track IT 
equipment. 
b) A&MMS staff to perform quarterly EIL inventory spot checks. 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
21 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
 
 
This process began in May 2004.  The EIL spot checks are reported through the 
Associate Central Hub A&MMS Manager to the Associate Medical Center 
Director. 
c) A&MMS and IRM staff to update EIL records when equipment is moved or 
excessed. 
A&MMS updates the EIL records after the Warehouse picks up equipment that 
has been turned in as excess.  As mentioned above, IRM has developed a new 
process for tracking IT equipment when it is moved and A&MMS and IRM are 
meeting on May 21, 2004 to review the new process. 
d) IRM to revise local policy on loaning laptop computers to staff to ensure 
loans are only made for official purposes. 
New processes are in place for laptop loan requests to include reason for request 
an supervisory approval.  The policy (PM 19-02, Use of Computer 
Laptops/Notebooks and Projectors) is in process of being updated to include 
these changes. 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
22 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Appendix C 
  
Monetary Benefits in Accordance with 
IG Act Amendments 
Recommendation 
Explanation of Benefit(s) 
Better Use of Funds 
3 
Better use of funds by ensuring all billing 
opportunities are realized. 
$13,095 
4 
Better use of funds by reducing supply 
inventories to 30-day supply levels. 
90,304 
 
 
Total 
$103,399 
 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
23 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Appendix D 
  
OIG Contact and Staff Acknowledgments 
 
OIG Contact 
William H. Withrow, Director, Kansas City Audit Operations 
Division (816) 426-7100 
Acknowledgments 
Nelson Miranda, Director, Washington Office of Healthcare 
Inspections 
Joseph T. Janasz, Jr., CAP Review Coordinator 
Randall Snow, Healthcare Inspections Team Leader 
Richard Horanski, Investigations Team Leader 
Jim L. Garrison 
C. Russell Lewis 
Gavin McClaren 
Henry Mendala 
Rayda Nadal 
Michelle Porter 
Carla S. Reid 
Oscar L. Williams 
 
 
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
24 
Combined Assessment Program Review of the VA Medical Center Chillicothe, Ohio 
Appendix E 
  
Report Distribution 
VA Distribution 
 
Office of the Secretary 
Veterans Health Administration 
Assistant Secretaries 
General Counsel 
 
Non-VA Distribution 
 
House Committee on Veterans’ Affairs 
House Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies 
House Committee on Government Reform 
Senate Committee on Veterans’ Affairs 
Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on VA, HUD, and Independent Agencies 
Senate Committee on Government Affairs 
National Veterans Service Organizations 
General Accounting Office 
Office of Management and Budget 
The Honorable Mike Dewine, U.S. Senate 
The Honorable George Voinovich, U.S. Senate 
The Honorable Dave Hobson, U.S. House of Representatives 
The Honorable Bob Ney, U.S. House of Representatives 
The Honorable Rob Portman, U.S. House of Representatives 
The Honorable Ted Strickland, U.S. House of Representatives 
The Honorable Michael Turner, U.S. House of Representatives 
 
 
This report will be available in the near future on the OIG’s Web site at 
http://www.va.gov/oig/52/reports/mainlist.htm.  This report will remain on the OIG Web site for 
at least 2 fiscal years after it is issued.   
VA Office of Inspector General 
 
25 
