 
ELECTRONICS/COMPUTER HARDWARE/COMMUNICATIONS 
 
Kopin Corporation 
Miniature LCDs Enhance High-Definition Displays 
In 1994, the computer industry was developing high-speed, advanced processors and high-
capacity data storage. Display technology lagged behind; consumers wanted larger, faster, 
flicker-free video images and complex graphics (e.g., computer-aided design applications) on 
lighter weight, lower cost, energy-efficient displays. Kopin and Philips formed a joint venture 
and requested cost-shared funding from the Advanced Technology Program (ATP) to achieve 
numerous pre-commercial technical advances in liquid crystal display (LCD) color high-
definition televisions (HDTVs). This project would have required additional years to accomplish 
without this joint venture collaboration and external funding. High-definition display technology 
was changing rapidly, and, at the time, the market was dominated 100 percent by foreign 
manufacturers.  
ATP awarded funding from 1995 through 1998 to Kopin and Philips, who together with their 
subcontractor, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, planned to develop and integrate the 
optical and color system (e.g., lenses, mirrors, or light guides), digital signals, and LCDs into a 
single, integrated package. By 2003, Philips had successfully commercialized high-resolution 
projection HDTVs that used the ATP-funded technology.  
Kopin applied the ATP-funded enabling technology in numerous applications to include 
miniaturized display applications for use in viewfinders for camcorders and digital cameras, 
wearable computers, virtual reality games, and military applications. LCD projection display 
technology is a key product differentiator in U.S. electronics manufacturing.  
 
COMPOSITE PERFORMANCE SCORE 
               (based on a four star rating) 
                 * * * *  
 
Research and data for Status Report 94-01-0304 were collected during June - September 2003. 
 
Early Tests of Facilitated Transport Identify 
Problems  
In 1994, the technology used to generate images for 
computer monitors, TVs, and projection televisions was 
the cathode-ray tube (CRT), a sophisticated glass 
vacuum tube with one to three tubes and 
accompanying lenses and/or a built-in filter wheel. CRT 
screens produce crisp, vibrant images, but they have 
serious drawbacks: they are heavy, bulky, and 
inherently analog rather than digital (consider the 
quality of a phonograph player, which is analog, 
compared to a compact disc player, which is digital). In 
order to increase the screen width and height, 
manufacturers had to increase the length of the tube (to 
give the scanning electron gun room to reach all parts 
of the screen). Scaling up this tube to create larger  
 
 
displays revealed its weaknesses: it loses high 
definition over large areas, becomes curved (which 
distorts the image), requires a glass plate up to an inch 
thick, and can produce distracting line and speckle 
patterns. 
The basic process for a CRT television or computer 
monitor to display images involves lighting up 
thousands of tiny pixels with a high-energy beam of 
electrons based on the information in a video signal. In 
most systems, three pixel colors (red, green, and blue) 
are evenly distributed on the screen. By combining 
these colors in different proportions, the screen can 
produce millions of colors. 
Kopin Corporation and Philips Electronics North 
America believed they could produce large, quality  
 
 
color images by projecting miniature high-definition 
liquid crystal displays (LCDs) onto a large screen (as in 
a slide projector). Small, direct-view monochrome LCDs 
were already being used in watches, calculators, and 
laptop computers, providing the lightweight and 
compact size (especially depth) that enabled these 
items to be portable. Liquid crystals are able to maintain 
their orientation, like a solid, yet they can move in 
response to heat and electric current, like a liquid. 
Predictable responses to electric current control light 
and create images. Existing LCDs were still slow, with a 
limited ability to present shades of gray. They were 
limited in size as well. Moreover, manufacturing the 
LCDs required a large up-front capital investment, 
because it is difficult to produce large flawless LCD 
panels. Producing large LCD direct-view displays was 
considered unsuitable for monitors or high-definition 
televisions (HDTVs) due to a high defect rate in 
manufacturing. 
CRT screens have serious drawbacks:  
they are heavy, bulky, and inherently analog 
rather than digital. 
At the time, all LCDs for laptop displays were 
manufactured outside the United States. If Kopin and 
Philips’ proposed project could make the necessary 
advances in speed, grayscale resolution, and 
optics/color, LCD projection technology could provide 
an entrée for U.S. manufacturers to compete in the 
global high-definition market.  
Kopin and Philips Propose to Collaborate 
Kopin Corporation is a small, innovative U.S. company 
of scientists and engineers that focuses on developing 
personal, portable communication products. Philips 
Electronics North America is part of a leading global 
electronics firm that focuses on consumer electronics, 
with a strong research and development program in 
New York. The subcontractor, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology (MIT), was brought into the project 
because they specialize in designing digital signal-
processing methods (translating electronic signals into 
images). However, after the first year of the project, MIT 
dropped out and Philips took over MIT’s task.  
The joint venture applied and was awarded ATP 
funding support in 1994 in order to pursue an  
 
aggressive technology development path. ATP 
awarded three years of funding to advance LCD 
projection display technology and to build a U.S. 
infrastructure to manufacture the technology. This 
infrastructure would support high-definition projection 
displays for future HDTV and computer applications. 
The technology required integrating the optical and 
color system (such as lenses, mirrors, and light guides), 
digital signals, and LCDs. The team needed the ATP 
award in order to support collaboration between Philips 
and Kopin; to speed up the development; and to break 
into a newly expanding global market.  
To accomplish the joint venture’s goals, fundamental 
advances were needed in high-resolution LCD 
grayscale images, speed, optical/color filter systems, 
light manipulation, screens, electronics, and digital 
signal processing. The team needed to produce shades 
of gray first, in order to display image detail and 
richness. Kopin was producing Smart Slide, an LCD 
technology for small projection systems that projected 
like a photographic slide (at 640 x 480 pixels). Philips 
had developed color high-definition display systems 
with three panels, one for each color. Philips hoped to 
integrate systems and produce color projection HDTVs 
and computer monitors at a lower cost. The joint 
venture’s goal was to combine Kopin’s image quality 
with Philips’ optics and color technologies. 
Joint Venture Defines Specific Tasks to Meet 
Challenging Objectives 
If Kopin and Philips’ technologies could be combined 
successfully, the proposed projection displays would 
save production expenses: 
• 
HDTV components could be manufactured on 
existing production lines. 
• 
Reducing pixel size would reduce cost. If the size of 
each pixel could be reduced, the manufacturer 
could either provide more pixels in a given space, 
providing more detail, or else reduce the size of the 
image with the same image quality and lower cost. 
• 
Production of small components would cost less 
than large, direct-view LCDs, which could not be 
produced in large sizes at the time, due to a high 
defect rate. 
 
 
The team set challenging system requirements: over a 
million pixels (high resolution); full color; bright, sharp, 
and pleasing images; and a fast display that was 
capable of video speeds. The team’s five specific tasks 
were the following: 
1. Kopin would improve LCD speed (from 30 
milliseconds (ms) to 2 ms). The basis of the 
technology was a cost-effective glass panel on 
which an overlying layer of liquid crystal is rapidly 
controlled with an underlying thin film of silicon-
based circuitry. 
2. Philips would integrate electronics into the display 
(projecting images using standard digital video 
formats). 
3. Philips would design and develop the optical and 
color system, minimize light loss, and generate full 
color by filtering three colors on a single panel. 
4. Philips would design external electronics for a test 
bed monitor and HDTV. 
5. Philips would construct a prototype system and 
would evaluate image quality. 
The entire system needed to be designed so that 
manufacturing costs would be low enough to open the 
technology to the large consumer markets expected in 
projection display for monitors, multimedia applications, 
and HDTV. The team anticipated that Philips or a third-
party label would produce the displays that could 
interface with computer software, HDTV signals, or 
other image sources. Anticipated spillover products 
included home entertainment systems, business 
presentation graphics, printing, and graphic arts. 
Projection Technology Makes Great Strides 
By the end of the ATP-funded project in 1998, the joint 
venture had successfully developed and demonstrated 
the key components to support high-definition color 
projection display products. Kopin and Philips 
accomplished 95 percent of their five technical goals: 
1. Kopin reached target LCD image refresh speeds of 
2 ms (improved by a factor of 15). The company 
developed an active matrix liquid crystal display 
(AMLCD) and some electronics with a resolution of 
1280 x 1024 pixels. Kopin developed proprietary  
 
 
methods to redesign circuits so that the foundry 
could manufacture AMLCD displays with fewer 
defects, thus increasing the yield and lowering 
production costs.  
2. Philips integrated electronics into the display and 
achieved high-speed image transfer (1.8 gigabits 
per second). They developed and demonstrated 
high-speed image microprocessors using TM-1000 
chips. Faster TM-2 chips were being developed, 
but were not expected to be available until 1999, 
after project conclusion. These new chips would 
accommodate parallel operation of all image 
enhancement and correction programs 
simultaneously. Philips intended to perform 
additional research using the faster TM-2 chips 
after the completion of the ATP-funded project. 
3. Philips designed and developed the optical and 
color system (see illustration, below). Steps 
included controlling and processing light passing 
through the liquid crystal; developing the lenses; 
and demonstrating real-time correction of color, 
contrast, and resolution. The system scans 
sequential stripes of red, green, and blue light down 
the display panel. Simultaneous color data loading 
into the pixel array run ahead of the respective 
scanning color stripes. These parallel operations 
maximize the time that each color is displayed and 
increase brightness. 
 
Magnified view of Philips’ color optics. Mirrors separate and recombine 
the red, green, and blue colors. 
4. Philips designed the display drive electronics to 
take television-format video signals and display a 
picture, while controlling the picture’s brightness 
and color saturation. The electronics module 
receives digital video signals and scales the image 
to match the display resolution (size). 
 
 
 
5. The final color display demonstration was not 
performed at project conclusion, because the LCD 
technology was still too slow for commercial use. 
Philips demonstrated a prototype system to 
evaluate image quality. The company completed an 
operational TM-1000-based system in a personal 
computer (PC). Philips constructed 12 screen 
samples, which compared well with the design 
goals. The proof-of-concept implementation verified 
the algorithms and evaluated image quality 
(formatting, brightness, color, and contrast were 
demonstrated individually). While the 
demonstration system approached, but did not 
achieve, the resolution and speckle goals, the 
system did validate the viability of the technology. 
Philips and Kopin’s key accomplishments during the 
ATP-funded project included the following: achieving a 
1280 x 1024 pixel display operating at 180 Hertz frame 
rate; correcting color in real-time; and demonstrating 
high color brightness. Philips received two patents for 
this technology. Philips and Kopin shared their 
advances with industry through publications and 
presentations. While these accomplishments 
encouraged the two companies to continue with 
additional investment and research into the technology, 
later changes in the industry led the companies to 
redirect their efforts. The computer monitor market 
changed as direct-view LCD manufacturing yield 
improved, as flat panels were being produced with 
fewer defects. This eliminated the need for projection 
technology in high-definition computer monitors. 
Therefore, Philips focused on HDTV only; Kopin applied 
its technology to other miniature near-to-eye displays 
(e.g., cell phones, viewfinders for camcorders, and 
eyewear viewers that allow wearers to view the display 
screen with one eye). Thus, the ATP-funded technology 
was successfully applied to other markets. 
Kopin Moves toward Miniature Display 
Development 
Kopin moved away from projection HDTV development, 
because the company could not reduce the 
manufacturing cost of LCD screens for large 
projections. Instead, it focused on miniature displays 
and commercialized its first CyberDisplay product in 
1997 (see illustration below). This product includes a 
color sequential display, based on the technology 
developed during this ATP-funded project, that uses a  
 
 
0.25-inch diagonal AMLCD. At the conclusion of the 
internally funded research, Philips developed its own  
project in October 1998, Kopin was marketing 10,000 
AMLCD displays per month to U.S. original equipment 
manufacturers (OEMs) for miniature near-to-eye 
viewing (e.g., eyeglass attachments for medical and 
research applications) and military applications (e.g., 
helmet-mounted displays for pilots). 
 
  
Example of a Kopin CyberDisplay LCD, with 0.25-inch diameter, used for 
a microdisplay. 
Philips Continues HDTV Display Development after 
Project Concludes 
After the conclusion of the ATP-funded project, Philips 
realized that Kopin’s LCD technology was still too slow 
to meet commercial needs for HDTV. Continuing with 
faster miniature internal reflective display system (less 
than 0.2 ms image refresh speed) that relied on liquid 
crystal on silicon (LCoS), which would replace LCD for 
this product by 2000. LCoS devices have the crystals 
coated over the surface of a silicon chip. Electronic 
circuits are etched into the chip, which is coated with a 
reflective surface. LCoS devices are even smaller than 
LCDs, are easier to manufacture, and have a higher 
resolution (see illustration below). Philips had 
completed a full high-definition demonstration of the 
front-end electronics using the TM-2 chip by the end of 
1999. Using the faster TM-2 chip showed full high-
definition processing functionality in real time. Philips 
published several articles about its research and 
continued to pursue projection displays for HDTV. 
 
Example of a Philips LCoS device used for a microdisplay. 
High-Definition Technology Booms 
Both Philips and Kopin were successful in marketing 
technology developed during this ATP-funded project.  
 
 
 
In 1996, projection display was one of the fastest 
growing areas of the display industry, with sales 
increasing at 25 percent per year. Sales were driven by 
home-theater applications, which also included CRT 
projectors, light-amplifier systems for large audiences 
and theaters, electronic overhead projectors, and 
helmet-mounted systems for personal viewing. Demand 
for institutional applications for presentations and data 
projectors was growing by 15 percent per year.  
The joint venture had successfully developed and 
demonstrated the key components to support 
high-definition color projection display products.
After conducting a business analysis in 2000, Philips 
decided to commercialize its projection HDTV, which it 
had initiated during this ATP project. Philips 
demonstrated its first commercial prototypes in January 
2003 and began to market them in August 2003. 
Illustrated below, this 44-inch LCoS-based projection 
HDTV system later won the Consumer Electronics 
Show’s “Best Innovation” award. 
 
Philips’ prototype 44-inch LCoS-based projection HDTV system, 
demonstrated in January 2003, won Consumer Electronics Show’s “Best 
Innovation” award. 
Philips’ model has a short depth and a low weight, 
when compared with CRT technology. Because of its 
small components, Philips’ projection HDTVs can be 
manufactured at 50 to 70 percent lower cost than direct-
view displays (plasma and LCD), with higher quality 
images than CRTs. For example, in 2003, Philips’ 
projection HDTVs ranged in price from $1,700 for a 43-
inch screen to $2,700 for a top-end 60-inch screen. In 
comparison, a CRT analog TV up to 36 inches, with 
1024 x 768 resolution, sold for $2,100, and super-thin 
42-inch plasma HDTVs cost from $3,000 to $11,500. 
 
Philips plans to offer more models of LCoS-based 
projection short-depth, low-weight HDTVs. The 
company believes it will continue to gain a price 
advantage over time, as sales grow and LCoS 
manufacturing costs drop. 
Kopin also achieved success with the project-related 
technology. By September 2003, Kopin was selling 
more than 400,000 AMLCD units per month, up from 
10,000 per month in 1998. Company employment had 
increased from 80 employees at the beginning of the 
project to 379 in 2003. 
Kopin currently markets several near-eye display 
products, called CyberDisplay (see illustration below). 
Products include monochrome and color options with 
varying resolutions. The CyberDisplay is 1,000 times 
smaller and consumes 100 times less power than a 
conventional PC monitor. Kopin sells these displays to 
a variety of OEMs for applications including viewfinders 
for digital cameras and camcorders, miniaturized view 
screens for cellular telephones, personal digital 
assistants, computerized writing instruments, virtual 
reality games, belt-wearable computers, and eyewear 
viewers (the viewer is attached to eyeglasses or a 
helmet and allows wearers to view the CyberDisplay 
screen with one eye), as well as low-volume, specialty 
military products. Demand for these products is driven 
by consumers’ desire for smaller, less expensive, more 
compact electronic devices, which display ever-
increasing amounts of data and visual information. 
 
 
Examples of OEM products that use the Kopin CyberDisplay. From left: 
IBM BodyWorn ThinkPad, JVC Camcorder, Oriscape Personal DVD 
Viewer, and Navitrak Hand-Held GPS. 
Also in 2003, Kopin was developing a rear-screen 
dashboard projector for automobiles, which builds on 
the ATP-funded technology. This dashboard will include 
instruments and programmable formats and colors. 
Prototypes of the dashboard have been used since 
2002 in Formula 1 race cars. However, because the 
dashboard is subjected to engine heat and high 
environmental temperatures, Kopin must develop 
methods to permit higher temperature tolerances for the 
display.  
 
 
Regulations Stimulate Demand for HDTV 
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) is 
responsible for regulating and enforcing 
communications standards; therefore, they are 
interested in standardizing HDTV broadcasting. In April 
1997, the FCC adopted rules for digital television 
broadcasting. The agency has been trying to accelerate 
the slow rollout to HDTV. In 2002, Congress set a target 
date for completing the transition to HDTV signals by 
December 31, 2006. These requirements encourage 
more broadcasters to offer HDTV, which stimulates 
consumer demand. As of May 2003, more than 1,000 
U.S. stations were on the air with HDTV signals, 
including at least one in every major market. (Analog 
TVs will still receive a signal; however, they will not be 
able to pick up the HDTV signal.) Philips expects to 
increase sales of its ATP-funded projection HDTVs as a 
result of increased consumer demand. 
U.S. Manufacturing Gains Entry into Display Market
Philips provided an entry for U.S. manufacturing into a 
market that was previously dominated 100 percent by 
foreign manufacturers. Philips manufactures key 
components and assembles the HDTV units in the 
United States. Kopin designs and manufactures its 
miniature displays in the United States and is the 
largest exporter of displays to Japan. 
The ATP-funded technology was successfully 
applied to other markets. 
By early 2003, more than 5 million U.S. consumers 
owned HDTV sets (less than 5 percent of U.S. homes). 
It is estimated that the market for projection HDTV will 
reach $6 to $10 billion by 2005. Worldwide shipments of 
electronic display materials were estimated at $8.5 
billion in 2000 and $66 billion in 2002, with sales 
projected to continue to grow by 12 percent per year 
and to reach $115 billion by 2007. In addition to HDTVs, 
LCD projection technology advances from this ATP-
funded project have contributed to improved resolution, 
speed, and color, as well as reduced prices in cellular 
phones, camcorders, and digital cameras. 
 
 
Conclusion 
This pioneering technology facilitated a paradigm shift 
in high-definition display technology. From 1995 to 
1998, Kopin and Philips combined existing 
monochrome liquid crystal displays (LCDs), which were 
used in watches and radios, with color, signal 
processing, and high-definition technology. During the 
project, the team accomplished 95 percent of its 
technical goals, received two patents, and shared 
knowledge with the industry through presentations and 
publications. The team members independently 
continued their development efforts after the conclusion 
of the project and achieved all of the project goals. 
Philips successfully developed and commercialized a 
liquid-crystal-on-silicon-based high-definition projection 
technology for high-definition televisions (HDTVs), 
providing prototypes by January 2003 and retail 
products by August 2003. Screens are now lighter, with 
improved color and speed, and consume less power. 
Projection HDTVs have lowered the entry price for 
consumers into the HDTV market. They are priced 50 
to 70 percent less than comparable-sized plasma 
HDTVs, which is stimulating sales. The market for 
projection HDTVs is anticipated to expand to $6 to $10 
billion by 2005, growing at approximately 11 percent 
per year. Philips expects to benefit from this sales 
increase. 
After the conclusion of the ATP-funded project, Kopin 
further developed LCD technology and provided the 
foundation for enhanced miniature color screens for 
multiple uses. Original equipment manufacturers use 
the screens in cellular phones, personal digital 
assistants, camcorder and still digital camera 
viewfinders, virtual reality games, wearable computers, 
and military applications. Kopin’s monthly sales 
increased from 10,000 active matrix liquid crystal 
displays in October 1998 to more than 400,000 units in 
September 2003. The outlook for additional new 
applications as well as growth in sales is excellent. 
 
 
 
PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS 
Kopin Corporation 
Project Title: Miniature LCDs Enhance High-
Definition Displays (High-Information Content Display 
Technology) 
Project: To develop next-generation liquid-crystal 
projection display technology capable of producing the 
high-quality, high-resolution images needed for monitors, 
multimedia applications, and high-definition TV. 
 
Duration: 4/15/1995–6/14/1998 
ATP Number: 94-01-0304 
 
Funding (in thousands): 
  
ATP Final Cost              $6,097     49% 
Participant Final Cost      6,407     51% 
Total                            $12,504 
 
Accomplishments: Kopin and Philips 
accomplished 95 percent of their technical goals:  
• 
Developed and demonstrated high-speed image 
microprocessors using TM-1000 chips 
• 
Designed and developed the optical and color system 
• 
Designed the display drive electronics to take 
television-format video signals and display a picture 
• 
Demonstrated a prototype system to evaluate 
image quality 
Philips continued research and ultimately developed and 
successfully commercialized high-definition projection 
televisions (HDTVs) in 2003, which relied on liquid-
crystal-on-silicon (LCoS) displays. Philips manufactures 
components and assembles the HDTV units in the 
United States. 
ATP support allowed Kopin to develop a knowledge base 
that later made its CyberDisplay product series possible; 
CyberDisplay’s color sequential display is based on this 
technology. Kopin produces U.S.-made liquid crystal 
displays (LCDs) for miniaturized color screens used in 
cellular phones, personal digital assistants, camcorder 
and still digital camera viewfinders, virtual reality games, 
wearable computers, and military applications. Kopin 
was selling more than 400,000 units per month by 
September 2003 and was the largest exporter of displays 
to Japan. 
In addition, Philips and Kopin received patents and 
awards, and they disseminated knowledge through 
presentations and publications. 
 
Philips filed and was awarded the following two patents 
resulting from this project: 
• 
“Rear projection screen with reduced speckle” 
(No. 6,147,801: filed August 18, 1997, granted 
November 14, 2000) 
• 
“Dichroic filters with low nm per degree sensitivity”  
(No. 5,999,321: filed June 19, 1998, granted 
December 7, 1999) 
The Philips projection HDTV won an award for 
innovation: 
• 
“Best Innovation for Consumer Electronics Show 
2003” for the 44-inch LCoS HDTV 
The ATP-funded project contributed to the knowledge 
base that made development of Kopin’s CyberDisplay 
product series possible in an accelerated timeframe. 
Kopin’s CyberDisplay won the following awards for 
innovation: 
• 
“Product of the Year,” for expanding functionality of 
portable devices including PDAs, cell phones, and 
pagers, 1998, Electronic Products magazine 
• 
“25 Technologies of the Year,” 1998, IndustryWeek 
magazine 
• 
“25 Most Technically Innovative Products,” 1999, 
for the CyberDisplay 320C, Photonics Spectra 
magazine 
Commercialization Status: Philips 
successfully brought the short-depth, low-weight 
projection HDTVs to market in August 2003. The award-
winning LCoS picture provides “the next level…[of] 
unsurpassed natural colors and picture sharpness,” 
according to the Consumer Electronics Show 2003. 
Philips was able to price the models 50 to 70 percent 
lower than comparable-sized plasma HDTVs and 
anticipates that production costs will become even more 
cost competitive as LCoS production increases. Sales 
are expected to be brisk. 
Kopin’s projection display products are being marketed 
for many applications. Kopin products include the 
CyberDisplay 320 Monochrome, CyberDisplay 320 
Color, CyberDisplay 640 Color, CyberDisplay 1280 
Monochrome, and custom displays. These are used by 
original equipment manufacturers for many applications, 
including camcorder viewfinders, digital still camera 
viewfinders, hand-held global positioning system 
devices, wireless cellular telephones, personal digital 
assistants and pagers, personal computers, wearable  
 
 
 
PROJECT HIGHLIGHTS 
Kopin Corporation 
computers, and military applications. Near-to-eye head-
mounted displays (attached to eye glasses or a helmet) 
connect with any device that provides video output (e.g., 
digital camera, camcorder, portable TV, or laptop).  
 
Outlook: The outlook for this technology is excellent. 
Worldwide sales of electronic display products were 
estimated at $66 billion in 2002. Shipments were 
projected to continue to grow by 12 percent per year to 
reach $115 billion by 2007. The market for projection 
HDTVs is anticipated to reach $6 to $10 billion in 2005. 
In addition, sales of miniature near-to-eye applications 
(e.g., viewfinders for camcorders and digital cameras, 
wearable computers, and military applications) are 
growing.  
 
Composite Performance Score: * * * *    
Number of Employees: 80 at project start, 379 
as of September 2003 
Company: 
Kopin Corporation 
695 Myles Standish Boulevard 
Taunton, MA 02780 
 
Contact: Ollie Woodard 
Phone: (508) 824-6696 
 
Company: 
Philips Consumer Electronics North America  
345 Scarborough Road 
Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510 
Contact: Betsy McIlvaine 
Phone: (914) 945-6195 
Subcontractor: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Cambridge, MA 
Publications and Presentations: 
Philips and Kopin’s presentations and publications 
include the following: 
• 
Stanton, D. A., J. A. Shimizu, and J. E. Dean. 
“Three-Lamp Single-Device Projector.” 
Proceedings of SID 1996, San Diego, CA, pp. 839-
42, May 12-17, 1996. 
• 
Goldenberg, J. F., H. Qiang, and J. A. Shimizu. 
“Rear Projection Screens for Light Valve Projection 
Systems.” Projection Displays III, San Jose, CA, 
Sponsors: SPIE and IS&T, Proceedings of the 
International Society for Optical Engineering 
(SPIE), vol. 3013, pp. 49-59, Feb. 10-12, 1997. 
• 
Woodard, O., F. P. Herrmann, H. E. Kim, and F. P. 
Cuomo. “Development of a 2560 x 2048 AMLCD 
Display for HMD Applications.” Helmet- and Head-
Mounted Displays III, Proceedings of the SPIE, vol. 
3362, pp. 311-321, August 1998. 
• 
Shimizu, J. A. “Single Panel Reflective LCD 
Projector.” Projection Displays V, San Jose, CA, 
Sponsors: SPIE and the Society for Imaging 
Science & Technology, Proceedings of the SPIE, 
vol. 3634, pp. 197-206, Jan. 26-28, 1999. 
• 
Gale, R. P., F. Herrmann, J. Lo, M. Metras, B-Y. 
Tsaur, A. Richard, D. Ellertson, et al. “Miniature 
1280 by 1024 Active Matrix Liquid Crystal 
Displays.” Helmet- and Head-Mounted Displays IV, 
Proceedings of the SPIE, vol. 3689, pp. 231-237, 
July 1999. 
• 
Woodard, O., R. P. Gale, H. L. Ong, and M. J. 
Presz. “Developing the 1280 by 1024 AMLCD for 
the RAH-66 Comanche.” Helmet- and Head-
Mounted Displays V, Proceedings of the SPIE, vol. 
4021, pp. 203-213, June 2000. 
• 
Shimizu, J. A. “Philips’ Scrolling-Color LCoS Engine 
for HDTV Rear Projection.” Information-Display, 
vol. 17, no. 11, pp.14-19, Nov. 2001, published by 
Palisades Inst. Res. Services. 
• 
Janssen, P., J. A. Shimizu, J. Dean, and R. Albu. 
“Design Aspects of a Scrolling Color LCoS 
Display.” Displays (UK), vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 99-108, 
June 2002, published by Elsevier. 
• 
Woodard, O. C., R. P. Gale, and C. E. Reese. 
“Colorization of Solid State AMLCDs for Military 
Head-Mounted Displays and Other Viewer 
Applications.” Helmet- and Head-Mounted Displays 
VIII: Technologies and Applications, Proceedings of 
the SPIE, vol. 5079, pp. 19-30, September 2003. 
 
 
 
 
Research and data for Status Report 94-01-0304 were collected during June - September 2003. 
 
