Classification No.: 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 
12/06/2004 
Review Date: 
12/06/2007 
ACCESS TO CURRENT AND OUTDATED INFORMATION ON EPA’S WEB SITE 
1. 
PURPOSE. This document establishes EPA’s policy for keeping information on the EPA 
public access Web site current, and providing access to useful information that is no 
longer current but is still valuable to the public as reference and/or background material. 
Undertaking these measures will improve the efficiency of EPA’s Web site in general, as 
well as the efficiency of the Web site’s search engine. 
2. 
AUDIENCE. Office Directors and Regional equivalents, data owners, Web site 
managers and contractor employees who produce and maintain EPA Web sites. 
3. 
BACKGROUND.  How EPA presents information affects how the public perceives, 
understands and uses that information for environmental analysis, decision-making and 
educational purposes. Some information continues to reflect current EPA decisions and 
activities (i.e., remains relevant) for years.  For example, several EPA regulations 
promulgated in the 1980s  remain effective and continue to be enforced.  Such regulations 
reflect current EPA policy and should thus be considered current despite the date of their 
original publication. 
In contrast, some information becomes obsolete and irrelevant after only a month.  For 
example, a Web page that promotes an upcoming event that month will contain obsolete 
information as soon as the event is over. 
With the fast-paced growth of EPA’s public access Web site, effective management of 
information is essential.  It is important to distinguish information that is current from 
what is outdated, but still useful. Otherwise, it can be difficult for people to locate the 
information they are most interested in accessing, or to determine what information 
accurately describes current EPA policy decisions and activities. Similarly, EPA’s Web 
site search engine should not inundate users with obsolete information. 
4. 
DEFINITIONS.  The terms, content owner and data owner, refer to the EPA staff 
person who develops, manages and maintains a Web page or Web area, and is intimately 
familiar with the information documents, and/or databases that are posted in that Web 
area. The content or data owner of a particular Web area is also generally the content 
expert for the topics covered in that Web area. 
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
Current information refers to information that reflects current EPA policy, regulations, 
programmatic activities and responsibilities. 
Old [or dated] information means information that was created in the past, in some 
cases, many years ago, but that still reflects current EPA decisions and/or activities. (Also 
see “Current information” above.)  Such information has not been superseded by policy 
decisions, data or other materials released at a later date, and in the case of regulatory 
requirements, is still legally enforced.  (Examples:  RCRA Revision Checklist 59: 
Hazardous Waste Miscellaneous Units, 54 FR 615-617, promulgated on January 9, 1989, 
and Effluent Guideline for Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Point Source Category, 48 FR, 
49821, promulgated on October 27, 1983.) 
Dead or broken link refers to an inactive link to a uniform resource locator (URL) (i.e., 
Web site), through the link’s retirement, change of address, or server error. 
Information is a communication or representation of knowledge such as facts or opinions 
in any medium or form, including textual, numerical, graphic, cartographic, narrative or 
audiovisual forms.  Examples include Web page text, images and links, as well as 
information available online and/or in hardcopy, including databases, models, reports, 
studies, memoranda, correspondence and other documents.  "EPA information," for the 
purpose of this Order, is defined as that information which is gathered or maintained by 
EPA, or information obtained from other sources for which EPA accepts a stewardship 
role. 
Obsolete information means information that no longer reflects current EPA policy, 
responsibilities and programmatic activities, AND IS NOT useful or relevant to the public. 
Most of this information includes ephemeral information about short-lived announcements 
and activities. 
Orphan Web site refers to those sites or areas of the EPA public access Web site that are 
no longer maintained and/or no longer linked to other pages. 
Outdated information means information that no longer reflects current EPA policy, 
responsibilities and programmatic activities, but that is still useful to the public as 
reference or background information.  It includes regulations, guidance and policies that 
are no longer used or enforced, or that have been superseded by more recently released 
decisions. Such information often provides invaluable historical context to current 
decisions, requirements and activities.  For purposes of this policy, such information is 
not considered to be obsolete or useless. 
-2-
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
5. 
POLICY.  EPA is committed to maintaining and refreshing current information on the 
Agency’s Web site, while continuing to provide access to historical information that is of 
interest to EPA’s stakeholders and the public. This policy establishes criteria for the 
following categories of information: 
a. 
Current and old information that still reflects EPA decisions and activities, 
regardless of its age, 
b.  
Outdated information that can be updated, 
c. 
Outdated information that cannot be updated, but is still useful and should 
be maintained on the public access Web site for reference purposes, and 
d. 
Obsolete information that is no longer useful to the public and should be 
permanently removed from the public access Web site. 
See the Definitions section above regarding the definition of terms such as “current,” 
“old,” “outdated” and “obsolete” information. 
It is easy to confuse the requirements and implications of this policy with record keeping 
requirements, as well as Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requirements.  These issues, 
which must be kept separate, are addressed in sections 8 and 9  below. 
In order to implement this policy, program and regional office directors will be held 
responsible for periodically assessing the currency, relevancy and accessibility of the 
information they manage on the Agency Web site. (See section 10 below.) 
(1) Current and old information that still reflects current EPA decisions and 
activities – Regardless of when the information was originally created and 
published, it might still reflect current policy decisions and activities and have 
lasting value. There are many years-old regulations, policies and programmatic 
descriptions posted on the Web site that are still accurate and have not been 
superseded by more recent information.  All such information posted on the Web 
site must be dated using the original publication or release date, as described in 
section VII. below. This type of information should not be labeled and treated as 
outdated. 
(2) Outdated information that can be updated – Outdated information on the Web 
site that can be updated to accurately reflect the Agency’s most recent policy 
decisions, programs or activities, should be revised and posted.  It is up to each 
office to determine which information can, and should, be revised. After it has 
been updated and posted, it should be regularly reviewed for its relevance and 
usefulness to the public. (Recommended time frame for revising outdated 
-3- 
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
information that can be updated: as soon as possible but no longer than a month 
after it is discovered.) 
(3) Outdated information that cannot be updated but is still useful to the public – 
A large amount of outdated but valuable information cannot be updated, but 
should be maintained on the public access Web site for reference and background 
purposes. Some of this information may pertain to activities that have been 
completed or closed out, or information that has been superseded.  It may also be 
information that reflects past policy decisions that have since changed, but that 
need to be made available to the public to provide context for newer policy 
decisions. In all these cases it is important to notify the public that the 
information no longer reflects current EPA decisions or activities.  Therefore, 
content owners must label the information as outdated with a standardized notice 
and graphic icon explaining that it is no longer current and is provided for 
reference purposes only. (See section 5 How to label outdated information that 
cannot be updated but is still useful to the public with a notice and icon below.) 
A. Useful, outdated information that should be maintained on the EPA 
public access Web site and labeled as no longer current – include the 
following: 
i. Regulations, guidance and policies that are no longer in effect and/or 
have been superseded, but that still provide context to more recent 
legislation or policy determinations.  Research and other materials directly 
related to these outdated regulations, policies, etc., are also included in 
this category. Recommended time frame for content owners to apply the 
notice and icon: within a month after such information becomes 
outdated. 
ii. Proposed regulations, as well as draft and proposed guidance and 
policies for which a final version has been released, and thus, are not of 
themselves in force, but provide valuable historical information. 
Recommended time frame for content owners to apply the notice and icon: 
within a month after a final version becomes effective. 
iii. Technical documents, research studies, models, databases or other 
information that are no longer current, but are useful as reference 
resources. Recommended time frame for content owners to apply the 
notice and icon: as soon as possible but no longer than three months 
after they are no longer current, accurate and/or in effect. 
-4-
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
iv. Information about EPA projects, programs and activities that are no 
longer active, or that have been completed or suspended, but have helped 
define programmatic decisions, policies, etc. and are still useful to 
maintain for reference purposes.  This includes “orphan Web sites” (see 
Definitions section above) that are important to maintain for reference 
purposes about past Agency activities. Recommended time frame for 
content owners to apply the notice and icon: within six months after they 
are completed or suspended. 
v. Materials from conferences, symposiums, workshops, seminars and 
meetings, such as agendas, lists of session participants, session 
presentation materials, papers, and other relevant documents that are still 
useful to maintain for reference purposes.  Such materials should be 
periodically reviewed for their relevance and usefulness to the public. 
Recommended time frame for content owners to apply the notice and icon: 
within a month after conclusion of the event. (Please note that 
announcement notices posted prior to conferences, symposiums, etc., 
including information about registration, lodging, travel and other 
logistics, should be permanently removed from the Web site within a 
month after the session has concluded; see (4)A.1. below.) 
vi. Other miscellaneous types of outdated information not included in the 
groups above. Recommended time frame for content owners to apply the 
notice and icon: within a month after the information is no longer current, 
accurate and/or in effect. 
B. Exemption for time sensitive information – The following 
materials that are inherently time sensitive and are clearly marked 
with a release date do not need to be labeled with an outdated 
information notice: 
(1) Speeches, testimony and transcripts by EPA senior 
managers. 
(2) Press releases and other news items which are 
maintained on the public access server for historical 
background purposes. 
(3) Materials that carry a date of issue and are produced 
periodically to describe or summarize program activities, 
including annual reports, progress reports, and newsletters. 
-5- 
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
The public is likely to realize that the materials listed above 
reflect EPA’s decisions and activities at a specific point in 
time and that the Agency’s decisions and activities may 
change in the future. 
(4) Obsolete information that is no longer useful to the public – should be 
permanently deleted from the EPA public access Web site.  Some obsolete 
information may still be useful to maintain for internal reference purposes, and 
should be maintained on the Agency’s intranet site.  (See section (4) B. below.) 
There is no need to maintain obsolete information on the public access Web site even if it 
is determined to be a record (i.e., a copy of an official record).  Record keeping 
obligations are fulfilled through the official copy in the record keeping system.  (See 
section 8 below.) Content owners may wish to preserve some information that has 
outlived its usefulness to the public, but that is still relevant to Agency employees, on the 
Agency’s intranet site. (See section (4) B. below.) Using the examples provided below, 
each office is responsible for determining which information is no longer useful and 
should thus be permanently removed from the EPA public access Web site. 
A. Obsolete information includes, but is not limited, to the following: 
1. Announcements, brochures, logistics and other non-substantive 
material about meetings, conferences or other events that have 
concluded (e.g., registration, travel arrangements, lodging, 
directions). Recommended removal time frame: as soon as 
possible but no longer than a month after they are no longer 
current, accurate and/or in effect. 
2. Announcements for programmatic deadlines that have passed 
(e.g., grant opportunities, public comment periods). 
Recommended removal time frame: as soon as possible but no 
longer than a month after deadline. 
3. Public comments for non-regulatory activities that have already 
been addressed. Recommended removal time frame: three 
months after the final decision has been made or activity has been 
completed. 
4. Information posted on the EPA homepage and on various top 
pages under “Recent Additions” or other similar categories. 
Recommended time frame for deleting such information from the 
“Recent Additions” or similar category on the Agency’s main 
-6- 
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
homepage:  three months after the date they were posted. 
Recommended time frame for deleting such information from the 
“Recent Additions” or similar category on various program and 
regional offices’ top pages: six months after the date they were 
posted. (There may be instances in which program and regional 
offices need to display information under “Recent Additions” for a 
relatively long period of time, such as displaying certain 
information affecting childrens’ health several months prior to and 
after the beginning of the school year.) 
5. Information that is marked with a “new” icon.  After such 
information has been posted for one month it should no longer be 
considered “new” and the icon should be removed.  Recommended 
time frame for removing the “new” icon: a month after such 
information was originally posted. 
6. News items, clips, etc. about Agency activities that are no 
longer relevant or useful to the general public. Recommended 
removal time frame: a month after the date they were posted on 
the Web site. 
7. Information about long-term activities, projects and  programs, 
as well as publications, reports, and data, that content owners and 
managers determine to be no longer useful or relevant to the 
public. Recommended removal time frame:  as soon as possible 
after it is discovered, but no longer than three months. 
8. “Orphan Web sites” (see the Definitions section above) that are 
no longer useful to the public and/or have no historical value. 
Recommended removal time frame:  immediately upon discovery. 
9. “Dead or broken links” (see the Definitions section above), as 
well as links that take the viewer to obsolete, irrelevant 
information.  Recommended removal time frame:  immediately 
upon discovery. 
B. Obsolete information to post and maintain on the Agency’s intranet 
site – Some information that has outlived its usefulness to the public may 
still be relevant to Agency employees.  Content owners should use their 
judgment to determine if obsolete information removed from the public 
access Web site should be posted on the EPA intranet site.  All obsolete 
information posted on the intranet should be labeled at the top of each 
-7- 
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
page, with a notice stating it is obsolete information that is being 
maintained on the intranet for reference purposes only. 
HOW TO HANDLE DIFFERENT TYPES OF 
PREVIOUSLY POSTED INFORMATION 
IF THE 
INFORMATION 
THEN 
IS... 
AND IT... 
IT IS... 
AND YOU SHOULD... 
USING... 
still relevant to the 
reflects current 
old 
leave it alone 
Section (1) 
public 
EPA decisions 
above 
and/or activities 
still relevant to the 
can be updated 
outdate 
update and re-post it on the 
Section (2) 
public 
d 
public access Web site 
above 
still relevant to the 
cannot be 
outdate 
leave it on the public access 
Sections (3) 
public 
updated 
d 
Web site but label it with a 
above and 
the standard notice and icon 
(5) below 
no longer relevant 
cannot be 
obsolete 
remove it from the public 
Section (4) 
to the public 
updated 
access Web site (if it still 
above 
useful for internal purposes, 
consider moving it to 
EPA’s intranet) 
(5). How to label outdated information that cannot be updated but is still useful to 
the public with a notice and icon – EPA content owners must clearly label all 
outdated information maintained on the Web site to help users distinguish it from 
current information.  A graphic icon and standardized notice (“EPA no longer 
updates this information, but it may be useful as a reference or resource”) 
have been developed to label outdated but still useful information.  Instructions 
for displaying it at the top of relevant pages, as well as sample pages and coding 
details are provided at http://www.epa.gov/epafiles/outdatedpages.htm. 
A. Links to outdated Agency information – When a Web page with 
current information includes a link to outdated EPA information, display 
the appropriate icon to the right of the link. See the sections in the EPA 
Web Guide regarding this smaller sized “link icon” at 
http://www.epa.gov/epafiles/outdatedpages.htm . When the link is to an 
Agency maintained area, the notice and full-size icon should be displayed 
-8- 
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
at the top of the linked area’s home page. (Hint: the small icon goes with 
links to pages that are labeled using the large icon.) 
B. Labeling outdated information in different electronic formats – 
All outdated Web pages, documents and databases, except those 
produced in PDF format, must be labeled with the outdated 
information notice and graphic icon.  This includes documents, 
such as memos, letters, reports, studies, etc. produced in HTML 
format.  Even outdated sub-pages, linked pages and materials 
buried several layers below an outdated top page should be labeled 
so that they can be identified as no longer current if a viewer 
locates them, for example, directly through a search engine.  (See 
the guidance in the Web Guide under Documents/EPA Orders and 
Memoranda at http://www.epa.gov/epafiles/outdatedpages.htm for 
more detailed information regarding how to label and tag such 
outdated information in order to comply with the Look and Feel 
Policy.) Do not assume that visitors will see higher-level pages 
and associated labels. 
Due to technological difficulties associated with inserting graphics 
into old PDF files, all outdated documents produced in PDF format 
will be exempt from displaying the outdated information graphic 
icon. Outdated PDF files are NOT EXEMPT from displaying the 
outdated notice text. Each outdated PDF document should clearly 
display the outdated information notice text at the top of the first 
page of the document. 
C. Exemption from EPA’s Look and Feel Policy for outdated 
information – All outdated information on the public access Web 
site that is properly labeled with the outdated information notice is 
exempt from the Agency Look and Feel Policy.  See 
http://www.epa.gov/epafiles/outdatedpages.htm for detailed 
instructions regarding application of the notice. See 
http://www.epa.gov/webguide/docs/epaweb.html for further 
information about the EPA Look and Feel Policy. 
(6). Ranking which pages to label first – Due to resource constraints, it may be 
difficult to label all outdated pages immediately.  Therefore, the first several 
layers or top Web pages should be labeled first.  Information determined to be 
“influential” as described in the Agency’s Information Quality Guidelines (See 
http://www.epa.gov/oei/qualityguidelines), as well as important scientific and/or 
-9- 
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
technical information, should be given priority in deciding which information to 
label first.  If outdated information is maintained in a separate archive location, 
the top archive page should be labeled first. While all of the individual pages 
maintained in the archive should be labeled, rank the order in which to label them 
according to the instructions above. 
(7). Date stamping – In order to adequately inform the public about various 
Agency decisions and activities, data owners must ensure that all information 
placed on the Web site displays the date when the decision or activity originally 
became effective.  For example, in order to understand the historical significance 
of a particular requirement or decision, one needs to know what period of time it 
was in place. Data owners should add the appropriate signature and effective date 
to all new documents, including policy directives, regulations, guidance, reports, 
memos, letters, etc.  Outdated documents and databases, if not previously dated, 
should be dated retrospectively as resources allow. 
(8). Record keeping and outdated information – In order for information in any 
format to be considered a record, it must meet the definition of a Federal record 
[44 U.S.C. Section 3301]. (See www.epa.gov/records/ for more information.)  A 
record can be made available to the public in various formats (i.e., hard copy 
document, video, email, Web page, Web site portal, etc.).  Web pages and 
materials posted on EPA’s Web site are often available in other formats, 
particularly in hard copy.  Information that is designated as a record, regardless of 
format, must be  maintained in a record keeping system and retained in 
accordance with the applicable records schedule (See 
intranet.epa.gov/records/schedule to review schedules). If an electronic record 
keeping system is not in use for the storage of official electronic records, the 
record must be printed and filed in a paper record keeping system.  (The Agency 
is in the process of developing a content management system that will provide 
electronic record keeping capabilities.) 
Program and regional offices are responsible for ensuring that records are 
maintained in accordance with EPA’s records schedules.  According to current 
EPA records management requirements, information posted on the Web site that 
is already contained in an office record keeping system should be managed in 
accordance with programmatic needs and the principles in this policy.  Such 
information does not rely on the Web copy to meet records management 
requirements and the Web copy may be deleted prior to the scheduled record 
keeping date of disposal. However, in order to comply with the Agency's records 
management program (see Chapter 10 of the Information Resources Management 
Policy Manual, EPA Directive 2100 – 
http://www.epa.gov/irmpoli8/polman/chaptr10.htm), once an official record is 
-10- 
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
disposed of in accordance with its record schedule, all copies of the information 
should be disposed of as well. Thus, all duplicate information posted on the Web 
site should be removed upon the same scheduled disposal date as the official 
record. 
This Order is in compliance with Agency records management policies.  The 
National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) is currently developing 
guidance on managing Web records.  Record keeping policies and guidance 
referenced here are subject to change during the life of this policy directive. For 
further information about record keeping requirements, see 
www.epa.gov/records/. 
(9). Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) and outdated information - The FOIA 
requires that final Agency opinions and orders, statements of Agency policy and 
interpretations, Agency staff manuals, and other records be made available in 
electronic format.  It is EPA’s policy to disseminate these records to the general 
public through the Agency’s public access Web site.  Such records should be 
maintained and removed from the public access Web site in accordance with 
EPA’s record retention policies. 
For more information about FOIA and E-FOIA, go to http://www.epa.gov/foia/. 
(10). Periodic review of outdated information – In order to enhance the public’s 
access to timely, current information, program and regional offices are expected 
to regularly review and update as appropriate all outdated Web pages, documents, 
and databases maintained on the Web site and follow the procedures discussed 
above. Program and regional offices will be held responsible for performing this 
type of Web site management once a year. 
6. 
Roles and Responsibilities. The Chief Information Officer/Assistant Administrator, 
Office of Environmental Information,  and the Associate Administrator for Public Affairs 
are jointly responsible for monitoring compliance with this Order.  
Office Directors in each EPA program office and equivalent managers reporting directly 
to the Regional Administrator in the regions are responsible for ensuring compliance with 
this Order, particularly for ensuring that a review of outdated Web pages, documents and 
databases is conducted at least once a year. 
Staff level content owners and managers are responsible for ensuring that any content 
they manage and/or maintain on the public access server complies with this Order. 
7. 
Authorities. The Information Technology Reform Act of 1996, Pub. L. 104106, 
established the position of Chief Information Officer in federal agencies in place of the 
designated senior official for information resources management previously established 
by the Paperwork Reduction Act. This provision establishes clear accountability for 
EPA ORDER 
2190.8 
Approval Date: 12/06/2004 
Review Date: 12/06/2007 
agency information resources management activities, provides for greater coordination 
among the agency's information activities, and ensures greater visibility of such activities 
within each agency. 
Electronic Freedom of Information Amendments of 1996 (E-FOIA) mandate that 
agencies make all reasonable efforts to provide information to requesters in the medium 
of their choice (hard copies, electronic data, CDs, etc.). 
8. 
Related Documents. Web Guide (http://www.epa.gov/webguide/) 
Records Management Web site (http://www.epa.gov/records/) 
FOIA Web site (http://www.epa.gov/foia/) 
Memorandum of Understanding between the Offices of Public 
Affairs and Environmental Information, “Management and 
Oversight Responsibilities for EPA”s Web Site,” November 8, 
2002 
(http://intranet.epa.gov/webgroup/memos/OPAOEIMOU.pdf) 
9. 
Recertification Date. Three years from date issued. 
10. 
Additional Information. For further information about this policy, please contact the 
Chief of the Policy and Program Management Branch, Office of Information Analysis 
and Access, 202-566-0668. 
