EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 5.0
2.6.14. Bacterial endotoxins
Maize starch
1.0 g
Sodium chloride
5.0 g
Agar, according to gelling power
10.0 g to 15.0 g
Purified water
1000 ml
Hydrate the agar, dissolve by heating to boiling with
continuous stirring. If necessary, adjust the pH so that
after sterilisation it is 7.3 ± 0.2. Sterilise by heating in an
autoclave at 121 °C for 15 min. Allow to cool to 45-50 °C;
add, where necessary, gentamicin sulphate corresponding to
20 mg of gentamicin base and pour into Petri dishes.
Medium R (Lactose monohydrate sulphite medium)
Pancreatic digest of casein
5.0 g
Yeast extract
2.5 g
Sodium chloride
2.5 g
Lactose monohydrate
10.0 g
Cysteine hydrochloride
0.3 g
Purified water
1000 ml
Dissolve, adjust to pH 7.1 ± 0.1 and fill to 8 ml in
16 mm × 160 mm tubes containing a small Durham tube.
Sterilise by heating in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 min and
store at 4 °C.
Before use, heat the medium for 5 min in a water-bath and
cool. Add to each tube 0.5 ml of a 12 g/l solution of sodium
metabisulphite R and 0.5 ml of a 10 g/l solution of ferric
ammonium citrate, both solutions being freshly prepared
and filtered through membranes (pore size: 0.45 µm).
Agar medium S (R2A)
Yeast extract
0.5 g
Proteose peptone
0.5 g
Casein hydrolysate
0.5 g
Glucose
0.5 g
Starch
0.5 g
Dipotassium hydrogen phosphate
0.3 g
Magnesium sulphate, anhydrous
0.024 g
Sodium pyruvate
0.3 g
Agar
15.0 g
Purified water
1000 ml
Adjust the pH so that after sterilisation it is 7.2 ± 0.2.
Sterilise by heating in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 min.
NEUTRALISING AGENTS
Neutralising agents may be used to neutralise the activity
of antimicrobial agents. They may be added to buffered
sodium chloride-peptone solution pH 7.0, preferably before
sterilisation. If utilised their efficacy and non-toxicity towards
micro-organisms are demonstrated.
A typical neutralising fluid has the following composition:
Polysorbate 80
30 g
Lecithin (egg)
3 g
Histidine hydrochloride
1 g
Peptone (meat or casein)
1 g
Sodium chloride
4.3 g
Potassium dihydrogen phosphate
3.6 g
Disodium hydrogen phosphate dihydrate
7.2 g
Purified water
1000 ml
Sterilise by heating in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 min.
If the solution has insufficient neutralising capacity the
concentration of polysorbate 80 or lecithin may be increased.
Alternatively, the neutralisers mentioned in Table 2.6.13.-3
may be added.
Table 2.6.13.-3. – Inactivators for antimicrobial agents to be
added to buffered sodium chloride-peptone solution pH 7.0
Type of an-
timicrobial
agent
Inactivator
Concentration
Comment
Sodium
laurilsulfate
4 g/l
Polysorbate 80
and lecithin
30 g/l and 3 g/l
Phenolics
Egg yolk
5 ml/l - 50 ml/l
Add after
sterilisation of
buffered sodium
chloride-peptone
solution pH 7.0
Organo-
mercurals
Sodium
thioglycolate
0.5 g/l - 5 g/l
Halogens
Sodium
thiosulphate
5 g/l
Quaternary
ammonium
compounds
Egg yolk
5 ml/l - 50 ml/l
Add after
sterilisation of
buffered sodium
chloride-peptone
solution pH 7.0
01/2005:20614
2.6.14. BACTERIAL ENDOTOXINS
The test for bacterial endotoxins is used to detect or
quantify endotoxins of gram-negative bacterial origin
using amoebocyte lysate from horseshoe crab (Limulus
polyphemus or Tachypleus tridentatus). There are
3 techniques for this test: the gel-clot technique, which
is based on gel formation; the turbidimetric technique,
based on the development of turbidity after cleavage of an
endogenous substrate; and the chromogenic technique,
based on the development of colour after cleavage of a
synthetic peptide-chromogen complex.
The following 6 methods are described in the present
chapter:
Method A.
Gel-clot method: limit test
Method B. Gel-clot method: semi-quantitative test
Method C.
Turbidimetric kinetic method
Method D. Chromogenic kinetic method
Method E.
Chromogenic end-point method
Method F.
Turbidimetric end-point method
Proceed by any of the 6 methods for the test. In the event
of doubt or dispute, the final decision is made based upon
method A unless otherwise indicated in the monograph.
The test is carried out in a manner that avoids endotoxin
contamination.
Apparatus
Depyrogenate all glassware and other heat-stable apparatus
in a hot-air oven using a validated process. A commonly used
minimum time and temperature is 30 minutes at 250 °C. If
employing plastic apparatus, such as microtitre plates and
pipette tips for automatic pipetters, use apparatus shown
to be free of detectable endotoxin and of interfering effects
for the test.
NOTE: In this chapter, the term ‘tube’ includes all types of
receptacles, for example microtitre plate wells.
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
161
2.6.14. Bacterial endotoxins
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 5.0
Preparation of the standard endotoxin stock solution
The standard endotoxin stock solution is prepared from
an endotoxin reference standard that has been calibrated
against the International Standard, for example endotoxin
standard BRP.
Endotoxin is expressed in International Units (IU). The
equivalence in IU of the International Standard is stated by
the World Health Organisation.
NOTE: One International Unit (IU) of endotoxin is equal to
one Endotoxin Unit (E.U.).
Follow the specifications in the package leaflet and on the
label for preparation and storage of the standard endotoxin
stock solution.
Preparation of the standard endotoxin solutions
After vigorously mixing the standard endotoxin stock
solution, prepare appropriate serial dilutions of this solution
using water for bacterial endotoxins test (water for BET).
Use the solutions as soon as possible to avoid loss of activity
by adsorption.
Preparation of the test solutions
Prepare the test solutions by dissolving or diluting active
substances or medicinal products using water for BET.
Some substances or preparations may be more appropriately
dissolved or diluted in other aqueous solutions. If necessary,
adjust the pH of the test solution (or dilution thereof) so that
the pH of the mixture of the lysate and test solution falls
within the pH range specified by the lysate manufacturer.
This usually applies to a product with a pH in the range of 6.0
to 8.0. The pH may be adjusted by the use of acid, base or a
suitable buffer, as recommended by the lysate manufacturer.
Acids and bases may be prepared from concentrates or
solids with water for BET in containers free of detectable
endotoxin. Buffers must be validated to be free of detectable
endotoxin and interfering factors.
Determination of the Maximum Valid Dilution
The Maximum Valid Dilution (MVD) is the maximum
allowable dilution of a sample at which the endotoxin limit
can be determined. Determine the MVD using the following
formulae:
Endotoxin limit: the endotoxin limit for active substances
administered parenterally, defined on the basis of dose, is
equal to:
K
=
threshold pyrogenic dose of endotoxin per
kilogram of body mass in a single hour period,
M
=
maximum recommended dose of product per
kilogram of body mass in a single hour period.
The endotoxin limit for active substances
administered parenterally is specified in units such
as IU/ml, IU/mg, IU/Unit of biological activity, etc., in
monographs.
Concentration of test solution:
— in mg/ml if the endotoxin limit is specified by mass
(IU/mg),
— in Units/ml if the endotoxin limit is specified by unit of
biological activity (IU/Unit),
— in ml/ml if the endotoxin limit is specified by volume
(IU/ml).
λ
=
the labelled lysate sensitivity in the gel-clot
technique (IU/ml) or the lowest point used
in the standard curve of the turbidimetric or
chromogenic techniques.
GEL-CLOT TECHNIQUE (METHODS A AND B)
The gel-clot technique allows detection or quantification
of endotoxins and is based on clotting of the lysate in the
presence of endotoxins. The concentration of endotoxins
required to cause the lysate to clot under standard conditions
is the labelled lysate sensitivity. To ensure both the precision
and validity of the test, confirm the labelled lysate sensitivity
and perform the test for interfering factors as described
under 1. Preparatory testing.
1. PREPARATORY TESTING
(i) Confirmation of the labelled lysate sensitivity
Confirm in 4 replicates the labelled sensitivity λ, expressed
in IU/ml, of the lysate solution prior to use in the test.
Confirmation of the lysate sensitivity is carried out when a
new batch of lysate is used or when there is any change in
the experimental conditions which may affect the outcome
of the test.
Prepare standard solutions of at least 4 concentrations
equivalent to 2λ, λ, 0.5λ and 0.25λ by diluting the standard
endotoxin stock solution with water for BET.
Mix a volume of the lysate solution with an equal volume
of 1 of the standard solutions (such as 0.1 ml aliquots) in
each tube. When single test vials or ampoules containing
lyophilised lysate are employed, add solutions directly to
the vial or ampoule. Incubate the reaction mixture for a
constant period according to the recommendations of the
lysate manufacturer (usually at 37 ± 1 °C for 60 ± 2 min),
avoiding vibration. Test the integrity of the gel: for tubes,
take each tube in turn directly from the incubator and invert
it through approximately 180° in one smooth motion. If a
firm gel has formed that remains in place upon inversion,
record the result as positive. A result is negative if an intact
gel is not formed.
The test is not valid unless the lowest concentration of the
standard solutions shows a negative result in all replicate
tests.
The end-point is the last positive result in the series of
decreasing concentrations of endotoxin. Calculate the mean
value of the logarithms of the end-point concentrations and
then the antilogarithm of the mean value using the following
expression:
Geometric mean end-point concentration =
=
sum of the log end-point concentrations of the
dilution series used,
f
=
number of replicates.
The geometric mean end-point concentration is the measured
sensitivity of the lysate solution (IU/ml). If this is not less
than 0.5λ and not more than 2λ, the labelled sensitivity is
confirmed and is used in the tests performed with this lysate.
(ii) Test for interfering factors
Prepare solutions A, B, C and D as shown in Table 2.6.14.-1,
and use the test solutions at a dilution less than the MVD,
not containing any detectable endotoxins, operating as
described under 1. Preparatory testing, (i) Confirmation of
the labelled lysate sensitivity.
162
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 5.0
2.6.14. Bacterial endotoxins
Table 2.6.14.–1
Solution
Endotoxin concentration/ Solution to
which endotoxin is added
Diluent
Dilution factor
Initial endotoxin
concentration
Number of replicates
A
None/Test solution
-
-
-
4
B
2λ/Test solution
Test solution
1
2
4
8
2λ
1λ
0.5λ
0.25λ
4
4
4
4
C
2λ/Water for BET
Water for BET
1
2
4
8
2λ
1λ
0.5λ
0.25λ
2
2
2
2
D
None/Water for BET
-
-
-
2
Solution A = solution of the preparation being examined that is free of detectable endotoxins.
Solution B = test for interference.
Solution C = control of the labelled lysate sensitivity.
Solution D = negative control (water for BET).
The geometric mean end-point concentrations of solutions B
and C are determined using the expression described in 1.
Preparatory testing, (i) Confirmation of the labelled lysate
sensitivity.
The test for interfering factors is repeated when any changes
are made to the experimental conditions that are likely to
influence the result of the test.
The test is not valid unless all replicates of solutions A and
D show no reaction and the result of solution C confirms
the labelled lysate sensitivity.
If the sensitivity of the lysate determined with solution B is
not less than 0.5λ and not greater than 2λ, the test solution
does not contain interfering factors under the experimental
conditions used. Otherwise, the solution interferes with the
test.
If the preparation being examined interferes with the test at
a dilution less than the MVD, repeat the test for interfering
factors using a greater dilution, not exceeding the MVD. The
use of a more sensitive lysate permits a greater dilution of
the preparation being examined and this may contribute to
the elimination of interference.
Interference may be overcome by suitable treatment, such
as filtration, neutralisation, dialysis or heat treatment. To
establish that the treatment chosen effectively eliminates
interference without loss of endotoxins, repeat the test for
interfering factors using the preparation being examined to
which the standard endotoxin has been added and which has
then been submitted to the chosen treatment.
2. LIMIT TEST (METHOD A)
(i) Procedure
Prepare solutions A, B, C and D as shown in Table 2.6.14.-2,
and perform the test on these solutions following the
procedure described under 1. Preparatory testing, (i)
Confirmation of the labelled lysate sensitivity.
Table 2.6.14.-2
Solution
Endotoxin concentration/ Solution
to which endotoxin is added
Number of replicates
A
None/Diluted test solution
2
B
2λ/Diluted test solution
2
C
2λ/Water for BET
2
D
None/Water for BET
2
Prepare solution A and solution B (positive product control)
using a dilution not greater than the MVD and treatments as
described in 1. Preparatory testing, (ii) Test for interfering
factors. Solutions B and C (positive controls) contain the
standard endotoxin at a concentration corresponding to
twice the labelled lysate sensitivity. Solution D (negative
control) consists of water for BET.
(ii) Interpretation
The test is not valid unless both replicates of the 2 positive
control solutions B and C are positive and those of the
negative control solution D are negative.
The preparation being examined complies with the test when
a negative result is found for both replicates of solution A.
When a positive result is found for both replicates of
solution A:
— if the preparation being examined is diluted to the MVD,
it does not comply with the test,
— if the preparation being examined is diluted to a dilution
less than the MVD, the test is repeated at a dilution not
greater than the MVD.
Repeat the test if a positive result is found for one replicate
of solution A and a negative result is found for the other.
The preparation being examined complies with the test if a
negative result is found for both replicates of solution A in
the repeat test.
3. SEMI-QUANTITATIVE TEST (METHOD B)
(i) Procedure
The test quantifies bacterial endotoxins in the test solution
by titration to an end-point. Prepare solutions A, B, C
and D as shown in Table 2.6.14.-3, and test these solutions
according to the procedure described under 1. Preparatory
testing, (i) Confirmation of the labelled lysate sensitivity.
(ii) Calculation and interpretation
The test is not valid unless the following 3 conditions are
met:
(a) both replicates of solution D (negative control) are
negative,
(b) both replicates of solution B (positive product control)
are positive,
(c) the geometric mean end-point concentration of solution C
is in the range of 0.5λ to 2λ.
To determine the endotoxin concentration of solution A,
calculate the end-point concentration for each replicate
series of dilutions by multiplying each end-point dilution
factor by λ.
The endotoxin concentration in the test solution is the
geometric mean end-point concentration of the replicates
(see the expression given under 1. Preparatory testing,
(i) Confirmation of the labelled lysate sensitivity). If the
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
163
2.6.14. Bacterial endotoxins
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 5.0
test is conducted with a diluted test solution, calculate
the concentration of endotoxin in the original solution by
multiplying the result by the dilution factor.
If none of the dilutions of the test solution is positive in a
valid test, record the endotoxin concentration as less than λ
(or, if a diluted sample was tested, as less than λ × the lowest
dilution factor of the sample). If all dilutions are positive, the
endotoxin concentration is recorded as equal to or greater
than the greatest dilution factor multiplied by λ (e.g. in
Table 2.6.14.-3, the initial dilution factor × 8 × λ).
The preparation meets the requirements of the test if the
endotoxin concentration is less than that specified in the
individual monograph.
PHOTOMETRIC TECHNIQUES (METHODS C, D, E AND F)
1. TURBIDIMETRIC TECHNIQUE (METHODS C AND F)
This technique is a photometric test to measure the increase
in turbidity. Based on the test principle employed, this
technique is classified as being the end-point-turbidimetric
test or the kinetic-turbidimetric test.
The end-point-turbidimetric test (Method F) is based
on the quantitative relationship between the endotoxin
concentration and the turbidity (absorbance or transmission)
of the reaction mixture at the end of an incubation period.
The kinetic-turbidimetric test (Method C) is a method to
measure either the time (onset time) needed for the reaction
mixture to reach a predetermined absorbance, or the rate of
turbidity development.
The test is carried out at the incubation temperature
recommended by the lysate manufacturer (usually 37 ± 1 °C).
2. CHROMOGENIC TECHNIQUE (METHODS D AND E)
This technique is used to measure the chromophore released
from a suitable chromogenic peptide by the reaction
of endotoxins with the lysate. Depending on the test
principle employed, this technique is classified as being the
end-point-chromogenic test or the kinetic-chromogenic test.
The end-point-chromogenic test (Method E) is based
on the quantitative relationship between the endotoxin
concentration and the quantity of chromophore released at
the end of an incubation period.
The kinetic-chromogenic test (Method D) measures either
the time (onset time) needed for the reaction mixture to
reach a predetermined absorbance, or the rate of colour
development.
The test is carried out at the incubation temperature
recommended by the lysate manufacturer (usually 37 ± 1 °C).
3. PREPARATORY TESTING
To assure the precision or validity of the turbidimetric and
chromogenic tests, preparatory tests are conducted to assure
that the criteria for the standard curve are satisfied and that
the test solution does not interfere with the test.
Validation of the test method is required when any changes
are made to the experimental conditions that are likely to
influence the result of the test.
(i) Assurance of criteria for the standard curve
Using the standard endotoxin solution, prepare at least
3 endotoxin concentrations to generate the standard
curve. Perform the test using at least 3 replicates of each
standard endotoxin solution as recommended by the lysate
manufacturer (volume ratios, incubation time, temperature,
pH, etc.).
If the desired range is greater than 2 log in the kinetic
methods, additional standards must be included to bracket
each log increase in the range of the standard curve.
The absolute value of the correlation coefficient, | r |, must
be greater than or equal to 0.980, for the range of endotoxin
concentrations indicated by the lysate manufacturer.
(ii) Test for interfering factors
Select an endotoxin concentration at or near the middle of
the endotoxin standard curve.
Prepare solutions A, B, C and D as shown in Table 2.6.14.-4.
Perform the test on at least 2 replicates of these solutions as
recommended by the lysate manufacturer (volume of test
solution and lysate solution, volume ratio of test solution to
lysate solution, incubation time, etc.).
Table 2.6.14.-3
Solution
Endotoxin concentration/ Solution to
which endotoxin is added
Diluent
Dilution factor
Initial endotoxin
concentration
Number of replicates
A
None/Test solution
Water for BET
1
2
4
8
-
-
-
-
2
2
2
2
B
2λ/Test solution
1
2λ
2
C
2λ/Water for BET
Water for BET
1
2
4
8
2λ
1λ
0.5λ
0.25λ
2
2
2
2
D
None/Water for BET
-
-
-
2
Solution A = test solution at the dilution, not exceeding the MVD, with which the test for interfering factors was carried out. Subsequent dilution of the
test solution must not exceed the MVD. Use water for BET to make two dilution series of 1, 1/2, 1/4 and 1/8, relative to the dilution with which the test
for interfering factors was carried out. Other dilutions may be used as appropriate.
Solution B = solution A containing standard endotoxin at a concentration of 2λ (positive product control).
Solution C = 2 series of water for BET containing the standard endotoxin at concentrations of 2λ, λ, 0.5λ and 0.25λ.
Solution D = water for BET (negative control).
164
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 5.0
2.6.14. Bacterial endotoxins
Table 2.6.14.-4.
Solution
Endotoxin
concentration
Solution to which
endotoxin is added
Number of
replicates
A
None
Test solution
Not less than 2
B
Middle concentration
of the standard curve
Test solution
Not less than 2
C
At least 3 concentra-
tions (lowest concen-
tration is designated λ)
Water for BET
Each concentra-
tion not less than 2
D
None
Water for BET
Not less than 2
Solution A = test solution, that may be diluted not to exceed the MVD.
Solution B = preparation to be examined at the same dilution as
solution A, containing added endotoxin at a concentration equal to or near
the middle of the standard curve.
Solution C = standard endotoxin solution at the concentrations used in
the validation of the method as described under 3. Preparatory testing, (i)
Assurance of criteria for the standard curve (positive controls.
Solution D = water for BET (negative control).
Calculate the mean recovery of the added endotoxin by
subtracting the mean endotoxin concentration in the
solution (if any) from that in the solution containing the
added endotoxin.
The test solution is considered free of interfering
factors if under the conditions of the test, the measured
concentration of the endotoxin added to the test solution
is within 50-200 per cent of the known added endotoxin
concentration, after subtraction of any endotoxin detected in
the solution without added endotoxin.
When the endotoxin recovery is out of the specified ranges,
the interfering factors must be removed as described in the
section Gel-clot technique, under 1. Preparatory testing,
(ii) Test for interfering factors. The efficiency of the treatment
is verified by repeating the test for interfering factors.
4. TEST
(i) Procedure
Follow the procedure described in 3. Preparatory testing,
(ii) Test for interfering factors.
(ii) Calculation
Calculate the endotoxin concentration of each replicate of
solution A using the standard curve generated by the series
of positive controls, solution C.
The test is not valid unless the following 3 requirements are
met:
(a) the result obtained with solution D (negative control)
does not exceed the limit of the blank value required in the
description of the lysate employed,
(b) the results obtained with the series of positive controls,
solution C, comply with the requirements for validation
defined under 3. Preparatory testing, (i) Assurance of criteria
for the standard curve,
(c) the endotoxin recovery, calculated from the endotoxin
concentration found in solution B after subtracting the
endotoxin concentration found in solution A, is within the
range of 50-200 per cent.
(iii) Interpretation
The preparation being examined complies with the test if the
mean endotoxin concentration of the replicates of solution A,
after correction for dilution and concentration, is less than
the endotoxin limit for the product.
5. REAGENTS
(i) Lysate solution
Dissolve amoebocyte lysate in water for BET or in a buffer, as
recommended by the lysate manufacturer, by gentle stirring.
Store the reconstituted lysate, refrigerated or frozen, as
indicated by the manufacturer.
(ii) Amoebocyte lysate
Amoebocyte lysate is a lyophilised product obtained
from amoebocyte lysate from Horseshoe Crab (Limulus
polyphemus or Tachypleus tridentatus). This reagent refers
only to a product manufactured in accordance with the
regulations of the competent authority.
Amoebocyte lysate reacts with some β-glucans in addition
to endotoxins. Amoebocyte lysate preparations which do
not react with glucans are available; they are prepared by
removing from amoebocyte lysate the G factor, which reacts
with glucans, or by inhibiting the G factor reacting system
of amoebocyte lysate. These preparations may be used for
endotoxin testing in the presence of glucans.
(iii) Water for BET (water for bacterial endotoxins test)
Water for BET is water for injections R or water produced
by other procedures that shows no reaction with the lysate
employed at the detection limit of the reagent.
The following section is published for information.
Test for bacterial endotoxins: guidelines
1. INTRODUCTION
Endotoxins from gram-negative bacteria are the
most common cause of toxic reactions resulting from
contamination of pharmaceutical products with pyrogens;
their pyrogenic activity is much higher than that of
most other pyrogenic substances. These endotoxins are
lipo-polysaccharides. Although there are a small number
of pyrogens which possess a different structure, the
conclusion is generally justified that the absence of bacterial
endotoxins in a product implies the absence of pyrogenic
components, provided the presence of non-endotoxin
pyrogenic substances can be ruled out.
The presence of endotoxins in a product may be masked by
factors interfering with the reaction between the endotoxins
and the amoebocyte lysate. Hence, the analyst who wishes to
replace the rabbit pyrogen test required in a pharmacopoeial
monograph by a test for bacterial endotoxins has to
demonstrate that a valid test can be carried out on the
product concerned; this may entail a procedure for removing
interfering factors.
As indicated in the test for bacterial endotoxins, information
must be available on the 2 following aspects before a test on
a sample can be regarded as valid.
1.1. The suitability of the material to be used for the test has
to be established. The absence of endotoxins in the water
for BET and in the other reagents must be assured and the
sensitivity of the amoebocyte lysate must be checked to
confirm the sensitivity declared by the manufacturer.
1.2. As the product to be examined may interfere with the
test, the sensitivity of the amoebocyte lysate is determined
in the presence and in the absence of the product under
examination. There must be no significant difference
between the 2 sensitivity values.
The test for bacterial endotoxins (2.6.14) indicates methods
for removing interfering factors; in the case of interference,
another test must be carried out after such a method has
been applied to check whether the interference has indeed
been neutralised or removed.
This annex explains the reasons for the requirements in the
test for bacterial endotoxins, then deals with the reading and
interpretation of the results.
Substitution of the rabbit pyrogen test required in a
pharmacopoeial monograph by an amoebocyte lysate test
constitutes the use of an alternative method of analysis and
hence requires validation; some guidance on how to proceed
is given in section 11.
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
165
2.6.14. Bacterial endotoxins
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 5.0
The reference method for bacterial endotoxins is stated in
the monograph on a given product; where no method is
stated, method A is the reference method. If a method other
than the reference method is to be used, the analyst must
demonstrate that the method is appropriate for this product
and gives a result consistent with that obtained with the
reference method (see also Section 13).
2. METHOD
The addition of endotoxins to amoebocyte lysate may result
in turbidity, precipitation or gelation (gel-clot); only the
gel-clot method was used in the Pharmacopoeia as an
evaluation criterion in the first type of test for bacterial
endotoxins. The advantage was the simplicity of basing the
decision to pass or fail the product under examination on the
absence or presence of a gel-clot, visible with the naked eye.
The quantitative methods described as methods C, D, E and F
were developed later: they require more instrumentation,
but they are easier to automate for the regular testing of
large numbers of samples of the same product.
Endotoxins may be adsorbed onto the surface of tubes
or pipettes made from certain plastics or types of glass.
Interference may appear due to the release of substances
from plastic materials. Hence, the materials used should be
checked; subsequent batches of tubes or pipettes may have
a slightly different composition, and therefore the analyst is
advised to repeat such tests on starting with new batches
of materials.
The decision to use the test for bacterial endotoxins as a limit
test implies first, that a threshold endotoxin concentration
must be defined for the product to be tested and second, that
the objective of the test is to know whether the endotoxin
concentration in the product under examination is below or
above this threshold. The quantitative methods C, D, E and F
make it possible to determine the endotoxin concentration
in the sample under examination, but for compliance with
the Pharmacopoeia and in routine quality control the final
question is whether or not this concentration exceeds a
defined limit.
In setting a threshold concentration of endotoxin for the
product to be tested, due attention should be paid to the
dose of the product: the threshold should be set so as to
ensure that as long as the endotoxin concentration in the
product remains below this threshold even the maximal
dose administered by the intended route per hour does not
contain sufficient endotoxin to cause a toxic reaction.
When the endotoxin concentration in the product exactly
equals the threshold value, gelation will occur, as is the case
when the endotoxin concentration is much higher, and the
product will fail the test, because the all-or-none character
of the test makes it impossible to differentiate between a
concentration exactly equal to the threshold concentration
and one that is higher. It is only when no gelation occurs that
the analyst may conclude that the endotoxin concentration
is below the threshold concentration.
For products in the solid state, this threshold concentration
of endotoxin per mass unit or per International Unit (IU)
of product has to be translated into a concentration of
endotoxin per millilitre of solution to be tested, as the test
can only be carried out on a solution. The case of products
that already exist in the liquid state (such as infusion fluids)
is discussed below.
Endotoxin limit: the endotoxin limit for active substances
administered parenterally, defined on the basis of dose, is
equal to, where:
K
=
threshold pyrogenic dose of endotoxin per
kilogram of body mass in a single hour period,
M
=
maximum recommended dose of product per
kilogram of body mass in a single hour period.
The endotoxin limit depends on the product and its route of
administration and is stated in monographs. Values for K are
suggested in Table 2.6.14.-5.
For other routes, the acceptance criterion for bacterial
endotoxins is generally determined on the basis of results
obtained during the development of the preparation.
Table 2.6.14.-5
Route of administration
K (IU of endotoxin per kilogram of
body mass per hour)
Intravenous
5.0
Intravanous, for
radiopharmaceuticals
2.5
Intrathecal
0.2
Which dilution of the product is to be used in the test to
obtain maximal assurance that a negative result means that
the endotoxin concentration of the product is less than
the endotoxin limit and that a positive result means that
the lysate detected an endotoxin concentration equal to or
greater than the endotoxin limit? This dilution depends on
the endotoxin limit and on the sensitivity of the lysate: it is
called the Maximum Valid Dilution (MVD) and its value may
be calculated as follows:
Concentration of test solution:
— in mg/ml if the endotoxin limit is specified by mass
(IU/mg),
— in Units/ml if the endotoxin limit is specified by unit of
biological activity (IU/Unit),
— in ml/ml if the endotoxin limit is specified by volume
(IU/ml).
λ
=
the labelled lysate sensitivity in the gel-clot
technique (IU/ml) or the lowest point used
in the standard curve of the turbidimetric or
chromogenic techniques.
When the value of the maximum valid dilution is not a whole
number, a convenient whole number smaller than the MVD
may be used for routine purposes (which means preparing a
solution of the product which is less diluted than the MVD
indicates). In this case, a negative result indicates that the
endotoxin concentration of the product lies below the limit
value. However, when the endotoxin concentration of the
product in such a test is less than the endotoxin limit but
high enough to make the reaction with the lysate result
in a clot, the test may be positive under these conditions.
Hence, when a test with this ‘convenient’ dilution factor is
positive, the product should be diluted to the MVD and the
test should be repeated. In any case of doubt or dispute the
MVD must be used.
This stresses the importance of the confirmation of the
sensitivity of the lysate.
166
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 5.0
2.6.14. Bacterial endotoxins
Example
A 50 mg/ml solution of phenytoin sodium (intended for
intravenous injection) has to be tested. Determine the MVD,
given the following variables:
M
=
maximum human dose = 15 mg per kilogram of
body mass per hour,
c
=
50 mg/ml,
K
=
5 IU of endotoxin per kilogram of body mass per
hour,
λ
=
0.4 IU of endotoxin per millilitre.
For routine tests on this product, it may be expedient to
dilute 1 ml of the solution to be tested to 20 ml (MVD/2
rounded to the next lower whole number). However, if this
test result is positive the analyst will have to dilute 1 ml to
41.67 ml and repeat the test. A dilution to 41.67 ml is also
necessary when the test is performed to settle a dispute.
3. REFERENCE MATERIAL
Endotoxin standard BRP is intended for use as the
reference preparation. It has been assayed against the WHO
International Standard for Endotoxin and its potency is
expressed in International Units of endotoxin per ampoule.
The International Unit of endotoxin is defined as the specific
activity of a defined mass of the International Standard.
For routine purposes, another preparation of endotoxin
may be used, provided it has been assayed against the
International Standard for Endotoxin or the BRP and its
potency is expressed in International Units of endotoxin.
NOTE: 1 International Unit (IU) of endotoxin is equal to
1 Endotoxin Unit (E.U.).
4. WATER FOR BET
Testing the absence of endotoxin in this reagent by a
technique derived from the rabbit pyrogen test was rejected
for practical and theoretical reasons:
4.1. The rabbit test is not sensitive enough to detect
endotoxin in water for BET intended for tests on products
with a very low endotoxin limit.
4.2. The relatively low precision of the rising temperature
response in rabbits would call for many replications in
rabbits.
4.3. The terms ‘pyrogens’ and ‘endotoxins’ denote groups of
entities that do not coincide completely.
The text of the test for bacterial endotoxins indicates that
methods other than triple distillation may be used to prepare
water for BET. Reverse osmosis has been used with good
results; some analysts may prefer to distil the water more
than three times. Whatever method is used, the resultant
product must be free of detectable endotoxins.
5. pH OF THE MIXTURE
In the test for bacterial endotoxins, optimum gel-clot occurs
for a mixture at pH 6.0 to 8.0. However, the addition of the
lysate to the sample may result in a lowering of the pH.
6. VALIDATION OF THE LYSATE
It is important to follow the manufacturer’s instructions for
the preparation of the solutions of the lysate.
The positive end-point dilution factors in the gel-clot methods
A and B are converted to logarithms. The reason is that if the
frequency distribution of these logarithmic values is plotted,
it usually approaches a normal distribution curve much more
closely than the frequency distribution of the dilution factors
themselves; in fact it is so similar that it is acceptable to use
the normal frequency distribution as a mathematical model
and to calculate confidence limits with Student’s t-test.
7. PRELIMINARY TEST FOR INTERFERING FACTORS
Some products cannot be tested directly for the presence of
endotoxins because they are not miscible with the reagents,
they cannot be adjusted to pH 6.0 to 8.0 or they inhibit
or activate gel formation. Therefore a preliminary test is
required to check for the presence of interfering factors;
when these are found the analyst must demonstrate that the
procedure to remove them has been effective.
The object of the preliminary test is to test the null
hypothesis that the sensitivity of the lysate in the presence of
the product under examination does not differ significantly
from the sensitivity of the lysate in the absence of the
product. A simple criterion is used in methods A and B: the
null hypothesis is accepted when the sensitivity of the lysate
in the presence of the product is at least 0.5 times and not
more than twice the sensitivity of the lysate by itself.
A classical approach would have been to calculate the means
of the log dilution factor for the lysate sensitivity with and
without the product and to test the difference between the
two means with Student’s t-test.
The test for interfering factors in gel-clot methods A and B
requires the use of a sample of the product in which no
endotoxins are detectable. This presents a theoretical
problem when an entirely new product has to be tested.
Hence, a different approach was designed for quantitative
methods C, D, E and F.
8. REMOVAL OF INTERFERING FACTORS
The procedures to remove interfering factors must not
increase or decrease (for example, by adsorption) the amount
of endotoxin in the product under examination. The correct
way of checking this is to apply the procedures to a spiked
sample of the product, that is, a sample to which a known
amount of endotoxin has been added, and then to measure
the recovery of the endotoxin.
Methods C and D. If the nature of the product to be analysed
shows interference which cannot be removed by classical
methods, it may be possible to carry out the standard
curve in the same type of product freed from endotoxins by
appropriate treatment or by dilution of the product. The
endotoxins test is then carried out by comparison with this
standard curve.
Ultrafiltration with cellulose triacetate asymmetric
membrane filters has been found to be suitable in most
cases. The filters should be properly validated, because
under some circumstances cellulose derivatives (β-D-glucans)
can cause false positive results.
Polysulphone filters have been found to be unsuitable
because false positive results had been obtained by some
users.
9. THE PURPOSE OF THE CONTROLS
The purpose of the control made up with water for BET
and the reference preparation of endotoxin at twice the
concentration of the labelled lysate sensitivity is to verify the
activity of the lysate at the time and under the conditions
of the test. The purpose of the negative control is to verify
the absence of a detectable concentration of endotoxin in
water for BET.
The positive control, which contains the product to be
examined at the concentration used in the test, is intended
to show the absence of inhibiting factors at the time and
under the conditions of the test.
General Notices (1) apply to all monographs and other texts
167
2.6.15. Prekallikrein activator
EUROPEAN PHARMACOPOEIA 5.0
10. READING AND INTERPRETATION OF THE RESULTS
Minute amounts of endotoxin in the water for BET, or in
any other reagent or material to which the lysate is exposed
during the test, may escape detection as long as they do not
reach the sensitivity limit of the lysate. However, they may
raise the amount of endotoxin in the solution containing the
product under examination to just above the sensitivity limit
and cause a positive reaction.
The risk of this happening may be reduced by testing the
water for BET and the other reagents and materials with the
most sensitive lysate available, or at least one that is more
sensitive than the one used in the test on the product. Even
then, the risk of such a ‘false positive result’ cannot be ruled
out completely. It should be realised, however, that in this
respect the test design is ‘fail-safe’ in contrast to a test design
permitting a false negative result, which could lead to the
release of an unsatisfactory product, thus endangering the
patient’s health.
11. REPLACEMENT OF THE RABBIT PYROGEN TEST BY
A TEST FOR BACTERIAL ENDOTOXINS
Monographs on pharmaceutical products intended for
parenteral use that may contain toxic amounts of bacterial
endotoxins require either a test for bacterial endotoxins or a
rabbit pyrogen test. As a general policy:
11.1. In any individual monograph, when a test is required,
only one test is included, either that for pyrogens or that for
bacterial endotoxins.
11.2. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the test for
bacterial endotoxins is preferred over the test for pyrogens,
since it is usually considered to provide equal or better
protection to the patient.
11.3. Before including a test for bacterial endotoxins in
a monograph, evidence is required that one of the tests
described in chapter 2.6.14 can be applied satisfactorily to
the product in question.
11.4. The necessary information is sought from
manufacturers. Companies are invited to provide any
validation data that they have concerning the applicability
of the test for bacterial endotoxins to the substances and
formulations of interest. Such data include details of sample
preparation and of any procedures necessary to eliminate
interfering factors. In addition, any available parallel data for
rabbit pyrogen testing that would contribute to an assurance
that the replacement of a rabbit pyrogen test by the test for
bacterial endotoxin is appropriate, must be provided.
Additional requirements are defined in the following sections.
12. USE OF A DIFFERENT BACTERIAL ENDOTOXIN
TEST FROM THAT PRESCRIBED IN THE MONOGRAPH
When a test for bacterial endotoxins is prescribed in a
monograph and none of the six methods (A to F) described
in chapter 2.6.14 is specified, then method A, the gel-clot
method limit test, has been validated for this product. If one
of the other methods (B to F) is specified, this is the one
which has been validated for this product.
13. VALIDATION OF ALTERNATIVE METHODS
Replacement of a rabbit pyrogen test by a bacterial endotoxin
test, or replacement of a stated or implied method for
bacterial endotoxins by another method, is to be regarded
as the use of an alternative method in the replacement of a
pharmacopoeial test, as described in the General Notices:
“The test and assays described are the official methods
upon which the standards of the Pharmacopoeia are
based. With the agreement of the competent authority,
alternative methods of analysis may be used for control
purposes, provided that the methods used enable
an unequivocal decision to be made as to whether
compliance with the standards of the monographs would
be achieved if the official methods were used. In the
event of doubt or dispute, the methods of analysis of the
Pharmacopoeia are alone authoritative.”
The following procedures are suggested for validating a
method for bacterial endotoxins other than the one implied
or indicated in the monograph.
13.1. The procedure and the materials and reagents used
in the method should be validated as described for the test
concerned.
13.2. The presence of interfering factors (and, if needed, the
procedure for removing them) should be tested on samples
of at least three production batches. It should be borne in
mind that methods D and E, using a chromogenic peptide,
require reagents that are absent in methods A, B, C and F,
and hence compliance of methods A, B, C or F with the
requirements for interfering factors cannot be extrapolated
to method D or method E without further testing.
14. VALIDATION OF THE TEST FOR NEW PRODUCTS
The procedures described under 13.1 and 13.2 should be
applied to all new products intended for parenteral use that
have to be tested for the presence of bacterial endotoxins
according to the requirements of the Pharmacopoeia.
01/2005:20615
corrected
2.6.15. PREKALLIKREIN ACTIVATOR
Prekallikrein activator (PKA) activates prekallikrein to
kallikrein and may be assayed by its ability to cleave a
chromophore from a synthetic peptide substrate so that the
rate of cleavage can be measured spectrophotometrically and
the concentration of PKA calculated by comparison with a
reference preparation calibrated in International Units.
The International Unit is the activity of a stated amount of
the International Standard which consists of freeze-dried
prekallikrein activator. The equivalence in International
Units of the International Standard is stated by the World
Health Organisation.
Prekallikrein activator in albumin BRP is calibrated in
International Units by comparison with the International
Standard.
PREPARATION OF PREKALLIKREIN SUBSTRATE
To avoid coagulation activation, blood or plasma used for
the preparation of prekallikrein must come into contact
only with plastics or silicone-treated glass surfaces.
Draw 9 volumes of human blood into 1 volume of
anticoagulant solution (ACD, CPD or 38 g/l sodium
citrate R) to which 1 mg/ml of hexadimethrine bromide R
has been added. Centrifuge the mixture at 3600 g for 5 min.
Separate the plasma and centrifuge again at 6000 g for
20 min to sediment platelets. Separate the platelet-poor
plasma and dialyse against 10 volumes of buffer A for
20 h. Apply the dialysed plasma to a chromatography
column containing agarose-DEAE for ion exchange
chromatography R which has been equilibrated in buffer A
and is equal to twice the volume of the plasma. Elute from
the column with buffer A at 20 ml/cm2/h. Collect the eluate
in fractions and record the absorbance at 280 nm (2.2.25).
Pool the fractions containing the first protein peak so that
the volume of the pool is about 1.2 times the volume of the
platelet-poor plasma.
168
See the information section on general monographs (cover pages)
