1
FOCUS
Locating Hydrothermal Vents
GRADE LEVEL
7-8
FOCUS QUESTIONS
What are hydrothermal vents and where are they 
found? 
What is a CTD and how is it used? 
How can pH be used as an indicator of hydrother­
mal vent activity?
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Students will learn how hydrothermal vents are 
formed and where they are located on the ocean 
floor.
Students will learn how scientists use CTDs to locate 
hydrothermal vents.
Students will learn how to determine the pH of a 
water sample and how this variable can be used to 
detect hydrothermal vent activity. 
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION FOR TEACHERS OF DEAF STUDENTS
There are no formal signs in American Sign 
Language for any of these words and many are 
difficult to lip-read. This activity is really designed 
to teach pH. You can start with that part of the 
activity (# 6 in the procedures), then go back and 
discuss how scientists would sample water if it was 
not easily accessible to them.  You can then intro­
duce CTD’s as a way to collect this information. 
The third part of the lesson can then be discus­
sion of hydrothermal vents and their properties. 
A reflection could be looking back at the pH and 
temperature lab and answering the final two ques­
tions regarding which sample was taken near a 
hydrothermal vent and how the data supports this 
hypothesis. That would be a good time to make the 
“white smoker” discussed in Step 16.  Depending 
on the background of the students, their knowledge 
of chemistry, and the depth to which you wish to 
go into this material, it may take two lessons to 
accomplish this activity.
MATERIALS
 One yo-yo
 One chart showing where spreading ridges are 
located in the ocean floor
 National Geographic Video entitled “Dive to the 
Edge of Creation,” if available
 Pictures of hydrothermal vents from website: http:
//www.divediscover.whoi.edu
 Pictures of animals that live near hydrothermal 
vents from website: 
     http://www.divediscover.whoi.edu
 Picture of CTD frame and sampling bottles from 
website: http://www.divediscover.whoi.edu
 One gallon of water, chilled in a refrigerator
 Vinegar
 A heat source (microwave oven or hot plate)
 One eyedropper
 One tablespoon
 One data record sheet per student
Galapagos Rift Expedition
Yo-Yos, Tow-Yos 
and pH, Oh My!
2
Galapagos Rift Expedition – Grades 7-8 
Focus: Locating hydrothermal vents
oceanexplorer.noaa.gov
Per group of four students:
 Five beakers labeled A, B, C, D and E
 One Alka-seltzer tablet (optional)
 Four thermometers 
 20 strips of pH paper and one color  indicator 
scale
AUDIO/VISUAL MATERIALS
TV/VCR  the National Geographic Video “Dive to the 
Edge of Creation” is available 
TEACHING TIME
45 minutes
SEATING ARRANGEMENT
Groups of four students
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF STUDENTS
36 students
KEY WORDS
Tow-yo
Conductivity
Salinity
CTD
Sampling bottle
pH
Acidic 
Basic
Hydrothermal vent
Galapagos Islands
Plumes
Hydrothermal 
White smokers
Black smokers
Vents
Molten
Crust
Ionization
BACKGROUND INFORMATION
Hydrothermal vents were first found by scientists 
using towed cameras back in 1976 along the coast 
of the Galapagos Islands. One year later, scientists 
traveled over 2,900 meters below the surface of 
the ocean using the manned submersible, Alvin, for 
the first in situ human observations of these newly-
found structures on the deep sea floor. Scientists 
were very surprised and excited to find towering 
plumes of black smoke rising from the seafloor, but 
had no idea then what they were. 
 
Scientists now know that the black smoke was not 
smoke at all; it was a hydrothermal fluid that was 
so hot that it could melt metal. The hot fluid car­
ries dissolved metals from beneath the surface of 
the seafloor out to cold ocean water. When the 
hot fluid mixes with seawater, the metals combine 
with sulfur and this combination forms small black 
particles. The black particles provide the effect of 
smoke! There are also white smokers. The fluid 
coming out of white smokers is generally cooler 
than the black smokers and flows more slowly. The 
white color comes from minerals (which lack met­
als) that mix with the surrounding seawater.
 
Vents occur in areas where warm water flows 
into the ocean from chimney-like structures on 
the ocean floor. These vents form in places where 
there is volcanic activity. Volcanic activity occurs in 
places around the Earth called ocean ridges where 
ocean plates are moving away from one another. 
Erupting lava creates new seafloor.
Near vents, water travels through cracks in the 
seafloor and is heated by hot, molten rock far 
below the ocean crust. Temperatures can reach as 
high as 400°C. As the water heats up, it reacts 
with the rocks in the ocean crust. These chemical 
reactions remove all of the oxygen from the water 
and, therefore, the water becomes acidic. The hot 
water rises to the surface of the seafloor and spews 
out of the vent openings. The pH of this fluid varies 
from roughly 3 to 5. This hydrothermal fluid carries 
with it dissolved metals and other chemicals from 
deep beneath the ocean floor. The water around 
a hydrothermal vent is more acidic, is higher in 
salinity and temperature, and is less clear than 
water from similar depths nearby that lack vents. 
3
oceanexplorer.noaa.gov
Galapagos Rift Expedition – Grades 7-8 
Focus: Locating hydrothermal vents
Scientists must sample very close to hydrother­
mal vents to detect high temperatures as the cold 
surrounding water of the deep sea at 2 degrees 
Celsius rapidly absorbs the heat generated from 
the vents.
Scientists note the location of hydrothermal vents 
carefully when they find them so that they are able 
to return to the area for future observations of vent 
activity. However, finding new areas of hydrother­
mal vent activity can be quite challenging. One of 
the tools scientists use to find vents is a CTD sensor 
(a conductivity, temperature and depth sensor). 
The CTD frame can also carry water-sampling 
bottles that look like long skinny bottles with a cap 
on the end. Scientists on board a research vessel 
drop the CTD frame with sampling bottles attached 
over the side and down to a specific water depth. 
They are able to send an electronic current down 
the cable and the current causes the cap on the 
sampling bottle to open. Water from that depth 
rushes into the sampling bottle, the cap closes, and 
the scientists then pull the sensor up through the 
water column back to the research vessel. Because 
scientists continually send the CTD frame down to 
a predetermined depth and then bring it back to 
the research vessel, this type of sampling can be 
thought to resemble the up and down movement 
of a “yo-yo.” Since the CTD is towed behind a 
research vessel as it goes up and down, scientists 
bestowed the name of this type of sampling as a 
“tow-yo.”
The CTD´s “job” is to measure conductivity and 
temperature of the seawater at various depths, and 
in some cases, it can collect water samples from 
various depths for scientists to study on board the 
ship. Using data sent up the conducting cable that 
connects the CTD to the ship, scientists map hydro­
thermal signals detected in the water column above 
the seafloor. Once a hydrothermal plume is detect­
ed, they send an electrical pulse down the cable. 
That triggers a sample bottle on the CTD frame to 
collect a water sample. 
When the CTD and water sample bottles are 
hauled back on the ship, the researchers take the 
water samples and transfer them the ship’s labo­
ratory. There they perform analyses to identify 
hydrothermal chemicals such as iron, manganese, 
methane, and hydrogen. If scientists detect signifi­
cant amounts of hydrogen in a water sample (a 
low pH), then this can be an indicator of proximity 
to high-temperature vents.
A water molecule, H2O, is composed of two hydro­
gen atoms and one oxygen atom. When water 
dissociates or separates, it forms H+ and OH-. This 
process is known as ionization. The hydrogen 
ion, H+, has a positive charge because it lost an 
electron, while the hydroxide ion, OH-, has a nega­
tive charge due to its gaining an electron. When 
another substance that ionizes is added, acids 
and bases are formed. An acid is created when 
excess hydrogen ions are present, while a base is 
formed when excess hydroxide ions are present. To 
determine if a substance is acidic or basic, the pH 
should be determined.
pH is a measure of the hydronium (H30+) concen­
tration in a water solution. The pH scale ranges 
from 0 to 14. If the solution contains more H+ ions, 
it is acidic while one containing more OH- ions is 
basic. A neutral solution will have a pH of 7.
0---------------------------7-------------------------14
most acidic 
       neutral 
      most basic
          (H+>OH-)                 (H+<OH-)
pH can be measured using a variety of methods. 
pH paper is often used and is simple and inexpen­
sive. There are indicators like phenolphthalein and 
methyl red, as well as foods that change colors 
in the presence of acids and bases. A variety of 
household items can be used as examples of acids 
or bases. Lemon juice, orange juice, soda, and 
vinegar are acids. Humans also have a very strong 
acid—hydrochloric acid—inside their stomachs to 
aid digestion. The lining of the human stomach is 
designed to protect the stomach from the strong 
4
Galapagos Rift Expedition – Grades 7-8 
Focus: Locating hydrothermal vents
oceanexplorer.noaa.gov
acid, however those people with holes in the lining 
of their stomachs (ulcers) often suffer very painful 
results. Examples of bases include bleach and bak­
ing soda. Solutions that have very low pHs or very 
high pHs can do tremendous damage to the human 
body.
The pH is one attribute that determines the biotic 
characteristics of a body of water. Most plants can 
tolerate a pH range of 6.5 to 13 while a large 
variety of animals prefer 6.5 to 7.5. For this rea­
son, the low pH found around hydrothermal vents 
creates a harsh environment in which only unique­
ly-adapted organisms can survive. 
LEARNING PROCEDURE
Prior to class:
1. Chill one gallon of water overnight in a refrig­
erator.
2. For each group of four students, fill five 100ml 
beakers with chilled water and label each 
with an A, B, C, D or E.
3. Heat the water in all beakers labeled D for 
60 seconds in the microwave oven shortly 
before the start of class.
4. Add 3 drops of vinegar to all beakers labeled 
C and E and stir.
5. Add one tablespoon of vinegar to all beakers 
labeled D and stir.
6. Practice your yo-yo skills!
During class:
1. Divide the class into groups of four.
2. Provide each student with a data worksheet.
3. Discuss the characteristics of hydrothermal 
vents with students. Explain where they are 
located and what they are.
4. Get out your yo-yo and begin to move the 
yo-yo up and down along the string. Once 
you have their attention, explain to students 
the design and function of a CTD. You can 
take a step forward with each downward 
movement of the yo-yo and tell students that 
scientists use a CTD in a similar manner; 
they travel “forward” by research vessel and 
sample the water below with each down­
ward cast of the CTD.
5. Explain that sampling bottles are attached to 
the CTD and explain how sampling bottles 
function.
6. Explain the concept of pH. Provide examples 
of common acids and bases. Explain why the 
water around a hydrothermal vent is acidic.
7. Explain to students that they are about to 
conduct an experiment to determine which 
sample was taken (using a CTD frame and 
sampling bottle) from a location very near a 
hydrothermal vent.
8. Provide sample A, B, C, D and E to each 
group of four students.
9. Provide two thermometers to each group of 
four students.
10.  Provide 20 strips of pH paper to each group 
of four students with at least one pH color 
indicator chart per group.
11.  Explain that each student will need to record 
the temperature and pH of each sample on 
their data worksheet.
12.  Model the correct way to measure pH with 
a pH strip.
13.  Ask the group, as a whole, to come up with 
a hypothesis as to which sample was col­
lected near a hydrothermal vent. Require 
that they be able to support their hypothesis 
using the data they have collected.
14. Provide 20 minutes for the groups to com­
plete their experiments, fill out their work­
sheets, and form their hypotheses.
15. Ask the groups to report their hypotheses.
16. Optional: for any group that correctly identi­
fies sample D as the sample taken very near 
a hydrothermal vent, provide the group with 
an Alka-Seltzer to place in sample D. The 
fizzing looks similar to a white smoker on a 
hydrothermal vent.
THE BRIDGE CONNECTION
www.vims.edu/bridge
Choose Data Port from the sidebar on the left, then 
On-line Data, and then go to General Sources, 
5
oceanexplorer.noaa.gov
Galapagos Rift Expedition – Grades 7-8 
Focus: Locating hydrothermal vents
then to the Digital Library for Earth Systems 
Education. Once you reach this site, conduct a 
search using the term “hydrothermal vents.”
THE “ME” CONNECTION
Have students do research to determine three 
similarities and three differences between the land-
based geyser called “Old Faithful” at Yellowstone 
National Park and a deep sea hydrothermal vent.  
CONNECTIONS TO OTHER SUBJECTS
Biology, English/Language Arts
EVALUATION
Provide students with the following hypothetical 
situation: there is a local citizens group that is 
concerned about the health of a lake in their area. 
Twenty years ago, someone threw several canisters 
of a strong acid into the lake. The canisters have 
rusted and now have begun leaking. Have students 
write a letter to the citizen group explaining how 
they could use a CTD with a water sampling bottle 
and pH paper to pinpoint where in the lake the 
canisters have begun to leak.
EXTENSIONS
Have your students visit            
http://oceanexplorer@noaa.gov and www.divediscover.whoi.edu 
with a member of their family each day to keep up 
to date with the  latest Galapagos Rift Expedition 
discoveries.
Build your own sampling bottle. Let students tape 
nails or weights to the outside of a small bottle so 
that it will sink when placed in water. Twist a screw 
eye into a cork that fits the mouth of the bottle. 
Mark a string or nylon cord at six inch intervals 
and tie it to the screw eye. Now tie another 12-inch 
piece of string from the screw eye around the neck 
of the bottle. Let this 12-inch piece of string hang 
loosely. Insert the cork just tightly enough so that it 
will stay in place when the bottle is lifted by the first 
string. Carefully, lower the bottle into the water to a 
depth from which a sample is to be obtained. Next, 
jerk the string to remove the cork, wait for bubbles 
to stop rising to the surface and then pull the bottle 
up (From The Everyday Science Source-book, Dale 
Seymour Publications, 1985).
Have students read and summarize any of the 
following articles from past issues of National 
Geographic:
Oases of Life in the Cold Abyss          
October, 1977
Return to the Oases of the Deep 
 
 
November, 1979
Light in the Abyss Reveals Life 
 
 
November, 1994
Rebirth of a Deep-sea Vent 
 
 
 
November, 1994
Life at the Bottom, May, 1998
Deep-sea Geysers of the Atlantic 
 
 
October, 1992
Deep Sea Vents: Science at the Extreme 
 
October, 2000
RESOURCES
http://oceanexplorer@noaa.gov and www.divediscover.whoi.edu 
- Follow the Galapagos Rift Expedition daily 
as documentaries and discoveries are posted 
each day for your classroom use. A wealth 
of resource information can also be found at 
both of these sites.
 
http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/vents/nemo/
 
http://www.divediscover.whoi.edu
 
http://www.nationalgeographic.com
 
http://www.marine.whoi.edu/ships/alvin/alvin.htm
 
http://www.ocean.udel.edu/deepsea
Gordon, David George. “Explosions from the Deep.” 
National Geographic World, June 2000, 
18-21.
Haymon, Rachel and Richard A. Lutz. “Rebirth of a 
Deep-Sea Vent.” National Geographic, Nov. 
1994, 114-126.
Rona, Peter A. “Deep-Sea Geysers of the Atlantic.” 
National Geographic, October 1992, 105-
109.
6
Galapagos Rift Expedition – Grades 7-8 
Focus: Locating hydrothermal vents
oceanexplorer.noaa.gov
Van Dover, Cindy Lee. “The Ecology of Deep-Sea 
Hydrothermal Vents.” Princeton University 
Press, 2000. 
Van Dover, Cindy Lee. “The Octopus’s Garden: 
Hydrothermal Vents and Other Mysteries of 
the Deep Sea.” Perseus Press, 1996.
Woodman, Nancy. “Sea-Fari Deep.” National 
Geographic Books, 1999.
NATIONAL SCIENCE EDUCATION STANDARDS
Content Standard A: Science as Inquiry
• Abilities necessary to do scientific inquiry
•  Understandings about scientific inquiry
Content Standard B: Physical Science
• Properties and changes of properties in matter
Content Standard D: Earth and Space Science
• Structure of the earth system
Content Standard E: Science and Technology
• Abilities of technological design
FOR MORE INFORMATION
Paula Keener-Chavis, National Education    
 
 
Coordinator/Marine Biologist
NOAA Office of Exploration
Hollings Marine Laboratory
331 Fort Johnson Road, Charleston SC 29412
843.762.8818
843.762.8737 (fax)
paula.keener-chavis@noaa.gov
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This lesson plan was produced by Stacia Fletcher, 
South Carolina Aquarium, Charleston, SC  for the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
If reproducing this lesson, please cite NOAA as the 
source, and provide the following URL: 
http://oceanexplorer.noaa.gov
oceanexplorer.noaa.gov
Galapagos Rift Expedition – Grades 7-8 
Focus: Locating hydrothermal vents
Student Handout
Name:
Sample Data
                         Sample               Temperature                   pH
                         
                             A
                             B
                             C
                             D
                             E
Which sample do you think was taken near a hydrothermal vent?
How does your data support this hypothesis?
