 32   YELLOWSTONE
Taking stock
To improve cooperation on issues that cross their boundaries, the Greater Yellowstone
Coordinating Committee (GYCC) was organized in the 1980s with representation from
Yellowstone and Grand Teton national parks and six national forests. In the wake of the
1988 fires, the GYCC assembled 15 interagency teams to collect data and make initial
assessments on topics ranging from air quality to recreational use.
Post-Fire Assessment and Research
A panel of scientists, chaired by Norman Christensen, a botanist from Duke University
with extensive experience in fire research, was selected by the GYCC to prepare an inde-
pendent evaluation of “the apparent ecological impacts and implications of the 1988 fires
as they related to the area’s watersheds, fisheries, wildlife, forests, soils, ranges, and biologi-
cal diversity.” With 10 other scientists from academic institutions across the country and
two researchers from the U.S. Forest Service, Christensen also developed a list of post-fire
research needs. The GYCC assessment and the findings of this panel are among the many
documents that served as references for this book.1
Most of the previous research on fire impacts in wildland areas had been done in relatively
small areas and after the fact. The Yellowstone fires, which prompted large-scale research
and monitoring projects on a variety of topics, demonstrated the importance of having
baseline data that was collected before the fires for comparison purposes. The pre-fire
records that had been compiled by government agencies and academic researchers have
THE HUMAN AFTERMATH
Chapter 3
The Yellowstone Tourist:  Was the abundance or distribution
of this species affected by the fires of 1988?
THE HUMAN AFTERMATH   33
made it possible to answer many questions on how the 1988 fires have affected various
components of the Yellowstone ecosystem. For example, since a number of elk studies were
already underway, the fires provided an unprecedented opportunity to document fire ef-
fects on a large elk population. But for topics on which no pre-fire data was available, such
as amphibian abundance and distribution, many questions remain unanswered.
More than 250 research projects have been initiated in the greater Yellowstone area to
study fire effects since 1988. The National Park Service provided more than $6 million to
support 32 projects involving scientists from 70 institutions; some of this funding came
from a special Congressional appropriation for a post-fire research program, and the re-
mainder was diverted from other programs at Yellowstone and other national parks. In
1991, of the 204 projects for which research permits were granted in Yellowstone, 60 were
focused partly or entirely on fire impacts.
Results from 58 studies relating to the 1988 fires were presented at the park’s second
biennial science conference in 1993, and about half of these papers were compiled in The
Ecological Implications of Fire in Greater Yellowstone (1996), edited by Jason Greenlee and
published by the International Association of Wildland Fire. By 1996, the number of
research projects in the park that related to fire impacts had dropped to 10. The rapid
decline in fire-related research in Yellowstone reflects both the loss of funding specifically
designated for it, and the speed with which the once headline-grabbing fires moved to the
back pages of ecological concerns in Yellowstone. When it became evident that, with a few
possible exceptions such aspen and moose, the fires would have little impact on species
diversity and abundance in the park, research attention turned to more pressing concerns,
such as bison management and the reintroduction of wolves.
But some of the researchers whose names appear in the following pages have been willing
and able to obtain funding to carry on long-term monitoring projects, and Yellowstone
continues to provide the stimulus for new fire-related research. In the spring of 2000,
David McGinnis brought the first group of ecology students from the University of Iowa
to spend two weeks measuring “forest-meadow edge re-establishment patterns” in the park.
Updated annually with new slides, John Burger’s lecture on “The Yellowstone Fires: A
Force for Change and Regeneration in a Natural Ecosystem” at the University of New
Hampshire remains his most popular, now presented to biology students for whom 1988
was more than a half-life ago.
Burn it and they will come.
Yellowstone:  A Cause for Universal Joy
“Momentous questions are now agitating the scientific world, calling for experi-
ment and observation which are daily becoming less possible, owing in a great mea-
sure to the obliterating influences of modern civilization…
“Much has already been said concerning the benefits to be derived by science
from the setting aside of this tract of land and the protection of its natural features.
In fact, this was one of the inducements offered for the passage of the bill [establish-
ing Yellowstone National Park] in both houses of Congress. Dr. Hayden, in speaking
of this bill says, ‘I believe it will mark an era in the popular advancement of scientific
thought not only in this country, but throughout the civilized world.  That our legis-
lators, at a time when public opinion is so strong against appropriating the public
domain for any purpose however laudable, should reserve for the benefit and
instruction of the people, a tract of 3,578 square miles, is an act that should cause
universal joy throughout the land.  This noble deed may be regarded as a tribute
from our legislators to science, and the gratitude of the nation and of men of science
in all parts of the world is due them for this munificent donation.’”
— Theo. B. Comstock, geologist participating in the 1873 Yellowstone expedition2
A stimulus for new research.
 34   YELLOWSTONE
Damage to Park Facilities
Although 5% of the park is zoned as “developed,” only about 1% of the park’s land area has
been paved over or otherwise built upon. Despite the large portion of the park that was
swept by fire, the firefighting priority given to protecting these developed areas kept them
largely intact in 1988. Nearly all of the damage to park facilities occurred in the Old
Faithful area, where 19 buildings in a complex of 400 were destroyed, including 12
concessioner cabins. Six buildings were damaged but salvageable. Sprinklers had previ-
ously been installed in many of the buildings and on the roof of the Old Faithful Inn, and
the spraying of buildings with chemical foam retardants as the fire front approached helped
minimize the losses. Of the 38 backcountry patrol cabins, only the Sportsman Lake cabin
was destroyed, but the others had varying degrees of damage from water or the fire shelters
that had been nailed on.3
Structural rehabilitation in the park also included repair or replacement of bumper logs,
signs, posts, snow poles and guardrails along roads; drainage ditches and culverts clogged
with ash and debris; 23 picnic areas and campgrounds (out of 61) that were damaged by
fire or used as fire camps; about 29 miles of frontcountry trails and boardwalks damaged by
fire or falling trees; trail signs, boundary markers, and the wooden water bars used to
prevent erosion on backcountry trails; 73 backcountry bridges; backcountry campsites
that had been burned over; smoke detectors damaged by prolonged exposure to smoke;
and more than 10 miles of power lines, 300 utility poles, and 8 telephone pedestals.
Most of this rehabilitation was completed by the end of 1989. As soon as the fires had
passed, crews began cutting the thousands of trees that could threaten public safety by
falling in developed areas or across power lines. This chore will need to continue for as long
as fire-damaged trees remain standing in the park, their root systems slowly weakening.
The Sportsman Lake cabin: pre-fire (constructed in 1912) and post-fire (completed in 1989).
 It will take a while longer for the trees to grow back.
THE HUMAN AFTERMATH   35
Fire Suppression Impacts
Like many of the fire management decisions made in 1988, the attempt to minimize the
use of heavy equipment was controversial. Even after fire suppression efforts began in mid-
July, they were sometimes restricted not because of a “let it burn” attitude, but because of
a “don’t damage the park” goal. Disturbances to the landscape that result from fire suppres-
sion activities are considered destructive in a way that naturally occurring fire is not. Areas
in which fireline was constructed are more susceptible to erosion than are most burned
areas, which remain protected by duff, roots, and needles, and still contain the organic
material that will be the basis for revegetation. Environmental impacts also resulted from
the dropping of water and fire retardants, the use of wetting and foaming agents on build-
ings, and from the transport and housing of thousands of firefighters. Off-road travel left
meadows riddled with vehicle tracks, in some places three miles from the nearest road, that
may remain apparent for decades. Scars left by firefighting done in the park up to 50 years
ago, when less was understood about landscape rehabilitation, are still visible today.4
National Park Service policy now requires rehabilitation of this type of human-caused
disturbance.  For Yellowstone after the fires of 1988,
there were two goals. One was purely aesthetic, com-
parable to cosmetic surgery: to minimize the visual
impact of fire suppression activities by making these
areas appear to the park visitor as though they’d never
been hit by a shovel, much less a bulldozer. The other
goal was ecological, analogous to reattaching severed
flesh: to return the topsoil and other organic debris
that had been dug out to create firelines to as near its
original position as possible. This would protect the
genetic integrity of the native seed source, instead of
using seed from external sources.5
At times up to 200 people were working on the reha-
bilitation effort, including crews from the National
Park Service, the U.S. Forest Service, the Student
Conservation Association, the Youth Conservation
Corps, and private contract fire crews, with overall
supervision provided by Eleanor Clark, Yellowstone’s
chief landscape architect. Most of the following in-
formation and the photographs on this page came
from her report to the park.6
Derived primarily from volcanic material, many Yel-
lowstone soils are relatively infertile and highly erod-
ible, particularly when disturbed. Organic matter is
slow to decay in the cold, dry climate, and develop-
ment of soil capable of supporting vegetation may
take thousands of years.  Protecting the accumulated
organic matter was therefore of primary importance
in preparing for the eventual rehabilitation of dis-
turbed areas. The groundwork was laid as soon as
fire suppression efforts began in July, when the park’s
landscape staff provided on-site guidance to the fire
commanders on how to minimize the damage of
firelines by limiting their depth, using curvilinear
rather than straight lines, avoiding timbered areas,
Top photo:  Bulldozer line for the North Fork fire, October 1988.
Bottom:  Same site after rehabilitation and the natural falling
of some dead trees, July 1991.
 36   YELLOWSTONE
feathering the edge of the corridor, and setting aside the removed topsoil and organic
debris for later restoration. The techniques used were similar to those employed when park
land must be dug up to install a sewer line.
Nearly all of the fireline constructed in the park was done for the North Fork fire. It was
fought from its start in the Targhee National Forest on July 22, with 30 miles of bulldozer
line and 320 miles of hand line, but its perimeter encompassed more than 500,000 acres by
the time it was declared out on November 18. The Clover Mist fire, which started a month
earlier in the park from a lightning strike and was initially allowed to burn, attained a
perimeter around nearly 400,000 acres but had only 90 miles of hand line and no bull-
dozer line.
Construction of bulldozer fireline, typically 12 to 24 feet wide, was the most destructive
suppression technique used in the North Fork fire. It typically requires removal of all sur-
face vegetation, root material, and one or more foot of soil with heavy excavating equip-
ment.  However, by angling the bulldozer blade and reducing the depth of cut to usually no
more than six inches, only the necessary organic material for vegetative growth was re-
moved and set aside in windrows immediately adjacent to where it had been taken. Slash
from cut trees and shrubs was piled to the side of the fireline away from the approaching
fire front.
Firelines created by bulldozers, which were usually accessible from established roads, were
rehabilitated using a rubber-tired excavator to scarify the upper six inches of compacted
subsoil, allowing for root growth and water infiltration.  The upper layer of organic mate-
rial that contained most of the viable seed was returned as near to the surface as possible.
Then larger trees, deadfall snags, and boulders were replaced.  A hand crew followed the
excavator to take care of soil raking, small slash replacement, and stump removal.
Rehabilitation efforts intensified in mid-September in order to lessen damage to the
organic soil layer before winter, and priority was given to steep areas with the most
potential for erosion. By November 21, when the project was shut down for the
season, crews had been working on snow-covered ground for several weeks, but
most of the firelines and helispots for the North Fork fire had been rehabilitated
and backcountry trash removed.
Chainsaws, shovels, and the combination hoe and axe named a “pulaski” after its
inventor were used to dig firelines by hand, often in areas accessible only by trail or
helicopter. Trees, shrubs, pine needle duff, sod, and organic debris were removed
along a line two to four feet wide within a wider corridor cleared of large vegetation,
leaving a windrow of topsoil and organic material pushed off to the side.
Erratic fire behavior and frequent burn-over of fireline resulted in irregular fireline
locations, multiple lines that were built as the fire moved, and severe soil compac-
tion as the lines were used as access trails by the fire crews. But limiting the width of
the fireline corridor, using curvilinear routes and following animal trails where pos-
sible minimized the visual scar.
Because of their location, hand firelines had to be rehabilitated using hand tools,
flush-cutting stumps and constructing water bars of rocks or weathered logs before
returning topsoil, sod, duff, and other organic debris as near to the original position
as possible. Stumps were blackened with ash or covered with duff or soil to foster
breakdown. Slash was scattered over the rehabilitated area to protect the surface
from wind and water erosion, and feathered away from the disturbed area to blend
it in with its surroundings.
Bulldozer and hand  firelines.
Firefighter at North Fork dozer line.
THE HUMAN AFTERMATH   37
Dynamite, which can clear a fireline of varying width depending on the type and strength
of the charge, is especially useful in sagebrush, grass, and other low shrubby vegetation,
where it can quickly be set up with a detonation cord. However, the explosion removes
most of the topsoil and seed sources in the fireline, making rehabilitation difficult.  Unlike
the bulldozer and handlines, the scars left by 18 to 24-inch wide explosive fireline near the
Madison River are still visible today, even to the untrained eye.
About 255 acres in the park were used for fire camps, staging areas, and helispots. Base
camps were established in areas with road access to provide temporary shelter for fire
crews; spike camps were set up in the backcountry. At the command center for the Snake
River fire, carpenters and electricians assembled a makeshift town of mess halls, medical
units, latrines, light poles, showers, and supply caches, rumbling night and day with the
sound of trucks, helicopters, and generators. Soil compaction caused by vehicle and foot
traffic was minimal at many of the spike camps; more severe impacts occurred at base
camps such as Madison Campground, which supported hundreds of firefighters for sev-
eral months. During rehabilitation, aeration and raking were done to relieve soil compac-
tion and promote regrowth. Site monitoring in 1989 and 1990 indicated that the rehabili-
tated areas were generally stable and revegetated with minimal erosion.
Creating backcountry landing zones for helicopters required removal of vegetation and
loose organic material. Meadows were favored because of safety concerns and the presence
of vegetation that would recover quickly from blowing. Helispots that required felling
large trees created significant intrusions that were difficult to visually rehabilitate, but by
enlarging natural openings, or creating irregularly-shaped openings that mimicked natural
ones and felling trees in the direction they might have blown down, within a few years a
rehabilitated helispot could appear to be a natural opening or windstorm area.
Several million gallons of water were dropped by helicopter, drawing down some smaller
streams and ponds, and some stream channel disturbance occurred where impoundments
were constructed to facilitate water removal. More than a million gallons of ammonium
phosphate base fire retardant were dropped within the park boundary, much of it on the
North Fork fire. This killed some fish and could temporarily increase the nutrient load in
runoff, but there has been no evidence of a long-term impact (see page 93). The chemical
foaming agents used in developed areas to protect structures were low toxicity detergents
that appeared to have dispersed into the soil during snowmelt the following spring.
Fire retardant and water drops.
Fire crew camps.
H
Explosive fireline.
Helispots.
When smoke gets in your clothes:
Madison base camp, September 1988.
 38   YELLOWSTONE
Archeological Sites
Archeological evidence of humans in the Yellowstone area dates back to more than 11,000
years ago and extends through the first explorations by Euroamericans in the early 19th
century and the first park administration in 1872. Although only a very small portion of
the park has been surveyed for archeological remains, more than 1,100 sites have been
documented, including prehistoric burials near Fishing Bridge and small campsites indi-
cated by only a few obsidian chips, rock shelters, and tipi rings.
Because of Yellowstone’s long history of fire, by 1988 there were unlikely to have been
many prehistoric sites in the park that had not been exposed to it before.  Wickiups (small
tipi-shaped shelters of wood once used by American Indians) had deteriorated over the
years in the harsh climate, and some that had so far gone unrecorded may have vanished
entirely  in 1988. However, all of the wickiups that were known to have survived until the
summer of 1988 were still present afterward, although most of the poles at one wickiup
were charred at the base.7 Such structures cannot be preserved forever, but the fires demon-
strated the need to document such sites before they disintegrate any further.
Most surface rock in the park appeared to have been unchanged by the fires, which pro-
bably moved too quickly to heat it to temperatures at which breakage could occur (about
350°C for some types of rock). Obsidian Cliff, a National Historic Landmark because of
its use as a quarry site by American Indians, showed signs of having been burned over in the
past; the shattering, feathering, and surficial weathering that resulted from the 1988 fires
were less severe than if this had been the first time it had burned.8
When soil has no protective layer of duff or lies beneath burning deadfall, it may be sub-
jected to such high temperatures (500° to 700°C) that it will oxidize, leaving a stain that is
visible in recently burned areas. Depending on the timing and intensity of subsequent
rainfall, the stain may remain as part of the sedimentary record.9 Even the most intense
fires will rarely heat soil more than 7 to 10 cm below the surface, so buried artifacts are
unlikely to be affected by the fires themselves. National Park Service staff from the Mid-
west Archeological Center in Lincoln, Nebraska, examined three burned areas in north-
western Wyoming in the fall of 1988 that included both lodgepole pine and meadow
habitat.  In the lodgepole pine study area between Canyon and Norris,
where a thin layer of soil covering bedrock or glacially deposited cobbles
was covered by a layer of forest duff, they found that the 1988 fires
burned the duff and left the soil below unaltered.10
However, forest fires may affect artifacts more than 10 cm below the
surface where the root system of a tree has burned or organic material
has accumulated.  In one meadow site with highly organic soil that was
charred and still burning in the fall of 1988, smoke rose from a depth
of 20 cm and metal parts of the excavation equipment became too hot
to handle, making it impossible to ascertain the possible depth of the
charred material.11
Changes in soil chemistry and the loss or reduction of ground cover
can increase erosion and cause freeze-thaw processes to penetrate to a
greater depth, increasing site perturbation. Archeological material at
the top of a slope may erode and be redeposited further down, while
that at the bottom of a slope may be buried by sediment. Treefall also
increases pedoturbation (mixing of the soil through biological pro-
cesses) and creates a hollow that may catch eroding charred soil and
charcoal and be mistaken for an archeological feature. However, be-
Wickiup
THE HUMAN AFTERMATH   39
cause archeological sites are generally not located on steep slopes, they
are less likely to be affected by the most severe erosion that may result
from fire.
Fires may change the landscape in ways that complicate the inter-
pretation of an archeological site, but by clearing away deadfall and
underbrush, they can increase the likelihood that new sites such as
lithic scatters will be detected, and make it possible to conduct more
thorough examinations of already known sites. For example, behind
Obsidian Cliff lies a 20-square-mile plateau that was a major source of
the obsidian used and traded by American Indians across the West for
thousands of years. Although the lack of trees in a 1878 photograph of
Obsidian Cliff was probably due to fire, by the 1970s the plateau was
heavily forested with lodgepole pine. After many of these trees burned
in 1988, the quarry sites could be documented for the first time, but
easier access by the public has required more frequent patrolling of the
area to deter and penalize theft and vandalism.
The Baronett Cabin, named in 1870 for the man who constructed the
first bridge across the Yellowstone River, remained in use until about
1920. But by the time the site was recorded in 1985, the cabin’s roof
and upper walls were gone, and tall grass and dense clumps of sage-
brush made ground visibility difficult and survey transects impossible.
When the site was re-examined in the fall of 1988 by Ann Johnson,
now the park archeologist, more features and artifacts were visible,
including a wagon road, the remnants of several outbuildings, tin cans,
and glass bottles. The remaining walls of the cabin had burned, leav-
ing a trench where the bottom row of logs had been. Johnson expected
that the fill that had been inside the cabin, including many artifacts,
would shift into this trench over time. Within a year, lush regrowth
concealed the site entirely.12
To take advantage of the brief period before regrowth, archeologists
surveyed specific burn areas in the park during the summers of 1989
and 1990 to document sites and any damage that may have been caused
by the fires or suppression efforts, and identify sites that might be
disturbed by post-fire rehabilitation activities. While they were there,
they also evaluated sites’ eligibility for placement on the National Reg-
ister of Historic Places. Ground visibility ranged from 100% in areas
that had sustained very intense fires and revegetation had not yet oc-
curred, to near zero in areas that were already densely vegetated by
new growth. About 224 miles of trails, bulldozed firebreaks, and hand-
cut fire lines were surveyed, along with more than 160 acres slated for
rehabilitation. In 1989, 96 sites were documented for the first time,
including two prehistoric sites along the Yellowstone River. In 1990,
another 11 previously unrecorded sites were documented, six prehis-
toric and five Euroamerican.13
Obsidian Cliff, 1999.
Creating a firebreak may expose archeological sites.
 40   YELLOWSTONE
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
'80
'82
'84
'86
'88
'90
'92
'94
'96
'98
Millions
Visitor and Economic Impacts
September 10, 1988 was the first day in Yellowstone’s 116-year history that the entire park
was closed. However, throughout that summer visitors often had to suddenly alter their
routes because of road and facility closures, or were required to travel in ranger-led convoys
that were subject to long delays. About 4,000 people were evacuated from Grant Village on
July 23, and again on August 21. On August 24, Canyon lodging and campgrounds were
evacuated. Old Faithful was evacuated on September 7, and Mammoth Hot Springs, where
the park’s headquarters are located, on September 10. Visitor accommodations in the park,
which in previous years had remained open until late September or mid-October, all closed
for the season on September 8. In addition to these disruptions, many people found their
park visits marred by the smoke which often obscured scenic vistas, and by the aircraft that
could be heard almost constantly during the height of suppression activities. But some
visitors were thrilled at having the rare opportunity to witness an ecological phenomenon
of this scale and impact.
The number of vehicles coming through each park entrance is mechanically counted and
used to derive an annual visitation estimate. Although October 1988 visitation increased
40% over the same month in 1987, with 175,000 people coming to see what all the fuss
was about, total visitation for 1988 was nearly 400,000 (15%) less than in 1987. This drop
in visitors translated into economic losses for many local enterprises, especially those that
earn most of their income during the summer. Some did a brisk busi-
ness in supplying the thousands of firefighters and journalists with
food and lodging, but some outfitters lost their fall revenues due to
trip cancellations and national forest closures that occurred because of
the fire danger.
Paul Polzin, a management professor at the University of Montana in
Missoula who studied park visitation data, found that although the
number of visitors dropped in 1988, the average length of stay re-
mained fairly constant (about 3.5 days, of which 2 were spent outside
the park), as did the proportion of expenditures made inside (46%)
and outside the park (54%).14 The proportion of visitors coming into
the park through each of its five entrances also remained fairly con-
stant. Although Polzin assumed this was because “the fires were dis-
Visitation at Yellowstone National Park
How visitors are counted.
Traffic delay on the West Entrance Road,  August 1988.
THE HUMAN AFTERMATH   41
tributed throughout the park, affecting all areas,” it may have been simply that people who
came to Yellowstone in 1988, before or after the fires, did not make their decision based on
the presence or absence of charred trees.
Polzin also believed that park visitation and tourism revenues in the surrounding commu-
nities were lower in subsequent years than if the fires had not occurred. Based on the over-
all trend in park visitation since 1971, the increases in tourist visits to Montana and na-
tional forests, and nation-wide travel activity in subsequent years, he projected that with-
out the fires, Yellowstone visitation would have risen 8.8% in 1988, 8.4% in 1989, and
19.9% in 1990—reaching a record high each year. Based on the park’s visitor count for
1987, that would have brought visitation to 3.6 million by 1990. The study did not ex-
tend its projections past 1990, noting that “it is unknown how long this potential lag in
growth will continue.” For those who accept Polzin’s projections and are concerned about
visitation growth, this “without fires” scenario may be cause for regarding the fires as a
blessing. With fires, the highest visitor count since 1988 has been 3.1 million, which has
been reached in four years since 1988.
But the loss of hypothetical visitors can be converted into the loss of millions of hypotheti-
cal dollars. Based on tourists’ average daily expenditures for lodging, travel, food, and
other recreation-related items from June through September, 1988–90, Polzin projected
how much more would have spent in the park and the five gateway communities if the
fires had not occurred and his projected visitation levels had been reached. He concluded
that a total of nearly $60 million would have been added to the actual tourist expenditures
of about $240 million in the three peak seasons during that period. (This estimate assumes
that none of the would-be visitors who did not enter the park because of the fires visited a
gateway community anyway.) Although government expenditures of
about $33 million for fire-related supplies, equipment, and services in
1988 partially offset the loss of tourist dollars, the study noted that
only about $10.8 million of these payments went to the seven “pri-
mary impact communities.”
Except for 1988, annual park visitation did increase each year from
1985 through 1992, by a total of about 41%. A study by David
Snepenger, a business professor at Montana State University, found
that tourism in Montana rose 54% during that same period (as mea-
sured by accommodation tax receipts), with the increase concentrated
in four counties, including one of the two Montana counties that bor-
der the park.15 While this disparity may suggest that park visitation
after 1988 was less than it would have been had the fires not occurred,
it could also be taken as evidence that the fires were not a major factor
in Montana tourism revenues.
How many people visit Yellowstone each year is influenced by a variety
of factors, including the weather, the price of gasoline, and shifts in the
popularity of other recreation options. It would therefore be difficult
to prove that the fires had any long-term impact on Yellowstone’s visi-
tor count. The prospect of seeing vistas of dead trees may have kept
some people away, but others have been drawn by curiosity. Total visi-
tation reached a record 2.7 million the year after the fires, and has
repeatedly exceeded 3 million since then. The park’s geothermal fea-
tures, which are among its most popular tourist attractions, were not
altered by the fires, and today the only areas of the park where public
use may still be affected by the fires are backcountry trails and camp-
grounds where falling snags pose a nuisance and safety threat.
More visitors without fires?
Impact on tourism revenues.
Ignoring the eruption of smoke in the distance,
undaunted visitors await Old Faithful, July 1988.
 42   YELLOWSTONE
Public Attitudes Toward Fire
The Yellowstone fires occurred at a time when the problem of “exurban” fire was becoming
more widely recognized. As Stephen Pyne observed the following year, “How to cope with
fires in sprawling residential and recreational communities nestled in wildlands (in areas
without clear jurisdiction for fire services) has become a national, even international co-
nundrum.”16 For many people, fire is as destructive in a national park as it would be in
their backyard, and an increasing number of people have backyards near wildland areas,
affecting their reaction to the scenes they were witnessing on their television screens.
On an aesthetic level, the Yellowstone fires evoked a negative response that 16 years of
natural fire management had done little to prevent. Even park employees who appreciated
the ecological importance of the fires and had to defend the park’s firefighting efforts over
phone lines buzzing with outraged citizens, mourned the transformation of a favorite view
or hiking trail. As reports of the advancing fire fronts came in that summer, their pleas
went up in the smoke. “Oh no, not Fairy Falls! Don’t take Fairy Falls too!” Of course, Fairy
Falls is still there, tumbling down 200 feet over the rocks. It just doesn’t look quite the way
they remember.
Alistair James Bath examined attitudes toward the fires for his Ph.D. dissertation at the
University of Calgary, Alberta during a nine-month period beginning in June 1989.17  He
obtained data from more than 4,500 respondents,
including  interviews conducted in the park, surveys
filled in by visitors leaving the park, and randomly
sampled residents in Montana and Idaho who were
mailed surveys. (A portion of the visitors participat-
ing in the interviews and exit surveys would have been
from Montana and Idaho, but their opinions were
grouped with those of other park visitors.) More than
half of the survey participants had been to Yellow-
stone at least once before the fires. Interviewed visi-
tors who had seen the effects of the fire had the most
favorable attitudes overall; Montana and Idaho resi-
dents who had not seen the fire effects were the most
negative. Although most respondents disagreed with
the statement, “All fires in Yellowstone National Park
should be suppressed regardless of how they start,”
those who had seen the fire effects tended to disagree
more strongly.
After visitors had seen the fire effects, they regarded
some fire management practices more favorably, but
knowledge of fire ecology remained meager.  When
asked whether nine statements about the 1988 fires
were true or false, respondents who were seeing post-
fire Yellowstone for at least the second time had the
highest score; area residents who hadn’t seen the fire
effects had the lowest.  Only slightly more than half
of the survey participants who had visited after the
fires knew that the statement, “The fires of 1988 de-
stroyed habitat for many big game animals,” was false.
Visitors focus on a grizzly bear, undeterred
by the standing snags, October 1992.
On Second Thought
Most Montana and Idaho participants in a 1989 mail survey
agreed with the statement, “The Yellowstone National Park fires
should have been put out when they first began.”  Visitors
surveyed at Yellowstone were less critical of park management.
However, more visitors agreed with the statement, “The National
Park Service handled the recent fires properly,” before they
entered the park than they did when they were surveyed after
their visit.
THE HUMAN AFTERMATH   43
Renewing Yellowstone’s Fire Policy
As a result of the controversy surrounding the Yellowstone fires, all natural fire manage-
ment programs at national parks were suspended in 1988 pending further study. Three
congressional hearings were held and the Secretaries of the Interior and Agriculture ap-
pointed a committee to evaluate fire management policies for national parks and wilder-
ness areas. Their report, issued in May 1989, upheld the need for fire in maintaining a
wildland ecosystem, but criticized several aspects of the National Park Service’s fire man-
agement plans, finding that agency budgets and the training and experience of many fire
managers were inadequate.18 Fire behavior analysts under-estimated the potential size and
intensity of the fires because of their inability to accurately predict weather trends and take
into consideration the effects of prolonged drought. Reduction of hazardous fuels near
developed areas prior to the fires would have eased the chore of keeping the fires at bay.
The committee also called for specific criteria that would be applied to determine under
what circumstances fires would be permitted to burn, taking into account weather condi-
tions, the availability of firefighting resources, and the potential impact on neighboring
communities. “The ecological effects of prescribed natural fire support resources objec-
tives in parks and wilderness, but in some cases the social and economic effects may be
unacceptable.”  In the same way that most people’s immediate reaction to the fires was
prompted by their impression of what Yellowstone had looked like in recent decades, the
park’s fire plans and those of other land management agencies had been driven largely by
observations of fire behavior over the previous few decades. Like park visitors, fire manag-
ers would have to adopt a longer view about fire’s potential role in Yellowstone.
Although the public comment period brought little scientific disagreement on the basic
principles, Yellowstone’s natural fire policy remained on hold and all fires were fought
until the park formally adopted a revised wildfire management plan in May 1992.  The
plan strengthened the coordination mechanisms between the park and the surrounding
national forests, established criteria to determine which fires must be suppressed, and clarified
the policy regarding protective “buffer zones” near gateway communities. As under Yellow-
stone’s prior policy:
G
Any fire that is human-caused or that threatens human life or property is
considered “wildfire” and suppressed as quickly as possible using methods that
will minimize damage to the park’s natural and cultural resources.
G
Naturally ignited fires that do not threaten human life or property may be
allowed to burn if they are “within prescription”—if they meet certain criteria
pertaining to fire behavior, weather, and fuel moisture content.
However, to classify a naturally ignited fire as within prescription, park managers must
now also give consideration to the regional and national fire situation, including the num-
ber of fires underway and the availability of firefighters and equipment. Once a fire has
been determined to be within the prescription, it is monitored daily to make sure that the
criteria are still met and that adequate suppression resources are available to ensure that it
will remain within the prescription during the next 24, hours, given the forecast for weather
and fire behavior.
More specific guidelines.
Considering the fire situation
outside the park.
 44   YELLOWSTONE
Fuel and weather monitoring.
Fire management personnel.
In 1995 the Secretaries of the Interior and Agriculture for the first time issued a joint fire
management policy to ensure that federal land management agencies would have compat-
ible, coordinated programs. They also confirmed that, “Wildland fire will be used to pro-
tect, maintain, and enhance resources and, as nearly as possible, be allowed to function in
its natural ecological role.” Agreements between Yellowstone and the surrounding national
forests that permit some fires to burn across forest boundaries into the park and vice versa
have been revalidated since 1988.  Each year before the fire season begins, the fire manage-
ment officers from the  national parks and national forests in the greater Yellowstone area
meet to review fire severity predictions and plans.
The size of the fire management staff at a national park is now determined using a formula
that takes into consideration the length of the fire season as well as the likelihood of large
fires.  Yellowstone’s wildland fire staff has about tripled in size since 1988, and there is also
more fire management expertise at the regional and national levels of the National Park
Service. Yellowstone uses funds provided by an NPS-wide program to support three year-
round fire management positions, a seasonal crew, and part of the cost of a summer heli-
copter operation. Several other full-time positions are paid for directly out of park funds,
and each summer more than 100 Yellowstone employees qualify for their “red card,” indi-
cating that they have received the necessary training and passed the fitness test required for
assignment to a fire crew if the need arises. Just as Yellowstone must turn to other govern-
ment agencies for help in case of serious fires, these employees assist in areas outside the
park when called upon.
The most significant change in Yellowstone’s fire management program since 1988 has
been the increased use of computers and access to “real time” weather data over the Internet.
Working with the National Interagency Fire Center in Boise, Idaho, park staff use com-
puterized software programs to monitor fire risks. In addition to manually collected data
on temperature, precipitation, relatively humidity, wind, and fuel moisture, three auto-
mated weather stations in backcountry locations transmit data on fire-related climate con-
ditions to park headquarters so that fire danger can be assessed.
Fuel loads in developed areas that are considered hazardous are reduced by physically re-
moving the debris or prescribed burning. Reducing the possibility of fire in developed
areas in and around the park increases the likelihood that a naturally ignited fire will be
able to burn within prescription. While a prescription fire is underway, fire monitors check
the site daily to assess weather conditions, fuel load, and rate of spread. Fuel samples are
weighed, oven-dried, and re-weighed to determine the moisture content and how intensely
and quickly the fire may spread.
In July 2000, a study plot was set up in an unburned
area adjacent to the Two Smoke Fire underway on
Pitchstone Plateau. Data was collected on aspects such
as vegetation composition, tree density, fuel load, and
litter depth. As anticipated, the fire soon burned
through the study plot, making possible an immedi-
ate pre-and post-burn comparison, as well as an as-
sessment of revegetation in future years.
Since 1988, the extent of both human- and lightning-
caused fires in Yellowstone has been relatively insignifi-
cant, but has fluctuated from year to year depending
largely on environmental factors. The 10 fires of 1993
burned less than one acre combined, but because of
dry conditions in 1994, the most active fire season
THE HUMAN AFTERMATH   45
since 1988, only four of the 48 lightning strikes met the criteria for a prescription fire.
There were also 16 human-caused fires in 1994, including four that started from sparks off
falling power lines.
Although the 2000 fire season has been called “the worst in 50 years” for the West, Yellow-
stone was relatively unaffected by the drought and its burned acreage was less than half of
that in 1994. The revised fire policy does make a difference in such years, however, and
reduced the acreage that would have been allowed to burn if only concerns for safety and
protecting developed areas in and around the park had been considered. But because the
available firefighting resources were being stretched to cover the many fires burning else-
where in the country, Yellowstone’s skeleton fire crew was theoretically supposed to imme-
diately suppress all fires, even those from lightning ignitions in areas that were far from
developed areas and will have to burn eventually.
The post-1988 rationale for the policy was clear—Yellowstone shouldn’t take the risk of
allowing small fires to grow big at a time when there’s no one to call for help—but it bore
seeds of bureaucratic illogic waiting for the right conditions to sprout. It is precisely in
“bad” fire seasons such as that of 2000 when many of Yellowstone’s own “red-carded”
employees have been sent elsewhere that the park is least able to immediately suppress
every lightning ignition. Every fire is monitored, but the reality
is that park managers must allocate the available staff to deal
with the more potentially serious fires and some fires that make
“ecological sense” are suppressed. Such a predicament provides
one rationale for setting controlled burns rather than waiting
for lightning to do the job: by conducting burns in areas ripe
for naturally-caused fires at times of less risk, the potential for
serious fires when firefighting crews are most in demand would
be reduced. (See page 15 for more information about the  use
of controlled burns in Yellowstone.)
Yellowstone’s fire policy, although far more widely understood
and accepted than it was in 1988, remains unsatisfactory for
those who object to any strategy other than an immediate ef-
fort at total suppression, and for those who favor the use of
prescribed burns to prevent large fires. The controversy about
fires, like that about wolves or snowmobiles, usually reflects a
difference in view about Yellowstone’s role as a national park.
At one end of the spectrum are those who criticize park manag-
ers for not doing enough to keep nature in its proper place,
who want Yellowstone to be managed as “safe and attractive
forests,” as advocated by Thomas Bonnickson, head of the De-
partment of Recreation and Parks at Texas A&M, who testified
during the Congressional hearings on the Yellowstone fires.19
At the other extreme are those who object to any intervention
in Yellowstone to suit the convenience or preferences of the
human species, and who value Yellowstone according to the
extent to which it remains “wild” and uncontrolled.
The controversy continues.
Yellowstone Fires Since 1988
Number of Fires
Year
Prescription
Suppressed
Acres Burned
1988
*
45
793,880
1989
*
24
10
1990
*
43
247
1991
*
29
270
1992
15
14
485
1993
5
5
< 1
1994
4
60
16,238
1995
9
7
<2
1996
13
11
3,261
1997
12
1
< 1
1998
11
2
125
1999
11
4
10
2000**
2
31
7,209
*After the natural fire policy was suspended on July
15, 1988, all fires in the park were suppressed until
the revised policy was approved in 1992.
**Estimate as of September 21. Nearly all lightning-
ignited fires were at least theoretically to be suppressed
because of the difficult fire season elsewhere in the West.
