 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Black Cohosh 
This fact sheet provides basic information about the herb black cohosh—common 
names, uses, potential side effects, and resources for more information. Black cohosh, 
a member of the buttercup family, is a plant native to North America. It was used in 
Native American medicine and was a home remedy in 19th-century America. 
Common Names—black cohosh, black snakeroot, macrotys, bugbane, 
bugwort, rattleroot, rattleweed 
Latin Names—Actaea racemosa, Cimicifuga racemosa 
What It Is Used For 
•  Black cohosh has a history of use for rheumatism (arthritis and muscle pain) 
but has been used more recently to treat hot flashes, night sweats, vaginal 
dryness, and other symptoms that can occur during menopause. 
•  Black cohosh has also been used for menstrual irregularities and 
premenstrual syndrome, and to induce labor. 
How It Is Used 
The underground stems and roots of black cohosh are commonly used fresh or 
dried to make strong teas (infusions), capsules, solid extracts used in pills, or 
liquid extracts (tinctures). 
What the Science Says 
•  Study results are mixed on whether black cohosh effectively relieves menopausal 
symptoms. An NCCAM-funded study found that black cohosh, whether used 
alone or with other botanicals, failed to relieve hot flashes and night sweats in 
postmenopausal women or those approaching menopause. 
•  Most studies to date have been less than 6 months long, so the safety of 
long-term use is unknown. 
•  NCCAM is funding studies to further understand the potential effects of 
black cohosh on hot flashes and other menopausal symptoms. 
•  There are not enough reliable data to determine whether black cohosh is 
effective for rheumatism or other uses. 
Side Effects and Cautions 
•  United States Pharmacopeia experts suggest women should discontinue use of 
black cohosh and consult a health care practitioner if they have a liver disorder 
or develop symptoms of liver trouble, such as abdominal pain, dark urine, or 
jaundice. There have been several case reports of hepatitis (inflammation of the 
liver), as well as liver failure, in women who were taking black cohosh. It is not 
known if black cohosh was responsible for these problems. Although these cases 
are very rare and the evidence is not definitive, scientists are concerned about the 
possible effects of black cohosh on the liver. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  Black cohosh can cause headaches and stomach discomfort. In clinical trials comparing the effects of 
the herb and those of estrogens, a low number of side effects were reported, such as headaches, 
gastric complaints, heaviness in the legs, and weight problems. 
•  No interactions have been reported between black cohosh and prescription medicines. 
•  It is not clear if black cohosh is safe for women who have had breast cancer or for pregnant women. 
•  Black cohosh should not be confused with blue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides), which has different 
properties, treatment uses, and side effects than black cohosh. Black cohosh is sometimes used with 
blue cohosh to stimulate labor, but this therapy has caused adverse effects in newborns, which 
appear to be due to blue cohosh. 
•  Tell your health care providers about any complementary and alternative practices you use. 
Give them a full picture of what you do to manage your health. This will help ensure 
coordinated and safe care. 
Sources 
Mahady GB, Low Dog T, Barrett ML, et al. United States Pharmacopeia review of the black cohosh case reports of 
hepatotoxicity. Menopause. 2008;15(4 Pt 1):628-638. 
Newton KM, Reed SD, LaCroix AZ, et al. Treatment of vasomotor symptoms of menopause with black cohosh, 
multibotanicals, soy, hormone therapy, or placebo: a randomized trial. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2006;145(12):869-879. 
Office of Dietary Supplements and National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine. Questions and Answers 
About Black Cohosh and the Symptoms of Menopause. Office of Dietary Supplements Web site. Accessed at 
http://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/blackcohosh.asp on July 2, 2007. 
National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine and Office of Dietary Supplements. Workshop on the Safety 
of Black Cohosh in Clinical Studies. National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine Web site. Accessed at 
http://nccam.nih.gov/news/pastmeetings/blackcohosh_mtngsumm.pdf on July 2, 2007. 
Black cohosh. Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database Web site. Accessed at http://www.naturaldatabase.com on 
June 29, 2007. 
Black cohosh (Cimicifuga racemosa [L.] Nutt.). Natural Standard Database Web site. Accessed at 
http://www.naturalstandard.com on June 28, 2007. 
Black cohosh root. In: Blumenthal M, Goldberg A, Brinckman J, eds. Herbal Medicine: Expanded Commission E Monographs. 
Newton, MA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2000:22-26. 
For More Information 
Visit the NCCAM Web site at nccam.nih.gov and view: 
•  
What’s in the Bottle? An Introduction to Dietary Supplements at nccam.nih.gov/health/bottle/ 
•  
Herbal Supplements: Consider Safety, Too at nccam.nih.gov/health/supplement-safety/ 
NCCAM Clearinghouse 
Toll-free in the U.S.: 1-888-644-6226 
TTY (for deaf and hard-of-hearing callers): 1-866-464-3615 
E-mail: info@nccam.nih.gov 
CAM on PubMed 
Web site: nccam.nih.gov/camonpubmed/ 
NIH Office of Dietary Supplements 
Web site: www.ods.od.nih.gov 
This publication is not copyrighted and is in the public domain. Duplication is encouraged. 
NCCAM has provided this material for your information. It is not intended to substitute for the medical 
expertise and advice of your primary health care provider. We encourage you to discuss any decisions about 
treatment or care with your health care provider. The mention of any product, service, or therapy is not an 
endorsement by NCCAM. 
National Institutes of Health 
♦♦♦ 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
D268 
Created July 2005 
Updated November 2008 
*D268* 
