MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
BETWEEN THE
U.S. NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION
AND THE
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA),
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS), have regulatory responsibilities concerning
medical devices, drugs, and biological products utilizing byproduct, source, or special nuclear
material.  The organizations in FDA that are principally responsible for these products are the
Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH), the Center for Drug Evaluation and
Research (CDER), and the Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER).  The
organizations in NRC that are principally responsible for these products are the Office of Nuclear
Material Safety and Safeguards (NMSS), the Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation (NRR), and
the Office of State and Tribal Programs (OSTP).  For their respective authorities, the agencies
hereby agree as follows:
I.
Purpose and Scope    
A. 
The purpose of this Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) is to coordinate
existing NRC and FDA regulatory programs for (1) medical devices, drugs, and
biological products utilizing byproduct, source, or special nuclear material; and (2)
the use of potassium iodide (KI) in response to events involving accidental
release of radioactive iodine.  These regulatory programs include activities for
evaluating and authorizing the manufacture, sale, distribution, licensing, and
labeled intended use of such products.
B.  
This MOU covers (1) medical devices, drugs, and biological products utilizing
byproduct, source, or special nuclear material regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended; and (2) the use of potassium iodide (KI) in response to
events involving accidental release of radioactive iodine.  The terms "drug" and
"device" are defined in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended
(21 USC 321(g) and (h)), and "biological product" is defined in the Public Health
Service Act (42 USC 262).  A biological product may be either a drug or device
and is described in Part II, FDA, of this MOU.  The terms "byproduct material,"
"source material," and "special nuclear material" are defined in Section 11(e), (z),
and (aa) of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and described in Part II,
NRC, of this MOU.
Medical devices affected by this MOU include, but are not limited to: in vitro
diagnostic kits (radioimmunoassay); utilization facilities licensed to perform
medical therapy; and teletherapy and brachytherapy sources, systems, and
accessory devices.  Biologics affected by this MOU include, but are not limited to:
licensed in vitro diagnostic kits (radioimmunoassay), and radiolabeled biologics. 
Drugs affected by this MOU include all those that contain byproduct,
2
 source, or special nuclear material and potassium iodide.
II
Authority and Regulatory Program 
A.
FDA 
FDA is responsible for assuring the safety, effectiveness, and proper labeling of medical
products, i.e., drugs, devices, and biological products.
1.
FDA/CDRH   
The principal statute under which FDA/CDRH regulates devices is the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended by the Medical Device Amendments of 1976; the
Safe Medical Devices Act of 1990; the Medical Devices Act of 1992; the Food; Drug
Modernization Act of 1997; and the Medical Device User Fee and Modernization Act of
2002.
Section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended, defines
"device" as follows:
"The term "device" means an instrument, apparatus, implement, machine,
contrivance, implant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article,
including any component, part, or accessory, which is --
1)
Recognized in the official National Formulary, or the United States
Pharmacopeia, or any supplement to them;
2)
Intended for use in the diagnosis of disease or other conditions, or in the 
cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease, in man or other
animals;
3)
Intended to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other
animals, and which does not achieve its primary intended purposes
through chemical action within or on the body of man or other animals,
and which is not dependent upon being metabolized for the achievement
of its primary intended purposes.
FDA/CDRH programs intended to ensure the safety and effectiveness of devices
include, but are not limited to, the following:
1)
Review of investigational device exemptions, premarket notification
(510(k)), premarket approval (PMA);
2)
Review of voluntary and mandatory medical device reports; and
3)
Enforcement activities such as routine and directed inspections, and
enforcement activities such as product removal, recall, warning letters,
and
3
 case actions such as seizure, injunction, prosecution, and civil penalties.
2.
FDA/CDER
The principal statute under which FDA/CDER regulates drugs for human use is the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended.
Section 201(g)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended, defines
"drug" as follows:
The term "drug" means:
1)
Articles recognized in the official United States Pharmacopeia, official
Homeopathic Pharmacopeia of the United States, or official National
Formulary, or any supplement to any of them; and
2)
Articles intended for use in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or
prevention of disease in man or other animals; and
3)
Articles (other than food) intended to affect the structure or any function of
the body of man or other animals; and 
4)
Articles intended for use as a component of any articles specified in
clause (1), (2), or (3).
FDA/CDER functions intended to ensure the effectiveness, safety, and quality of drugs
for human use include, but are not limited to, the following:
1)
Review of clinical and bioavailability studies, manufacturing processes,
and testing methods;
2)
Review of voluntary and mandatory adverse reaction reports and drug
product defect reports; and
3)
Enforcement activities such as routine and directed inspections, product
removal, recall, warning letters, and case actions such as seizure,
injunction, prosecution, and civil penalties.
4)
Issuance of guidance to other federal agencies, and state and local
governments, regarding the safe and effective use of potassium iodide
(KI), for use in the development of emergency response plans for events
involving accidental release of radioactive iodine.
3.
FDA/CBER
The principal statute under which FDA/CBER regulates biological products is the Public
Health Service Act.
However, biological products also meet the definition of either a drug or device under the 
4
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as amended.
Section 351(I) of the Public Health Service Act defines a biological product as, "a virus,
therapeutic serum, toxin, or antitoxin, vaccine, blood, blood component or derivative or
arsphenamine (or any other trivalent organic arsenic compound), applicable to the
prevention, treatment or cure, of a disease or condition of human beings."
FDA/CBER functions intended to ensure the effectiveness, safety, and quality of
biological products for human use include, but are not limited to, the following:
1)
Review of clinical and bioavailability studies, manufacturing processes,
and testing methods;
2)
Review of voluntary and mandatory adverse reaction reports and
biological product deviation reporting; and
3)
Enforcement activities such as routine and directed inspections, and
enforcement activities such as product removal, recall, warning letters,
and case actions such as seizure, injunction, prosecution, license
revocation and suspension, and civil penalties.
B.
NRC
NRC is responsible for licensing and regulating nuclear facilities and material and for
conducting research in support of the licensing and regulatory process, as mandated by
the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended; the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, as
amended; and in accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, as
amended, and other applicable statutes.  NRC responsibilities include protecting public
health and safety, protecting the environment, and safeguarding materials in the interest
of national security.  
1.
NRC/NMSS
 
NMSS's responsibilities for the medical use of byproduct, source, and special nuclear
material include, but are not limited to:
1)
Licensing and inspection of medical, industrial, academic and commercial
uses of byproduct material;
2)
Development and implementation of NRC policy for the regulation of
activities involving safety, quality, approval, and inspection and
enforcement regarding the use and handling of byproduct, source, or
special nuclear materials;
3)
Reviewing of sealed sources or devices to provide reasonable
assurances that the radiation safety properties of the source or device are
adequate to protect health and minimize danger to life and property; and
4) 
Monitoring and investigation, as necessary, of medical events as defined
5
 
 in 10 CFR 35.2,  which occur during the intentional internal or external
administration of byproduct, source, special nuclear material, or radiation
therefrom, to human beings in the practice of medicine.
2.
NRC/OSTP
OSTP's responsibilities for the medical use of byproduct, source, and special nuclear
materials include, but are not limited to:
1)
Negotiation of Agreements with States under section 274 of the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended; 
2)
Evaluation of the program of a new Agreement State to determine if it is
adequate to protect the public health and safety, and if it is compatible with
the NRC program;
3)
Periodic evaluation of the Agreement State programs to determine
continued adequacy and compatibility;
4)
Training of, and consultation with, Agreement States on radiological public
health and safety issues.
3.
NRC/NRR
NRR’s responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
1)
Licensing and inspection of utilization facilities for medical therapy,
pursuant to 10 CFR 50.21 and 10 CFR 50.41;
2)
Development and implementation of NRC policy for the regulation of
activities involving safety, quality, approval, and inspection and
enforcement regarding the use of utilization facilities for medical therapy;
3)
Oversight of production of byproduct materials at facilities licensed under
10 CFR Part 50; and
4)
Development of policy and requirements for emergency planning, which
reflect FDA guidance on the use of potassium iodide, for events involving
the accidental release of radioactive iodine.
4.
NRC/NSIR
NSIR’s responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
1) 
Developing overall NRC policy and providing management direction for
evaluation and assessment of technical issues involving security at
nuclear facilities;
2)
NRC safeguards and security interface with the Office of Homeland
Security and other agencies;
3)
Directs the NRC program for response to incidents; and
6
4)
NRC interface with the Federal Emergency Management Agency, FDA,
and other Federal agencies on incidents involving nuclear materials.
1.
Agreement States
Under section 274 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, the Commission is
authorized to discontinue its regulatory authority for certain radioactive materials if a
State has a program that is adequate to protect the public health and safety and
compatible with NRC's program.  The transfer of this regulatory authority is executed
through an Agreement between the NRC and the Governor of a State.  Agreement States
use their own authority to regulate these materials.
III.  Elements of Coordination   
B.
Notification of Product Complaints, Medical Events, or Emergency Situations 
 
Both agencies agree to promptly inform each other whenever they receive a report or
otherwise become aware of a potential public health problem such as a malfunction,
failure, or a medical event involving products of mutual regulatory concern.  Each agency
will assign one or more contact persons in order to ensure that such information is
promptly exchanged and that appropriate FDA and/or NRC actions are initiated on the
basis of any necessary compliance or follow-up objectives.  Each agency will promptly
notify the other when there is a change in an assigned contact person.
B. 
Coordination of Investigations 
Upon request, FDA and NRC will assist each other, to the fullest extent possible, in the
investigation of incidents or complaints involving products of mutual regulatory concern.  
For the purposes of this MOU, investigations will be considered to include inspections in
response to incidents or events, as well as, formal investigations initiated in accordance
with each agency's internal procedures, (Agreement States will be involved as
appropriate to the specific situation).  During the term of this agreement, joint inspections
or observer invitations can be requested or extended by either agency, when deemed
necessary, to ensure that information obtained from an investigation is collected, shared
and acted upon in a timely and coordinated manner.  Both agencies will make every
reasonable effort to accommodate joint inspection or observer requests depending upon
availability of personnel and current FDA or NRC priorities.  Each agency will assign one
or more persons to assure that investigations are coordinated in a manner that
maximizes regulatory efficiency and minimizes duplication of effort.  Each agency will
promptly notify the other when there is a change in an assigned contact person.
1.
Investigation Information Exchange
7
Both agencies agree to an exchange of information with respect to investigations and
inspections.  The purpose of these exchanges is to provide expert technical assistance
to either agency and to assist either agency by reducing or eliminating any duplication of
effort.  The sharing of information between FDA and NRC (and Agreement States as
appropriate) will be exercised to the extent authorized by law, and by NRC and FDA
directives, statutes, and regulations, and will be consistent with the respective agency's
mission.
Both agencies recognize the need to protect from public disclosure, data and information
that are exchanged between the agencies and that fall within the definition of trade
secret, or confidential commercial or financial information.  Both agencies agree to
exchange proprietary information in accordance with applicable regulations.  If FDA
provides NRC with trade secret information, there shall be an additional written
agreement in the form of an exchange of letters between the appropriate liaison officers
in accordance with 21 CFR 20.90.  If a request calls for a disclosure determination
regarding proprietary information such as a Freedom of Information Act request, 
response to a Congressional inquiry, or in cases where either agency must comply with
various regulatory or public information responsibilities, for any such information obtained
from the other agency, that agency will be notified of the request.  The notified agency will
be responsible for making any needed contact with the submitter of the protected
information and accept the responsibility for evaluating the submitter's comments prior to
rendering the disclosure determination. 
To reserve the right of maximum control over actual disclosure of its own records, each
agency shall retain legal authority and the commensurate responsibility over disclosure
of those documents provided to the other agency.
Upon request, FDA and NRC will:
1)
provide copies of Establishment or User Site Inspection Reports;
2)
provide copies of all analytical data and correspondence of significance
related to investigations or activities associated with an area of mutual
regulatory concern;
3)
provide copies of official legal or compliance actions taken against firms
or licensees of mutual interest; and
4)
participate in meetings with regulated industry covering issues of mutual
regulatory concern.
8
2.
NRC Licensee and Agreement State Notifications
Upon request, NRC will promptly notify NRC licensees and Agreement State Program
Directors of any public health issues or other important user communications initiated by
FDA as the result of joint investigations or other activities involving products of mutual
regulatory concern.
C.
Product Premarketing and Prelicensing Information Exchange
To the extent practicable the two agencies will share information concerning new
technology or methods under development or review, including devices, drugs, or
biologics, for which regulations have not yet been developed, or which is related to the
mission of the other agency.  Both agencies agree to exchange proprietary information in
accordance with applicable regulations.  If FDA provides NRC with trade secret
information, there shall be an additional written agreement in the form of an exchange of
letters between the appropriate liaison officers in accordance with 21 CFR 20.90.
 
 This information will include, but is not limited to:
1)
design, chemical and physical form of the material or the device
2)
manufacture/preparation
3)
prototype testing
4)
quality assurance and control
5)
labeling per regulatory requirements
6)
intended use
7)
safety analysis
8)
installation
9)
servicing
10)
leak testing
11)
operating instructions; 
12)
emergency/safety instructions.
D.
Sharing of Other Information
FDA and NRC will offer each other the opportunity to comment on notifications to
manufacturers, operators, licensees, or patients.  FDA and NRC will also offer each
other the opportunity to comment on regulations, regulatory guides or other
communications that refer to activities, policies, or regulations of the other agency.  If
practicable, the documents will be provided prior to issuance.
Either agency may request additional information when deemed necessary to complete
its mission.
9
E.
Advisory Committees
NRC and FDA will make the other agency aware of and, to the extent possible, allow
participation by a representative from the other agency in any Advisory Committee which
advises on issues related to this MOU. 
IV
Name and Mailing Address of Participating Agencies
Food and Drug Administration
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
     and the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission
Washington, D.C. 20555-0001
 V.
Liaison Officers
Each liaison officer will establish and maintain a call list of responsible persons within his
or her organization.  These call lists will designate specific persons for day-to-day
contact on matters related to this MOU.  These lists with current work and home phone
numbers will be exchanged among the liaison officers. 
  
Liaison officers are as follows:
A.  For the Food and Drug Administration 
Center for Devices and Radiological Health
     
Director, Office of Compliance
     
2094 Gaither Road
Rockville, MD 20850
Telephone:  301-594-4692
Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
Director, Executive Operations
1451 Rockville Pike
Rockville, MD 20852
Telephone: 301-594-5400
Center for Biologic Evaluation and Research
Deputy Director for Medicine, Office of Compliance
1401 Rockville Pike
10
Rockville, MD  20852
Telephone:  301-827-3028
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition 
Director of Compliance, Office of Premarket Approval,
200 C Street, SW
Washington, D.C. 20204
Telephone: 202-418-3093
Center for Veterinary Medicine
Office Surveillance and Compliance
7500 Standish Place
Rockville, MD 20855
Telephone: 301-827-1168
B.
For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
Director, Office of Nuclear Material Safety
   and Safeguards
11545 Rockville Pike
Rockville, MD 20852
Telephone: 301-415-7800
Director, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation
11545 Rockville Pike
Rockville, MD 20852
Telephone: 301-415-2223
Director, Office of Nuclear Security and
  Incident Response
11545 Rockville Pike
Rockville, MD 20852
Telephone: 301-415-7476
VI.  
Annual Inter-Agency Meeting
The liaison officers shall meet at least annually to evaluate the activities related to this
MOU.  FDA and NRC will host the meeting on alternating years.
11
VII. 
Other Laws and Matters
Nothing in this Memorandum of Understanding shall be deemed to restrict, modify, or
otherwise limit the application or enforcement of any laws of the United States with
respect to matters specified herein, nor shall anything in the Memorandum be construed
as modifying the existing authority of either agency.
VIII.  
Effective Date, Modification and Termination of MOU
This MOU will take effect when it has been signed by the authorized representatives of
FDA and NRC.  It may be modified by mutual written consent or terminated by either
agency upon a sixty (60) day advance written notice to the other agency. 
APPROVED AND ACCEPTED FOR THE
NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION
BY:
William D. Travers
TITLE: Executive Director of Operations
DATE: ______________________________
APPROVED AND ACCEPTED FOR THE 
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
BY:
Philip J. Frappalo
TITLE: Director, Office of Compliance
(Acting)
DATE: ______________________________
