Proactive Postmarketing Surveillance:  
Overview and Lessons Learned from Medication 
Safety Research in the Veterans Health Administration 
 
Robert R. Campbell, JD, MPH, PhD; Andrea M. Spehar, DVM, MPH, JD;  
Dustin D. French, PhD 
 
Abstract 
This report is an overview of the medication safety studies conducted by the VISN (Veterans 
Integrated Service Network) 8 Patient Safety Center of Inquiry (PSCI), Tampa, FL, over the past 
5 years. The Center has been developing the research capacity to conduct national Veterans 
Health Administration (VHA) proactive medication safety surveillance studies as part of its 
research focus on patient falls and mobility issues in elderly veterans. The Center’s research 
findings describe new directions and alternative approaches based on a paradigm shift in how 
proactive medication safety surveillance can be conducted using the VHA’s comprehensive 
health care utilization data. These studies are primarily hypothesis-generating and enhanced 
signal-detection studies on a national level. The lessons learned from the Center’s studies may 
help to inform the current Congressional debate on Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
legislation Prescription Drug User Fees Act (PDUFA IV) that affects the nature and rigor of U.S. 
postmarketing drug safety studies.  
 
Introduction 
 
Considerable controversy exists concerning the sufficiency of current programs that ensure the 
safety of drugs in the U.S. health care system.1, 2, 3 The U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) has come under increased scrutiny for safety issues associated with approved drugs.2, 3, 4, 5 
The FDA requires drug manufacturers to do extensive safety and efficacy testing of proposed 
new medications during the approval process.6 However, after FDA approval, knowledge gaps 
exist in its postmarketing safety system.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 These gaps include concerns that the current 
postmarketing reporting system fails to detect drug safety risks in a timely fashion, challenges in 
its ability to monitor drug safety in populations that were not included in the drug approval 
process (e.g., children, pregnant women, and the elderly), and safety issues with off-label 
medication use.6 Because of its sophisticated health information technology system, the Veterans 
Health Administration (VHA) has a unique opportunity and capacity to provide a model system 
for proactive postmarketing surveillance of medications.  
 
1 
Proactive medication safety surveillance does not necessarily rely on reports of adverse events 
(AEs) associated with drugs to initiate an investigation.8 Historically, voluntary spontaneous 
reporting systems have focused on adverse drug reactions, defined as responses to a drug that are 
noxious and/or unintended at doses normally used for treatment.9 The VHA Patient Safety 
Center of Inquiry (PSCI) in Tampa, FL, has undertaken a series of proactive medication safety 
surveillance studies that have focused on adverse health outcomes where the literature has 
identified medications as a risk factor. These studies have used multivariate analyses focused on 
the adverse outcome as the dependent variable in the study and temporally linked selected 
medications as an independent variable to the adverse outcome. These AEs included adverse 
drug reactions and other adverse outcomes, such as fall-related fractures, that occurred while 
patients were prescribed a category or class of medication.10 This article provides an overview of 
these VHA proactive medication safety surveillance studies and discusses the lessons learned 
from these studies within the context of the current FDA postmarketing surveillance policy 
debate. 
 
Current U.S. Initiatives 
 
Potential postmarketing medication safety issues in the United States are largely identified by 
various AE reporting systems.11 Medication safety incidents are reported to the FDA from 
several major sources: as manufacturer reports (AEs that result in serious injury and for which a 
medication error might be a component), direct contact reports (MedWatch),12 reports from the 
U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP, e.g., U.S. Pharmacopeia MEDMARX® Program),13 and the Institute 
for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP).14 With other adverse drug event reporting systems (e.g., 
VHA Patient Safety Reporting System)15 or mandatory State serious AE reporting systems,16 
events may or may not be reported to the FDA.17 Commentators have noted that problems with 
the FDA’s postmarketing surveillance program include the need for more population-based data 
on medication usage and better use of existing data.7, 18, 19, 20  
 
Additionally, other issues raised have included the FDA’s inability to require and enforce timely 
clinical studies of postmarketing drug safety, the limitations of the voluntary MedWatch 
reporting system, and limited resources currently devoted to the FDA’s Office of Drug Safety.1, 7 
The recent Institute of Medicine (IOM) study on drug safety underscored that two decades of 
studies have made recommendations addressing these same deficiencies in drug postmarketing 
surveillance programs in the United States.2 
 
A fundamental recommendation from recent studies of the FDA’s postmarketing surveillance 
system is the need for large-scale health care datasets to conduct population-based safety 
studies.2,7 The recent General Accounting Office (GAO) and the IOM reports recommend that 
the FDA obtain large-scale datasets for postmarketing studies in order to enhance FDA 
medication safety activities.1, 2 A major finding of the GAO (2006) report was that the FDA 
needs to gain access to and analyze large-scale datasets from more diverse patient populations, 
over a longer period, through a postmarketing safety surveillance system utilizing electronic 
health care data systems.1 The FDA has recognized the need for analyses of large-scale health 
care utilization datasets and has contracted with outside providers—largely managed care 
organizations and research institutions—to conduct them.6, 21  
 
2 
Health care information in the United States is largely fragmented, so the ability to link 
medications to adverse outcomes of interested is limited. No U.S. organization exists that 
actively collects and analyzes national, population-based data on the linkage of medication use 
with a broad range of potential patient harms that span adverse drug reactions, injuries, and other 
serious medical conditions, such as strokes and acute myocardial infarctions (AMIs). Several 
countries, the World Health Organization (WHO), and the European Union (EU) have been 
actively developing more population-based medication safety surveillance systems.22, 23, 24, 25
These developing international systems are possible because they occur in countries with 
nationally financed health care systems that have the ability to link pharmacy and health care 
utilization data. 
 
 
In recent years, the VHA has conducted postmarketing safety surveillance primarily through 
several mechanisms. These include an affiliation with the Research on Adverse Drug Events and 
Reports Project (RADAR),26 the national VHA Center for Medication Safety,27 and health 
services research. The RADAR project, partially funded by the VHA, focuses on identifying, 
evaluating, and disseminating information concerning serious adverse drug reactions.26 This 
project primarily uses clinical event reports from investigators and other clinicians to initiate an 
investigation and then obtains data from other sources, which may include FDA case reports and 
literature reviews.26 The VHA currently has a very robust medication safety program 
administered by its Pharmacy Benefits Management system (PBM), which conducts drug 
utilization reviews and maintains the sophisticated national health information technologies 
associated with its computerized prescribing and barcoded medication administration systems. 
The VHA’s Center for Medication Safety, in conjunction with the National Center for Patient 
Safety, is responsible for coordinating adverse drug event reporting and medication safety 
administrative programs.27  
 
The VHA health service’s research programs have historically supported a broad range of 
medication safety-related research. Recently, several new PSCIs were established and funded 
under the auspices of the VHA’s National Center for Patient Safety (NCPS). These new Centers 
will focus their research activities on specific medication safety issues, such as risk assessment 
of drugs, medication reconciliation, and safer outpatient medication usage. These three new 
patient safety centers join with the Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN) 8 PSCI in 
continuing the VHA’s commitment to patient safety research.  
 
Proactive Medication Safety Surveillance Studies  
at the VISN 8 Patient Safety Center of Inquiry, Tampa, FL  
 
The VISN 8 PSCI was established in 1999 to conduct research on mobility-related safety issues 
in elderly veterans. It has established an international reputation in the areas of falls and safe 
patient handling and movement. Because of the recognized chance of certain medications to 
increase the risk of injurious falls in the elderly, for the past 5 years, the Center has been 
developing the research capacity for proactive medication safety surveillance studies similar to 
the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality’s (AHRQ) DEcIDE (Developing Evidence to 
Inform Decisions about Effectiveness) project.28  
 
3 
The DEcIDE project is developing a database that links administrative data with clinical 
components from the pharmacy, outpatient, inpatient, physician office, and emergency 
departments.28 Center studies linking VHA administrative and clinical datasets have 
demonstrated the utility of using hospital discharge data to develop an injury and AE 
surveillance system for the VHA.29 The Center’s medication safety research over the last 5 years 
has produced studies that have examined drug-related adverse outcomes in many care 
settings.30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38 The usefulness of VHA national data for proactive medication
safety surveillance, or enhanced pharmacovigilance studies, is based on the ability of researchers 
to link national data on health care utilization from all VHA datasets across care settings. 
 
 
Postmarketing medication safety studies have largely relied on spontaneous, passive reporting 
systems.2 Spontaneous reporting systems are limited by the fact that clinicians may fail to 
identify and report illnesses that they suspect are not due to a drug. This has led to the 
development of systems in other countries (mainly in the EU) based on reporting all AEs in the 
initial postmarketing period.39, 40 Proactive medication safety studies, with the proper data and 
methods of analysis, can be expanded beyond adverse drug reactions and recognized adverse 
drug-drug or drug-disease interactions to encompass a broader range of patient harms and 
injuries to provide a more robust, proactive medication safety surveillance system.29, 34, 38  
 
These kinds of proactive studies are largely hypothesis-generating and enhanced signal-detection 
studies that may identify associations between medications and the outcomes of interest over a 
longer period. However, it must be noted that these studies are primarily aimed at hypothesis 
testing or enhanced detection of safety signals. These kinds of studies require clinician 
involvement in their design and interpretation. The ultimate determination of safety issues 
requires further examination and studies that could include examination of the patients’ medical 
records, consultations with manufacturers, and the involvement of the FDA.  
 
The IOM report recommended that the FDA adopt an approach to drug risk and benefit that 
extends more comprehensively past the initial approval process.2 Another recommendation (IOM 
recommendation 4.3, 2006) was that the FDA collaborate with public and private organizations 
and use data from publicly funded health care programs, including the Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) and Department of Defense (DoD), to improve the drug safety system with partial 
public funding.2 The VA and DoD datasets are components of comprehensive electronic health 
care data systems. This enhances their ability to rapidly and efficiently identify potential 
medication-related AEs that might merit further analysis using electronic medical records.  
 
Recently, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) also recognized the usefulness 
of large-scale datasets for postmarketing surveillance in a proposed rule.41 The rule proposes that 
the new Medicare Part D claims data be used for a variety of purposes, including postmarketing 
surveillance activities by the FDA. These surveillance activities, according to the proposed rule, 
could: (1) include monitoring patterns of drug use in the elderly and the disabled with the goal of 
identifying unsafe or suboptimal patterns of use, (2) be used to identify rare but serious 
complications more quickly and effectively, or (3) be used to facilitate formal epidemiologic 
studies examining the nature and magnitude of risk associated with particular medications.41  
 
4 
When linked to Medicare health care utilization data, these Medicare Part D pharmacy claims 
data could create a more effective postmarketing medication safety surveillance system. 
Currently, these kinds of proactive postmarketing studies of medications in specific 
populations—e.g., a larger group of aged patients with chronic diseases and long-term 
medication usage—are not widely published in the United States. 
 
Lessons Learned from Center Medication Safety Research 
 
The major lessons learned from developing the capacity for VHA proactive medication safety 
surveillance research are summarized below: 
 
Large scale pharmacy datasets capable of being linked to health care utilization data are 
critical for identifying groups of patients who were exposed to a particular medication and 
the effect of that exposure to the health outcome of interest. This is especially important 
when the outcome of interest is a very rare event. The VHA maintains national pharmacy 
datasets that include inpatient and outpatient settings of care. In contrast to individual reports of 
adverse drug reactions, national pharmacy data allow one to put AEs, or health outcomes of 
interest, into a population-based context. Large-scale pharmacy administrative datasets that 
include unique patient identifiers can be used to rapidly identify a population of patients exposed 
to a particular medication of interest. This provides a “denominator” of patients exposed to the 
drug and a critical context for determining the subsequent effect of the adverse outcome of 
interest. The Center’s studies temporally linked these patients to their health care utilization to 
see which patients had the AE or outcome of interest. An example of this kind of Center study 
was the research on COX-2 inhibitor usage linked with hospitalizations for an AMI or stroke.38  
 
Proactive medication surveillance systems require detailed information on relatively large 
numbers of patients who have been prescribed the medication, in addition to comprehensive data 
on their health care utilization. VHA studies have demonstrated the utility of using clinical 
datasets to rapidly identify populations exposed to medications of interest to study outcomes of 
interest that are either relatively common or rare. Without sufficient information on the numbers 
of potentially affected patients (i.e., a denominator), it is difficult to evaluate the effect on the 
VHA system of the safety of a medication, especially for very rare AEs. An example is the 
Center’s study of Viagra® use and the potential for patients using the drug to develop ischemic 
optic neuropathy.42  
 
Linked administrative health care data can be used to identify a broader spectrum of 
adverse outcomes and associated health care utilization costs beyond adverse drug 
reactions or adverse drug events. These kinds of studies—which represent a major paradigm 
shift from the current focus of postmarketing safety studies—greatly expand the scope of 
medication safety surveillance into new areas, where medications themselves are a risk factor for 
the occurrence or development of an adverse outcome. This is exemplified by the Center’s 
studies of hospitalizations and costs for fall-related injuries temporally linked to the use of 
psychotropic medications.29, 30, 32  
 
These kinds of studies are the logical extension of new initiatives from accreditation activities, 
such as the Joint Commission’s patient safety goals related to medications and fall-risk 
5 
assessment. Recent patient safety initiatives have recognized the importance of patient 
medication assessments in relation to injury risk profiles. An example is The Joint Commission’s 
use of the patient safety goals to accurately and completely reconcile medications across the 
continuum of care and to reduce the risk of patient harm resulting from falls through assessments 
that include patients’ current medication profiles.43  
 
Medication safety surveillance employs epidemiologic methods to identify and analyze potential 
adverse outcomes associated with the use of medications. Adverse outcomes can encompass 
more than adverse drug reactions. The FDA has defined pharmacovigilance as “all post-approval 
scientific and data gathering activities relating to the detection, assessment, understanding, and 
prevention of AEs or any other product-related problems.”44  
 
“Pharmacovigilance” is defined in a WHO report as “the science and activities relating to the 
detection, assessment, understanding, and prevention of AEs or any other possible drug-related 
problems.”45 Center studies have demonstrated the usefulness of linked datasets to explore the 
associations of medications with a broader range of AEs, especially in the elderly veteran 
population. 
 
Proactive medication safety analyses can be used to identify major drug-drug interactions 
that were associated with AEs temporally and where these interactions were modeled as 
independent risk factors for adverse outcomes, such as injuries. An example of this kind of 
Center study is an analysis of concomitant use of benzodiazepines and other medications linked 
to adverse outcomes, such as fall-related injuries in elderly veterans.33  
 
Drug-drug interactions are widely evaluated in drug utilization reviews and in studies of 
potentially inappropriate prescribing for selected subpopulations.46, 47, 48 However, few studies 
have used large-scale, population-based datasets to examine the influence of drug-drug 
interactions on other relatively common adverse health outcomes, such as fall-related injuries.31, 
32, 33 These types of hypothesis-generating studies also facilitate the identification of rare, or 
previously unrecognized, serious AEs that can be further investigated, as suggested in the CMS 
proposed rule related to the potential uses of Medicare Part D prescription data.41  
 
The use of large-scale national datasets allows researchers to conduct more sophisticated 
epidemiologic studies that incorporate multivariate analyses. These kinds of multivariate 
analyses can inform clinical decisionmaking by empirically specifying the nature and 
magnitude of the risk of having a particular adverse outcome associated with a medication. 
The Center’s study of benzodiazepines and the risk of injury incorporated a multivariate analysis 
and provided information to health care providers on the risk of an injury associated with the 
interaction of benzodiazepine dose and duration, while controlling for other important factors.31  
 
By using multivariate models that control for important confounders identified in comprehensive 
datasets, a more effective postmarketing surveillance system can be developed to protect patients 
against adverse outcomes and to inform clinical prescribing patterns. Specific information for 
clinicians, based on empirical research that quantifies the effect of medications on identified 
risks from more sophisticated multivariate modeling of risk factors, can guide safer prescriptive 
practices and positively influence patient safety. These kinds of sophisticated 
6 
pharmacoepidemiologic studies support the current Federal initiatives for expanded use of 
Medicare Part D claims data for research recommended in the proposed CMS rule and current 
AHRQ medication safety research initiatives.41 
 
Proactive medication safety studies using population-based datasets can be used to develop 
medication and comorbidity profiles in the elderly linked to specific injuries or other health 
outcomes of interest. These kinds of studies can promote safer prescribing practices in 
elderly subpopulations and care settings. Center studies have demonstrated that analyses can 
be conducted to produce profiles of patients that include summaries of their medication and 
comorbidity profiles. These profiles have been included in Center analyses that have examined 
the association of these patient profiles with outcomes of interest such as treatment for outpatient 
fractures or inpatient hospitalizations for syncope.34, 36 
 
Polypharmacy and multiple chronic diseases are common in the elderly population.33, 46, 47, 48, 49, 
50, 51 Premarketing medication studies typically do not include patients with multiple 
comorbidities or patients taking multiple medications. Targeted proactive postmarketing 
surveillance could be especially valuable for these types of vulnerable populations. This is a 
recognized limitation of the current FDA drug approval process, noted in a recent IOM report 
(2006), that could be partially addressed by the proposed CMS rule.2, 41 Medication and 
comorbidity profiles derived from large-scale datasets permit proactive, hypothesis-generating 
studies of health care utilization and could lead to safer prescribing practices in specific patient 
cohorts. Proactive medication safety studies that incorporate medication and comorbidity 
profiles, a common occurrence in the elderly, would be responsive to the proposed uses of 
national Medicare Part D prescription data under several Federal research initiatives.41 
 
A proactive medication safety surveillance system can be used on a national level to identify 
adverse outcomes and events in different settings of care that are associated with selected 
medications. Center studies have examined national data on adverse health outcomes 
associated with selected medication usage in long-term care, acute care hospitalizations, 
and outpatient treatment settings.29, 32, 34, 37 
 
The CMS proposed rule for sharing Medicare Part D data linked to Medicare Parts A and B data 
would permit more rapid and effective investigations of medication-related adverse outcomes in 
different populations and care settings, similar to the Center’s research and other VHA 
research.41  
 
Conclusion 
 
The Center’s medication safety studies have demonstrated the utility of conducting research 
using the VHA’s national administrative datasets for proactive medication safety surveillance. 
The Center’s studies have been focused on identifying potential medication-related AEs in 
different care settings and in specific populations. These studies have explored hypotheses about 
the association between certain medications and selected health outcomes of interest to the 
Center and the VHA. The studies have demonstrated the utility of these national comprehensive 
VHA datasets to enhance proactive medication safety surveillance studies and to enhance signal 
detection for AEs. 
7 
 
The current policy debate about improving the FDA’s postmarketing surveillance activities 
underscores the importance of regulator and researcher access to large-scale health care datasets 
to conduct research similar to the VHA’s studies. The current Congressional debate on the exact 
kinds of postmarketing safety study provisions to include in the final legislation concerning the 
Prescription Drug User Fees Act amendments (PDUFA IV) underscores the public interest in 
providing for more rigorous and timely postmarketing safety studies.52 Large-scale national 
datasets, although necessary to identify potential medication-related AEs, are not sufficient for a 
comprehensive medication safety surveillance system.  
 
More definitive studies of medication safety ultimately require access to information usually 
available only in medical records. Ideally, these should be electronic medical records similar to 
the VHA’s electronic medical record system. The VHA’s comprehensive national programs in 
postmarketing surveillance have been in place for several years and encompass administrative 
programs and an extensive array of health services research initiatives.53 Recently, the VA and 
the FDA entered into a memorandum of understanding to allow collaborative safety research 
initiatives capitalizing on the richness of the VHA’s national datasets and expertise.54  
 
Many safety research initiatives are currently underway that can inform the direction of the FDA 
postmarketing surveillance debate in Congress. These include the VHA programs, drug safety 
surveillance programs in other countries, and health services research being conducted in 
numerous sites across the United States. The current AHRQ medication safety research 
initiatives under the DEcIDE program constitute a promising avenue of Federally supported 
health research in the effectiveness of health care services. Health care systems, providers, and 
insurers have important contributions to make to the current FDA policy debate based on their 
own internal data systems and medication safety program initiatives. Medication safety, cost, and 
effectiveness studies will continue to be important public policy concerns as the Medicare Part D 
drug prescription program matures in the coming years. New directions and alternative 
approaches in postmarketing surveillance studies will continue to be an important area for future 
health services research.55 
 
Acknowledgments 
The research reported here was supported by the Department of Veterans Affairs, Veterans 
Health Administration (VHA). The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do 
not necessarily represent the views of the Department of Veterans Affairs. 
Author Affiliations 
VISN-8 Patient Safety Center of Inquiry, Tampa, FL. 
Address correspondence to: Robert R. Campbell, JD, MPH, PhD, VISN-8 Patient Safety Center 
of Inquiry, 11605 North Nebraska Avenue (118M), Tampa, FL 33612; telephone: 813-558-3962; 
fax: 813-558-3990; e-mail: robert.campbell3@va.gov. 
8 
References 
 
 
14.  U.S. Pharmacopeia (USP) and the Institute for Safe 
Medication Practices (ISMP) USP-ISMP Medication 
Errors Reporting Program (MERP); 2006. Available 
at: 
1.  Drug safety: Improvement needed in FDA’s 
postmarket decision-making and oversight process. 
Report No.: GAO-06-402; Washington, DC: US 
Government Accountability Office; 2006 March. 
www.usp.org/hqi/patientSafety/mer/. Accessed 
April 14, 2008.  
15.  Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). Patient safety 
reporting system. Patient Safety Resources: National 
Center for Patient Safety; 2006. Available at: 
2.  Baciu A, Stratton K, Burke SP, eds. The future of drug 
safety: Promoting and protecting the health of the 
public. Committee on the assessment of the U.S. drug 
safety system, Board on Population Health and Public 
Health Practice. Washington, DC: Institute of 
Medicine; 2006. 
www.va.gov/ncps/. Accessed April 14, 2008. 
16.  Rosenthal J, Booth M. Maximizing the use of State 
adverse event data to improve patient safety. Portland, 
ME: National Academy for State Health Policy; 2005. 
3.  Sibbald B. Rofecoxib (Vioxx) voluntarily withdrawn 
from market. CMAJ 2004; 17: 1027-1028. 
17.  Aspden P, Wolcott J, Bootman JL, et al, eds. 
Preventing medication errors: Quality chasm series. 
Committee on Identifying and Preventing Medication 
Errors. Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine; 2006. 
4.  Grassley C, Baucus M, Graham D, et al. FDA, Merck 
and Vioxx: Putting patient safety first? United States 
Senate Committee on Finance; 2004. Available at: 
18.  Lenzer J. U.S. government agency to investigate FDA 
over rofecoxib. Br Med J 2004; 329: 935. 
news.public.findlaw.com/hdocs/docs/vioxx/111804vio
xxhrngs.html. Accessed April 10, 2008. 
19.  Rodriguez EM, Staffa JA, Graham DJ. The role of 
databases in drug postmarketing surveillance. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2001; 10: 407-410. 
5.  Carpenter D, Ting MM. Essay: The political logic of 
regulatory error. Nat Rev Drug Discov 2005; 4: 819-
823. 
20.  Avorn J. Powerful medicines: The benefits, risks, and 
costs of prescription drugs. New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf: Distributed by Random House; 2004. 
6.  Report to the nation: Improving public health through 
human drugs. Rockville, MD: U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), Center for Drug Evaluation 
and Research (CDER); 2005. 
21.  FDA awards contracts on databases of adverse effects 
of marketed drugs ability to monitor approved drugs 
enhanced. FDA Talk Paper #T05-30. Rockville, MD: 
Food and Drug Administration; 2005 October 7. 
Available at: 
7.  Gottlieb S. Opening Pandora's pillbox: Using modern 
information tools to improve drug safety. Health Aff 
(Millwood) 2005; 24: 938-948. 
www.fda.gov/bbs/topics/answers/2005/ans01368.html
8.  Pharmacovigilance planning: Planning of 
pharmacovigilance activities. Report No.: 
CPMP/ICH/5716/03. London: The European Agency 
for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products (EMEA); 
Report No.: CPMP/ICH/5716/03; 2003 November 20. 
. 
Accessed April 14, 2008.  
22.  Assessment of the European community system of 
pharmacovigilance. Karlsruhe, Germany: Fraunhofer 
Institute for Systems and Innovation Research; Service 
Contract No: FIF.20040739; 2006 January 25. 
9.  International drug monitoring: The role of national 
centres. Technical Report Series No 498. Geneva, 
Switzerland; World Health Organization; 1972.  
23.  Practical pharmacovigilance. In: WHO Collaborating 
Centre for International Drug Monitoring. Uppsala, 
Sweden: The Uppsala Monitoring Centre; 2006. 
10.  Aronson JK, Ferner RE. Clarification of terminology 
in drug safety. Drug Saf 2005; 28: 851-870. 
24.  de Vries F, de Vries C, Cooper C, et al. Reanalysis of 
two studies with contrasting results on the association 
between statin use and fracture risk: The general 
practice research database. Int J Epidemiol 2006; 35: 
1301-1308. 
11.  Smetzer JL, Cohen MR. Medication error reporting 
systems. In: Medication errors. 2nd ed. Washington, 
DC: American Pharmacists Association; 2006. 
12.  U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
MedWatch; 2006. Available at: 
25.  Paterson JM, Laupacis A, Bassett K, et al. Using 
pharmacoepidemiology to inform drug coverage 
policy: Initial lessons from a two-province 
collaborative. Health Aff (Millwood) 2006; 25: 
1436-1443. 
www.fda.gov/medwatch/. Accessed April 14, 2008.  
13.  United States Pharmacopeia (USP). MEDMARX®. 
Rockville, MD: U.S. Pharmacopeia; 2006. Available 
at: www.usp.org/products/medMarx/. Accessed April 
14, 2008. 
26.  Bennett CL, Nebeker JR, Lyons EA, et al. The 
Research on Adverse Drug Events and Reports 
(RADAR) project. JAMA 2005; 293: 2131-2140. 
 
 
9 
 
 
27.  National Center for Patient Safety. Department of 
Veterans Affairs (VA); 2006. Available at: 
38.  French DD, Spehar A, Campbell R, et al. A 
medication surveillance system model to improve 
patient safety: A national veterans study of 
cyclooxygenase 2 inhibitors and risks of stroke or 
myocardial infarction. J Patient Saf 2006; 2: 78-82. 
www.va.gov/ncps/. Accessed April 10, 2008. 
28.  Medicare prescription drug data development: 
Methods for improving patient safety and 
pharmacovigilance using observational data. DEcIDE 
Projects in Progress; Rockville, MD: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2006. 
39.  Coulter D. PEM in New Zealand. In: Mann R, 
Andrews E, eds. Pharmacovigilance. Chichester, UK: 
Wiley & Sons; 2002. 
29.  Campbell R, Bradham D, Sanchez-Anguiano A, et al., 
eds. Developing a VHA Serious Injury Surveillance 
System. Advances in patient safety: From research to 
implementation. Rockville, MD: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2005. Available at: 
40.  Shakir S. PEM in the UK. In: Mann R, Andrews E, 
eds. Pharmacovigilance. Chichester, UK: Wiley & 
Sons; 2002.  
41.  Center for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). 
Medicare Program; Medicare Part D data, Proposed 
Rule. Federal Register 2006; 71: 61445-61455. 
www.ahrq.gov/downloads/pub/advances/vol1/Campbe
ll.pdf. Accessed April 10, 2008. 
42.  Margo C, French D. Ischemic optic neuropathy in 
male veterans prescribed phosphodiesterase-5 
inhibitors. Am J Ophthalmol 2007; 143: 538-539. 
30.  French D, Spehar A, Campbell R, et al. Outpatient 
benzodiazepine prescribing, adverse events, and costs. 
Advances in patient safety: From research to 
implementation. Rockville, MD: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality; 2005. Available at: 
43.  Facts about the 2007 National Patient Safety Goals. 
Oakbrook Terrace, IL: Joint Commission on 
Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations. Available 
at: 
www.ahrq.gov/downloads/pub/advances/vol1/French.
pdf. Accessed April 10, 2008. 
http://www.jointcommission.org/PatientSafety/Nation
31.  French DD, Campbell R, Spehar A, et al. 
Benzodiazepines and injury: A risk adjusted model. 
Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf 2005; 14: 17-24. 
alPatientSafetyGoals/07_npsg_facts.htm. Accessed 
April 10, 2008. 
44.  Risk assessment of observational data: Good 
pharmacovigilance practices and 
pharmacoepidemiologic assessment. Concept paper. 
Rockville, MD: U.S. Food and Drug Administration; 
2003 March 3; Docket number 02N-0528. 
32.  French DD, Campbell R, Spehar A, et al. Outpatient 
medications and hip fractures in the United States: A 
national veterans study. Drugs Aging 2005; 22: 877-
885. 
33.  French DD, Chirikos TN, Spehar A, et al. Effect of 
concomitant use of benzodiazepines and other drugs 
on the risk of injury in a veterans population. Drug Saf 
2005; 28: 1141-1150. 
45.  The safety of medicines in public health programmes: 
Pharmacovigilance an essential tool. Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2006. ISBN 
92 4 159391 1 (NLM classification: QV771). 
Available at: 
34.  French DD, Campbell R, Spehar A, et al. National 
outpatient medication profiling: Medications 
associated with outpatient fractures in community-
dwelling elderly veterans. Br J Clin Pharmacol 2007; 
63: 238-244. 
www.who.int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/safety_ef
ficacy/Pharmacovigilance_B.pdf. Accessed April 10, 
2008. 
46.  Zhan C, Correa-de-Araujo R, Bierman AS, et al. 
Suboptimal prescribing in elderly outpatients: 
Potentially harmful drug–drug and drug–disease 
combinations. J Am Geriatr Soc 2005; 53: 262-267. 
35.  French DD, Campbell R, Spehar A, et al. Drugs and 
falls in community-dwelling older people: A national 
veterans study. Clin Ther 2006; 28: 619-630. 
36.  French DD, Campbell R, Spehar A, et al. National 
Veterans Health Administration hospitalizations for 
syncope compared to acute myocardial infarction, 
fracture, or pneumonia in community-dwelling elders: 
Outpatient medication and comorbidity profiles. J Clin 
Pharmacol 2006; 46: 613-619. 
47.  Hanlon JT, Lindblad CI, Hajjar ER, et al. Update on 
drug-related problems in the elderly. Am J Geriatr 
Pharmacother 2003; 1: 38-43. 
48.  Allard J, Hebert R, Rioux M, et al. Efficacy of a 
clinical medication review on the number of 
potentially inappropriate prescriptions prescribed for 
community-dwelling elderly people. CMAJ 2001; 
164: 1291-1296. 
37.  French DD, Campbell RR, Spehar AM, et al. How 
well do psychotropic medications match mental health 
diagnoses? A national view of potential off-label 
prescribing in VHA nursing homes. Age Ageing 2007; 
36: 107-108. 
49.  Lindblad CI, Hanlon JT, Gross CR, et al. Clinically 
important drug-disease interactions and their 
prevalence in older adults. Clin Ther 2006; 28: 
1133-1143. 
10 
 
 
50.  Perucca E, Berlowitz D, Birnbaum A, et al. 
Pharmacological and clinical aspects of antiepileptic 
drug use in the elderly. Epilepsy Res 2006; 68 
(Suppl 1): S49-S63. 
54.  Memorandum of understanding between the Food and 
Drug Administration and the Veterans Health 
Administration, Department of Veterans Affairs. 
MOU number 225-07-4300; 2007 January. Available 
at: www.fda.gov/oc/mous/domestic/225-07-
51.  French D, Campbell R, Spehar A, et al. How well do 
psychotropic medications match mental health 
diagnoses? A national view of potential off-label 
prescribing in VHA nursing Homes. Age Ageing 
2007; 36: 107-112. 
4300.html. Accessed April 10, 2008. 
55. Developing Evidence to Inform Decisions about 
Effectiveness: The DEcIDE Network: Request for 
Proposals; 2005 July. Rockville, MD: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality. Available at: 
52.  FDA letters transmitted to Congress, March 16, 2007 
concerning prescription drug users fees amendments 
2007 (PDUFA IV). Available at: 
www.ahrq.gov/fund/contarchive/rfp050010.htm. 
Accessed April 10, 2008. 
www.fda.gov/oc/pdufa/default.htm. Accessed April 
10, 2008. 
 
53.  Campbell R, French D, Cunningham F. Enhancing 
post-marketing surveillance: Lessons from the 
Veterans Health Administration. Presentation at the 3rd 
Annual Harvard FDA Compliance symposium. 
Boston, MA. August 24, 2007. Powerpoint 
presentation available at: 
www.ehcca.com/presentations/fdasymposium3/campb
ell_4.ppt. Accessed April 10, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
