Exploring Collaboration between USP DQI and the ACTWatch Study in Cambodia: 
Sentinel Site Visit to Oddar Meanchey and Meetings with Key Partners 
 
Phnom Penh, Cambodia, September 15, 18 – 20, 2008 
Oddar Meanchey Province, Cambodia September 16 – 18, 2008 
 
Trip Report 
 
 
Ms. Laura Krech, Program Manager, Southeast Asia  
Mr. Christopher Raymond, Project Coordinator, Southeast Asia  
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Pharmacopeia Drug Quality 
and Information Program 
12601 Twinbrook Parkway 
Rockville, MD  20852 USA 
Tel: (+1) 301-816-8160 
Fax: (+1) 301-816-8374 
Email: uspdqi@usp.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cooperative Agreement # HRN-A-00-00-00017-00 
Sponsoring USAID Missions: USAID/Cambodia 
Grantee: United States Pharmacopeia Drug Quality and Information (USP DQI) Program 
Author(s) Name: Krech, L.  
Language: English  
Date of Publication: November 10, 2008 
This report is made possible by the generous support of the American people 
through the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), under 
Cooperative Agreement number HRN-A-00-00-00017-00. The contents are the 
responsibility of the U. S. Pharmacopeia Drug Quality and Information Program 
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Government. 
 
About USP DQI 
The United States Pharmacopeia Drug Quality and Information (USP DQI) Program, funded by 
the U.S. Agency for International Development (cooperative agreement HRN-A-00-00-00017-
00), provides technical leadership to more than 30 developing countries to strengthen their drug 
quality assurance programs, ensure the quality of medicines and promote public health. 
USP DQI helps build local, national and regional capacity to improve the standards of drug 
manufacturing and distribution, reduce the impact of infectious diseases, mitigate the effects of 
the HIV/AIDS epidemic, and advance the appropriate use of medicines. This document does not 
necessarily represent the views or opinions of the U.S. Agency for International Development 
(USAID). It may be reproduced if credit is given to USP DQI. 
 
Abstract 
Ms. Krech (USP DQI), Mr. Raymond (USP DQI) and Dr. Lawrence Evans (USP International 
Technical Alliances Program (ITAP)) traveled to Cambodia to meet with key partners and 
determine how the ACTWatch Drug Quality Study can be carried out in conjunction with 
ongoing USP DQI medicine quality monitoring activities without creating overlap or duplication.  
USP staff conducted a supervisory visit to the remote sentinel site of Samrong in the province of 
Oddar Meanchey, which is part of the Thai-Cambodia cross border study on antimalarial 
medicine quality. The team also traveled to the nearby border town of O’smach to collect 
antimalarial samples from formal and informal outlets.  
 
USP staff met with key partners from the Department of Drugs and Food (DDF), National 
Laboratory for Drug Quality Control (NLDQC), Population Services International (PSI), the 
World Health Organization (WHO), Global Fund (GF), National Malaria Center (CNM) and 
USAID to discuss all ongoing medicine sampling and testing activities in Cambodia. The goal of 
these meetings was to discuss how the partners can best work together to report and share results 
as well as take action when poor quality and counterfeit medicines are found.    
 
Recommended Citation 
Krech, L. 2008. Exploring Collaboration between USP DQI and the ACTWatch Study in 
Cambodia: Sentinel Site Visit to Oddar Meanchey and Meetings with Key Partners. Phnom Penh 
and Oddar Meanchey Province, Cambodia: Sept 14-21, 2008. Submitted to the U.S. Agency for 
International Development by the United States Pharmacopeia Drug Quality and Information 
Program. Rockville, Maryland: United States Pharmacopeia. 
 
Key Words 
Cambodia, Oddar Meanchey, O’smach, antimalarials, ACTs, PSI, Thai-Cambodia Cross Border 
Study, medicine quality monitoring, Department of Drugs and Food, pharmacovigilance, ISO 
17025, ACTWatch, Global Fund Round 6, National Laboratory for Drug Quality Control.  
 
 
 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
2
Table of Contents 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements...................................................................................................... 4 
Acronyms...................................................................................................................... 5 
Background .................................................................................................................. 6 
Purpose of Trip............................................................................................................. 6 
Source of Funding........................................................................................................ 6 
Overview of Activities.................................................................................................. 7 
Next Steps .................................................................................................................. 12 
Annex 1: Sentinel Sites in Cambodia ....................................................................... 13 
Annex 2: Sentinel Sites in Cambodia and Thailand participating in the Cross- 
Border study .............................................................................................................. 14 
Annex 3: PSI Map of Malaria Containment Zones in Cambodia............................. 15  
Annex 4: Photographs of Oddar Meanchey site visit.............................................. 16 
 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
3
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
The author would like to express sincere appreciation to the staff at the Cambodian Department 
of Drugs and Food (DDF) and the National Laboratory for Drug Quality Control (NLDQC). In 
particular we wish to recognize Ms. Mam Boravann, Mr. Oeurn Samuth, and Vice-Director Dr. 
Chroeng Sokhan from the DDF who helped arrange all logistics related to our sentinel site visit 
to O’smach in the Oddar Meanchey province and all meetings with key partners. A special thank 
you also goes out to Dr. Nam Nivanna and Mr. Tey Sovannarith from the NLDQC for their time 
and efforts in discussing our three-year work plan proposal and presenting all NLDQC activities 
related to sampling and testing medicines.   
 
Dr. Lawrence Evans from USP ITAP should also be thanked for his dedication to explore how 
USP DQI and PSI can collaborate on specific activities in Cambodia. Through the PSI grant to 
ITAP, Dr. Evans provided funding for two USP DQI staff and Ms. Boravann to visit O’smach as 
well as providing for USP DQI staff expenses while in Phnom Penh.  
   
The author would also like to acknowledge the support and guidance from Dr. William Mfuko of 
the WHO Cambodia office, H.E. Yim Yann, and Dr. Sokhan on how USP DQI and Global Fund 
activities and funding can be coordinated and optimized.  
 
The author would also like to thank the USAID Mission in Cambodia, in particular Mr. Jonathan 
Ross, for his participation in the partners’ meeting on September 19, 2008 and for his feedback 
regarding USP DQI’s current and future activities.  
 
It is important to express sincere appreciation to all administrative staff and editors of the USP 
DQI Program for assistance in logistical arrangements and editing of this trip report. 
 
Lastly, thank you to Mr. Anthony Boni, USAID CTO based in Washington, D.C. and Ms. Veerle 
Coignez for their support and advice.  
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
4
ACRONYMS  
 
 
 
ACT 
Artemisinin-based Combination Therapy 
CNM 
National Malaria Center 
DDF 
Department of Drugs and Food 
GF or Global Fund 
Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria  
HPLC 
High Performance Liquid Chromatography 
ITAP 
International Technical Alliances Program 
JPMA 
Japanese Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association 
LSHTM 
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine 
MOH  
Ministry of Health 
NLDQC 
National Laboratory for Drug Quality Control 
PAC 
Pharmacists Association of Cambodia  
PSI 
Population Services International 
PV 
Pharmacovigilance 
QA 
Quality Assurance 
QC 
Quality Control 
TLC 
Thin Layer Chromatography 
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development 
USP 
United States Pharmacopeia 
USP DQI 
United States Pharmacopeia Drug Quality and Information 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
USAID 
United States Agency for International Development 
USP DQI 
United States Pharmacopeia Drug Quality and Information 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
WPRO  
WHO Western Pacific Regional Office  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
5
Background 
USP, PSI, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine (LSHTM), and AC Nielson – 
through a grant from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation – are partners in a study called 
ACTwatch. The goal of ACTwatch is to increase effective treatment rates of malaria by 
generating and disseminating evidence and recommendations to policymakers on methods to 
increase availability and decrease the consumer price of quality assured Artemisinin-based 
combination therapy (ACT). This study is a five-year project across eight countries: Benin, 
Nigeria, Uganda, The Democratic Republic of the Congo, Zambia, Madagascar, Cambodia and 
tentatively, Myanmar. USP is leading the antimalarial drug quality study in each country.  
 
The objectives of ACTWatch are to provide policy makers with evidence and actionable 
recommendations in the following areas: 
• levels and trends in the availability, price, quality, volume, retailer perceptions, and 
knowledge information about antimalarial medicines at different points of sale; 
• wholesaler and retailer volumes and the components of the consumer price of 
antimalarials, as well as current policy influences on the market, and specifically, on 
mark-ups from import to outlet; and 
• consumer treatment-seeking behavior and volumes of specific antimalarials consumed, to 
support the development and monitoring of policies and other interventions to increase 
rates of effective malaria treatment. 
• country-specific advocacy plans and international dissemination activities to ensure that 
evidence is effectively translated into policy.  
 
The studies through which these objectives will be met include the: 
• Outlet Survey: will evaluate availability, price, and affordability of antimalarials in the 
public and private sectors. 
• Supply Chain Research: will determine price and availability of antimalarials.  
• Antimalarial Drug Quality Assurance and Control: will measure quality and purity of 
antimalarials in the market. 
• Household Survey: will measure levels and trends in the use of effective and ineffective 
antimalarials and determinants of use. 
 
Purpose of Trip 
• Determine how the ACTWatch Drug Quality Study can be carried out in conjunction 
with ongoing USP DQI activities without creating overlap or duplication.  
• Visit O’smach sentinel site and evaluate staff performance on basic testing and TLC  
• Meet with the USAID Mission and WHO to discuss Cambodian activities. 
• Meet with key partners from the DDF, NLDQC, and USAID to discuss USP DQI’s three-
year work plan proposal.  
• Visit the NLDQC to determine what next steps the lab should take in terms of WHO 
prequalification to ultimately attain ISO 17025 accreditation.   
 
Source of Funding 
This trip was supported with funds from PSI, as well as by USAID/Cambodia. 
  
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
6
Overview of Activities 
September 15, 2008 - morning 
Meeting with the Department of Drugs and Food  
Participants: Dr. Chroeng Sokhan, Vice-Director DDF 
Ms. Mam Boravann, Deputy-Chief of the Essential Drugs Bureau 
Ms. Sar Kuy Heang, Chief of Registration 
Dr. William Mfuko, WHO DDF Advisor 
USP Staff (Mr. Christopher Raymond, Ms. Laura Krech, and Dr. Lawrence Evans) 
 
Dr. Chroeng Sokhan welcomed the USP ITAP team. Dr. Evans gave a brief overview of the 
ACTWatch Drug Quality Study and summarized the study design provided earlier via email. The 
DDF indicated that they currently have a post-marketing surveillance system in place that is 
collecting data on antimalarials as well as other medicine products, and the Cross-Border study 
will provide data specifically on antimalarials. Dr. Evans was asked to revise the proposed work 
plan to: 1) focus on Cambodia; 2) add a summary section of current and recent drug quality 
studies in the country; and 3) indicate how an unmet need is being addressed. Dr. Sokhan 
requested that USP provide a 1-2 page summary letter of the study so the DDF can obtain the 
waiver for any type of ethical clearance. This is consistent with how USP and DDF have handled 
this issue in the past.  
 
The point was made that the ACTWatch study addresses geographical areas covered by the 
Cross-Border study and the current medicine post-marketing surveillance program; however, in 
the latter, sampling is done only at the outlet level. Data sharing was recommended because of 
overlap and to reduce the burden on local staff. Mam Boravann, USP’s focal point in the DDF. 
  
NOTE: Cambodia is divided into 20 provinces and 4 urban municipalities. The post-marketing 
surveillance program collects data on anti-infective medicines – antibiotics, antimalarials, anti-
tuberculosis agents (ATBs), antiretrovirals (ARVs), and oseltamivir – in 11 provinces. The 
Cross-Border Study focuses on antimalarials in 6 provinces, 5 of which are part of the post-
marketing surveillance program (the exception is Oddar Meanchey, only participating in the 
Cross-Border Study). There are no sentinel sites in some central Cambodian provinces but these 
are areas where malaria exists but Artesunate-tolerant parasites are not suspected (see Annexes 1 
and 2). 
 
September 15, 2008 afternoon  
Meeting with the Department of Drugs and Food and WHO 
Participants: Dr. Chroeng Sokhan, Vice-Director DDF 
Ms. Mam Boravann, Deputy-Chief of the Essential Drugs Bureau 
Ms. Sar Kuy Heang, Chief of Registration 
Dr. William Mfuko, WHO DDF Advisor 
Dr. Mam Dathara, Cambodian Pharmacovigilance Center 
Mr. Bunso Sok, Cambodian Pharmacovigilance Center 
USP Staff: Mr. Christopher Raymond and Ms. Laura Krech 
                 
Ms. Mam Boravann and Ms. Krech presented an overview of the 9-day training course they 
attended in Manila, Philippines, in September, entitled “Introductory Training Course in 
Pharmacovigilance”. The course was sponsored by WHO HQ and WPRO, and 14 countries were 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
7
represented. The attending countries either a) had no pharmacovigilance (PV) infrastructure or 
activities ongoing; b) had only recently commenced PV activities; or c) have a PV center, 
activities, and a reporting system but face many challenges, and therefore the program is not 
fully functioning.  
 
Two DDF staff (Ms. Boravann and Mr. Huot Sengthong) were selected by the Cambodian 
Ministry of Health (MOH) to represent the country. Efforts were made to include the two PV 
staff (Dr. Dathara and Mr. Sok) already working at the Cambodian Pharmacovigilance Center, 
but unfortunately it was not possible. In order to share the knowledge of the training, DDF staff 
will spend on average one hour each day going over the different training topics from the course 
with the PV staff. 
 
Ms. Krech and Ms. Boravann also presented and discussed the Cambodian PV action plan which 
was formulated at the training in Manila (see Annex 4). The plan lists five activities to be 
accomplished in FY 09.  
 
September 15, 2008  
Meeting with Population Services International (PSI)  
Participants: Dr. Lawrence Evans, USP  
Ms. Diane Freeman, International Fellow, Malaria Advisor, PSI 
 
Dr. Evans met with Diane Freeman, Country Program Coordinator for ACTWatch in Cambodia. 
Dr. Kate O’Conell was scheduled to be included in the meeting via teleconference but was 
unavailable. In the proposed study design, during phase 2, a single product would be targeted. 
Ms. Freeman indicated that neither Malarine nor A+M, need to be tested in this phase because 
both undergo testing by the NLDQC. The PSI developed zones/stratum for Cambodia were 
compared with the sentinel sites for the Cross-Border study and were found to overlap, thus 
suggesting that the sentinel sites are optimal locations for sample collection. (See annex 3)  
 
Site Visit to Oddar Meanchey Province, September 16-17, 2008  
September 16, 2008 arrival in Samrong 
Meeting with the Vice Provincial Health Director of Oddar Meanchey (OMC)  
Participants:  Dr. Ploug Thom, Vice Provincial Health Director and Hospital Chief 
Mr. Hien Kimseat, Pharmacist, OMC Operational District 
Mr. Bun Channa, Pharmacist, OMC Operational District 
Ms. Mam Boravann, DDF and USP focal Point 
USP Staff: Dr. Lawrence Evans, Ms. Laura Krech, and Mr. Christopher Raymond 
 
The Deputy Director of Oddar Meanchey, Dr. Ploug Thom, welcomed the USP team. He was 
pleased to have had two pharmacists from his operational district recently complete sample 
collection and Minilab® training. He has been active in removing medicine from private outlets 
that are banned by the MOH or not registered. However, he pointed out that in some cases, 
medicines that do not have a registration sticker are of good quality and that the registration 
sticker is easily counterfeited.  
 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
8
He indicated that with Minilab® results and coordinating with the NLDQC, he will now have the 
drug quality data needed for enforcement, including the removal of poor quality drugs from the 
market. He was interested in testing medicines besides antimalarials in the future, especially 
when he and his staff find suspicious products. In addition, he requested the testing results be 
made available to the MOH to assist in forming policy.  
 
September 16, 2008  
Visit to the OMC Operational District Warehouse 
Participants: Mr. Hien Kimseat, Pharmacist, OMC Operational District 
Mr. Bun Channa, Pharmacist, OMC Operational District 
Ms. Mam Boravann, DDF and USP focal Point 
USP Staff: Dr. Lawrence Evans, Ms. Laura Krech, and Mr. Christopher Raymond 
 
Oddar Meanchey Province has only one operational district compared and is part of the USP 
Cross-Border Study. Mr. Kimseat and Mr. Channa are pharmacists at the Operational District 
Warehouse. Both are responsible for sample collection, performing Minilab® testing, and 
distributing medicines to provincial facilities. The facility houses public sector drugs including 
antimalarials that are distributed to hospitals, health centers, and other health posts. Both 
pharmacists recently completed the USP DQI training (July 2008) on the use of the Minilab®, 
thus this visit was used to evaluate and reinforce skills obtained during the training. The 
individuals were evaluated for their basic testing and TLC skills for two chloroquine samples. 
Their technique was good, and no issues were observed. USP DQI should budget for a larger 
table and sufficient quantities of water for testing.  
 
September 17, 2008  
Visit to the O’smach Health Center and O’smach Market (on the Thai-Cambodia border) 
Participants: Mr. Hien Kimseat, Pharmacist, OMC Operational District 
Mr. Bun Channa, Pharmacist, OMC Operational District 
Ms. Mam Boravann, DDF and USP focal Point 
USP Staff: Dr. Lawrence Evans, Ms. Laura Krech, and Mr. Christopher Raymond 
 
USP staff shadowed Mr. Kimseat and Mr. Channa to observe their sample collection technique. 
The group visited one public facility, the O’smach Health Center, and seven private outlets. Four 
of the private outlets were located in a market; two of the outlets were legal, and two were 
illegal.  
 
Sample availability was an issue. An adequate number of units to comprise a sample were 
available at only a few locations. This raised the issue of whether a sample should be collected 
for testing or left for potential treatment against malaria. The “mystery shopper” approach was 
not used because the town is small and all the pharmacy staff know Mr. Kimseat and Mr. Channa 
personally.  
 
September 18, 2008 
Meeting with the PSI, DDF, CNM, NLDQC, and WHO 
Participants: Dr. Chroeng Sokhan, Vice Director, DDF 
Ms. Mam Boravann, Deputy Chief of the Essential Drugs Bureau, DDF 
Mr. Samuth Oeurn, TLC and Cross Border Study supervisor, DDF 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
9
Dr. William Mfuko, Technical Officer – Essential Medicines, WHO 
Mr. Ouk Rada, Senior Officer, CNM 
Prof. Nam Nivanna, Director, NLDQC 
H.E. Yim Yann, Global Fund-DDF Medicine Quality Project Coordinator 
Mr. Long Sameth, Global Fund-DDF Medicine Quality Project Asssistant 
Mr. Tey Sovannarith, Deputy Chief of Technical Laboratory, NLDQC 
Ms. Diane Freeman, International Fellow, Malaria Advisor, PSI 
USP Staff: Dr. Lawrence Evans, Ms. Laura Krech, and Mr. Christopher Raymond 
 
The USP team met with the DDF, CNM, and the NLDQC. The objective of the meeting was to 
present the ACTWatch drug quality study to the key stakeholders as a group. Ms. Krech and Mr. 
Raymond gave brief overviews of their USP sponsored activities. Dr. Evans gave an overview of 
the ACTWatch Drug Quality Study, which included the objectives, methodology, and timeline 
and names of USP’s partners in the study. Dr. Evans also updated the stakeholders of the low 
availability of antimalarials in the province visited earlier in the week. Therefore, where the 
study designs allow, data sharing will be required to not cause stock outs. Data on samples 
collected per province will be requested from the DDF to establish whether this is common to 
only this province. Dr. Evans indicated that in addition to testing antimalarials, the study also 
includes a survey of the Medicine Regulatory Authority in each country.  
  
Dr. William Mfuko, the WHO DDF Advisor, indicated that a document is available that 
describes the functions of the Medicine Regulatory Authority in Cambodia and provided Dr. 
Evans with this information. Ms. Freeman of PSI spoke about the other components of 
ACTWatch, the Supply Chain study, and Household and Outlet Surveys.  
 
Mr. Sovannarith of the NLDQC mentioned that antimalarials not specified in the study design 
are also found in the market. He also indicated that he needed access to methods in the Chinese 
Pharmacopeia to perform some of the confirmatory testing. Dr. Evans asked the NLDQC for a 
schedule of testing for the upcoming year to identify high volume testing periods. A schedule is 
not available, but the NLDQC indicated that the projected period when confirmatory testing is to 
be performed for ACTWatch is a low volume period. The presentation was well received by all 
stakeholders and no implementation issues were indicated.  
 
Dr. Evans requested the following lists from Ms. Borvann: 
• registered antimalarial drug manufacturers, importers, and wholesalers  
• registered antimalarials  
• antimalarials collected per province from the most recent round of USP activities 
 
NOTE:   
The antimalarial drugs in the ACTWatch study design and the Cross Border study were selected 
because of available methodology for Minilab® and confirmatory testing.  
 
Artekin is an ACT containing dihydroartemisinin and piperaquine phosphate and is commonly 
found in the Cambodian market. A method for the Minilab® does not exist, and there are no 
pharmacopeial methods available for the FDC. 
 
 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
10
September 19, 2008 
Meeting with the NLDQC to discuss 3-year work plan proposal submitted to USP DQI 
Participants: Prof. Nam Nivanna, Director, NLDQC 
Mr. Tey Sovannarith, Deputy Chief of Technical Laboratory, NLDQC 
USP Staff: Dr. Lawrence Evans, Ms. Laura Krech, and Mr. Christopher Raymond 
 
Dr. Evans, Ms. Krech, and Mr. Raymond met with the NLDQC to review the capacity of the 
national lab, discuss supply requests to USP DQI, and determine what impact the ACTWatch 
study could have on the lab’s output. 
• The NLDQC is equipped with several HPLC instruments (7) that are up and running  
• The NLDQC had recently received 2 additional HPLC instruments from the Japanese 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association (JPMA) which are waiting to be installed.  
• Plans are underway for the lab to move to a new building in 3 years. Construction will begin 
in 2009-2010. USP DQI can help NLDQC find an expert in lab design, which is very 
important if the NLDQC wants to attain ISO 17025 accreditation in the future. The World 
Bank is funding construction of the new lab, and the NLDQC will budget for a design expert.  
• NLDQC and USP DQI staff agreed that a technical assessment visit from the Centers of 
Excellence QA/QC experts (Chulalongkorn University) is not necessary at the present time. 
Ms. Krech and Dr. Evans will meet with the QA department at USP to organize a packet of 
information about how the lab can start preparing for ISO 17025 accreditation. Once these 
steps have been put in place a technical assessment visit will be scheduled.   
• The lab needs a new dissolution machine. USP DQI will see if a used dissolution machine –
in good condition – with an autosampler can be donated to the NLDQC. 
• NLDQC requested training on the potentiometry titration method. USP will see if the 
Pharmacopeial Education department has plans to offer their titration course in Asia.  
September 19, 2008 
Meeting with USAID, PSI, DDF, CNM, NLDQC, and WHO 
Participants: Dr. Chroeng Sokhan, Vice Director, DDF 
Ms. Mam Boravann, Deputy Chief of the Essential Drugs Bureau, DDF 
Mr. Samuth Oeurn, TLC and Cross Border Study supervisor, DDF 
Dr. William Mfuko, Technical Officer – Essential Medicines, WHO 
Mr. Ouk Rada, Senior Officer, CNM 
Prof. Nam Nivanna, Director, NLDQC 
H.E. Yim Yann, Global Fund-DDF Medicine Quality Project Coordinator 
Mr. Long Sameth, Global Fund-DDF Medicine Quality Project Asssistant 
Mr. Tey Sovannarith, Deputy Chief of Technical Laboratory, NLDQC 
Ms. Diane Freeman, International Fellow, Malaria Advisor, PSI 
Mr. Jonathan Ross, Deputy Director, Office of Public Health, USAID 
USP Staff: Dr. Lawrence Evans, Ms. Laura Krech, and Mr. Christopher Raymond 
 
The primary objective of the meeting was to have stakeholders describe their current drug quality 
monitoring programs and activities in the country. After the meeting, Mr. Ross spoke with Ms. 
Krech and Mr. Raymond regarding feedback from USP DQI’s 3-year work plan proposal and 
offered advice regarding the annual portfolio review in October. Mr. Raymond provided Mr. 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
11
Ross with a DVD of the Public Service Announcements on the dangers of counterfeit medicines 
that USP DQI has been working on for the past 8 months with Cambodia Mission funding. There 
are versions of the PSA with Khmer subtitles and voiceovers.  
 
September 20, 2008 
Meeting with DDF and WHO 
Participants: Dr. Chroeng Sokhan, Vice Director, DDF 
Ms. Mam Boravann, Deputy Chief of the Essential Drugs Bureau, DDF 
Dr. William Mfuko, Technical Officer – Essential Medicines, WHO 
H.E. Yim Yann, Global Fund-DDF Medicine Quality Project Coordinator 
USP Staff: Dr. Lawrence Evans and Ms. Laura Krech 
     
Ms. Krech and Dr. Evans met with the DDF and WHO to discuss budget issues for upcoming 
USP projects and the initiation of Global Fund Round 6. Ms. Krech went over the Round 6 
budget line-by-line with the DDF and WHO staff members to determine which agency will cover 
which activities. The goal is to eliminate overlaps in funding.   
 
For the ACTWatch study, the DDF suggested that the ACTwatch budget supplement were 
needed to cover per diem for sampling and Minilab® testing as well as the cost for samples. 
Confirmatory testing costs will be obtained from Mr. Sovannarith of the NLDQC. It was 
indicated that the current rate the NLDQC charges for confirmatory testing may be adjusted. Dr. 
Evans will request the current rate for confirmatory testing from the NLDQC. 
 
Next Steps 
• Communicate regularly with Dr. Evans and PSI to determine how and when the 
ACTWatch study will begin in Cambodia  
• Dr. Evans will add a section to the ACTWatch proposal/workplan summarizing current 
and recent drug quality studies in Cambodia and will also indicate how an unmet need is 
being addressed through this study. 
• Ms. Krech and Dr. Evans will meet with Dr. Keith Conerly of QA at USP to organize a 
packet of information about how the NLDQC can start preparing to obtain ISO 17025 
accreditation. 
• Order and send all supplies, reagents, and reference standards requested by NLDQC for 
the sentinel sites, and the National Lab to continue sampling and testing activities for the 
Cross Border Study and the regular medicine quality monitoring project without delays. 
• Send the two PV staff (Dr. Dathara and Mr. Sok) to a fully-functioning PV center for 
hands-on training.  
• Follow up with Dr. Sokhan from the DDF to write a letter to WHO HQ so Cambodia can 
become an official member of the WHO Programme for International Drug Monitoring 
• Ms. Boravann (DDF) and Dr. Mfuko (WHO) will teach the Cambodian PV staff the 
training materials from the WPRO “Introductory Course in Pharmacovigilance.”  
 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
12
 
 
ANNEX 1 
 
SENTINEL SITES IN CAMBODIA1
 
Cambodia has 10 sentinel sites, each equipped with a Minilab®
1.  Battambang (borders Thailand) 
2.  Bantheay Meanchey (borders Thailand) 
3.  Koh Kong (borders the ocean) 
4.  Pailin (borders Thailand) 
5.  Preah Vihear (borders Thailand and Lao PDR) 
6.  Pursat (borders Thailand) 
7.  Svay Rieng (borders Vietnam) 
8.  Stung Treng (borders Lao PDR) 
9.  Ratanakiri (borders Vietnam and Lao PDR) 
10. Kampong Cham (borders Vietnam) 
 
                                                 
1 Spelling of the provinces in English is phonetic; therefore some of the spelling of the sentinel sites differs from 
what is found in the map.  USP uses the spelling of our partners from the Cambodian Department of Food and 
Drugs.  
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
13
ANNEX 2 
 
Sentinel sites in Thailand and Cambodia participating in the cross-border (X-
border) study 
 
Thailand  
Cambodia 
   Buri Ram (only X border study)  
   Banteay Meanchey (only X border study) 
   Chanthaburi (X border and MQM) 
   Battambang (X border and MQM*) 
   Sa Kaeo (only X border study) 
   Oddar Meanchey (only X border study) 
   Si Sa Ket (only X border study)  
   Pailin (X border and MQM) 
   Surin (only X border study)  
   Preah Vihear (only X border study)  
   Trat (X border and MQM) 
   Pursat (X border and MQM)  
 
*Medicine quality monitoring activities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Surin 
Si Sa 
Ket 
Buri 
Ram 
Chanthaburi 
Sa Kaeo 
Trat 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
14
ANNEX 3 
 
 
 
 
 
Zone 1 red 
Zone 2 orange 
Zone 3 green 
Zone 4 white 
 
Map diagram prepared and provided by PSI. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PSI Map of Malaria Containment 
Zones in Cambodia 
Chum Ki
Kampot
Koh Kong 
Kampong S
Veal Veng 
Samlout 
Battambang 
Ka
ng 
 Krao 
lin 
Pursat 
Banteay  
Meanchey 
Preah Vihear
THAILAND 
LAOS
VIET NAM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Kampong 
Chhnan  
Sampov Lun 
Phnom Proek 
Mondulkiri 
Takeo
Kampong 
Chhnang 
Kampong 
Thom 
Siem Reap
Sihanoukville 
Kep
Oddar Meanchey
Prey 
Veng Svay 
Rien
g
Kandal
Kampong Cham
Kratie
Ratanakiri 
Phnom Penh
Stung Treng
Pailin 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
15
ANNEX 4 
 
Photographs of Oddar Meanchey site visit 
 
Dr. Lawrence Evans (USP ITAP) presenting the ACTWatch study to partners from the DDF, CNM, WHO, 
PAC and NLDQC.  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
USP, DDF and Oddar Meanchey colleagues wait to see if the road will re-open – heavy rains washed 
away a large part of the road leaving a gaping hole, and the only way to pass through was with the help 
of 20 people pushing the vehicle. Here, Mr. Chris Raymond and Dr. Lawrence Evans wonder if the team 
will make it through.  
 
 
 
 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
16
Still waiting to see if the road is passable, Ms. Krech stands in front of the car to show that the bumper 
fell off during the trip due to the rough road conditions.  
 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Raymond and Ms. Krech show DDF Vice-Director Dr. Chroeng Sokhan and His Excellency Yim Yann, 
President of the Pharmacists Association of Cambodia, the Public Service Announcements USP DQI 
created about the dangers of counterfeit medicines. An interview that USP DQI filmed with H.E. Yim Yann 
was also shown.   
 
 
USP DQI Trip Report – Cambodia, September 2008 
17
