Fire Technology, 40, 149–176, 2004
C⃝2004 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The United States.
Generation and Transport of Smoke
Components
Kathryn M. Butler and George W. Mulholland, National Institute of Standards
and Technology, 100 Bureau Drive, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8665, USA
Abstract.
Smoke is a mixture of gases, vapors, and suspended particulate matter, or aerosols.
The nature of the aerosol component of smoke can play a signiﬁcant role in its deposition in
the ﬁre environment and in its lethal and sublethal effects on people. This paper presents the
current state of knowledge about smoke aerosol phenomena that affects smoke toxicity: soot
generation, fractal structure of soot, agglomerate transport via thermophoresis, sedimentation,
and diffusion, agglomerate growth through coagulation and condensation, and the potential for
the aerosols to transport adsorbed or absorbed toxic gases or vapors into the lungs. Tables are
included for measured smoke yields and aerodynamic particle sizes, equations and references
are provided for the smoke agglomerate transport properties and wall loss, and key literature
references are provided for adsorption of irritant gases on soot particles and water droplets and
the toxicity of nanosize particles.
Key words: smoke aerosol, smoke generation, smoke transport, smoke toxicity, ultraﬁne particulates
Introduction
There is increasing concern about sublethal effects of smoke generated by ﬁres. The eye
and lung irritation due to irritant gases and aerosols and the confusion due to asphyxi-
ants may slow escape or cause incapacitation. The inhalation of a large concentration of
soot and toxic gases may lead to lung edema and inﬂammation, causing death a short
time after the ﬁre. This paper focuses on the information needed to assess the smoke
aerosol exposure of an individual in a ﬁre. The key smoke property information is the par-
ticle yield, the particle size distribution, and the type and amount of toxic gases adsorbed
on the particulate. Factors affecting smoke transport include the ﬁre size and building
geometry, the change in size distribution resulting from coagulation and condensation,
and particle losses due to thermophoresis, sedimentation, and diffusion. This information
would enable an estimate of the smoke exposure of an individual at a target location in a
building.
A second possible application of this paper concerns the major cleanup challenge posed
by smoke deposition during and after a ﬁre. Knowledge of the smoke yield, smoke size
distribution, and transport and deposition processes are necessary for developing a model
of smoke deposition resulting from a ﬁre. Protection of critical equipment could be improved
by using such a model to modify building design.
Smoke is a mixture of gases, vapors, and particulates. The latter include both micro-
droplets formed from condensed organic vapors and carbonaceous agglomerated structures
(soot) consisting of hundreds up to many thousands of nearly spherical primary particles. A
150
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
range of adverse health effects is associated with inhalation of smoke aerosols, depending
on the amount and location of their deposition within the respiratory tract. The depth of
penetration into the lungs and the likelihood of being exhaled depend on the particle size.
The degree of damage depends on the quantity of deposited particles, which is related in
turn to the concentration of smoke aerosol in the inhaled air, on their shape, and on their
toxicity. The damage can cause immediate effects such as a coughing response or long-term
effects such as the suspected role of smoke inhalation in the development of cancer. In this
paper the focus is on the short-term effects that impair the individual’s ability to escape
from the ﬁre and to survive its immediate aftermath.
We focus on ﬂame-generated smoke. Many of the exposures of concern are remote from
the ﬁre source, which requires a strongly buoyant plume generated by a ﬂame. Although
non-ﬂaming sources produce high yields of toxic products that may spread beyond the
room of origin under certain circumstances [1], this will not be addressed in this paper. This
document contains three sections: (1) Smoke aerosol characteristics, including smoke yield
and size distribution; (2) Smoke transport, changes, and losses; and (3) Adsorption of toxic
gases on smoke particulates.
Physical and Chemical Characteristics of Smoke Aerosol
An assessment of conditions within the lungs must begin with information about the initial
character of particulate matter as it emerges from the ﬁre. Soot formation and growth in-
volves a number of processes. First, the fuel pyrolyzes from the surface as fuel fragments.
In the high temperature ﬂame environment, these fragments react to form acetylene, ben-
zene, and radical species including H, OH, and small hydrocarbon radicals. The one-ring
benzene undergoes a number of reactions involving acetylene and the radical species lead-
ing to multiple-ring species termed polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs). The PAHs
continue to grow to ultimately form the smallest soot particles, which are on the order
of a few nanometers [2]. Subsequent particle growth takes place by surface addition of
acetylene and particle-particle collisions, termed coagulation, followed by coalescence into
a single particle. The early soot loses hydrogen forming a solid particle that no longer
coalesces. The size of the particle at this step is on the order of 0.02 µm to 0.05 µm.
Subsequent growth occurs by agglomeration of these primary particles. This agglomera-
tion process takes place in the ﬂame, where some of the primary particles are partially
fused, as well as in the post-ﬂame region, where the agglomerates are held together by
dispersion forces. As the smoke leaving the ﬂame cools, vapor phase PAHs condense on
the surface of the soot particle. The amount of condensed organics is generally less than
20% for overventilated ﬁres; however, for underventilated ﬁres the fraction can increase to
50% and the agglomerates develop a more agglutinated structure [3]. Smaller molecules,
including water, benzene, other hydrocarbons, and acid gases, may adsorb on its surface.
The surface area of a smoke particle and the chemical functionalities on that surface are of
critical importance to the particle’s subsequent growth and migration and to its ability to
adsorb water and toxic gases. The topic of surface adsorption will be discussed later in this
paper.
The focus of this section is on the smoke yield for ﬂaming combustion and the size
distribution of the agglomerates. These are key properties needed for modeling the impact
of a ﬁre on the inhalation conditions at a location some distance from the ﬁre.
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
151
Smoke Yield
Smoke yield, sometimes also referred to as the emission factor, is deﬁned as the mass of
smoke generated per mass of fuel burned. Values range from fractions of a percent to about
20% of the fuel mass. Fuels such as methane and wood undergoing ﬂaming combustion
populate the low end of this scale, and the high end typically represents fuels with an
aromatic chemical structure.
The two major methods for determining smoke yield are the ﬂux method and the carbon
balance method [4]. The ﬂux method consists of measuring the mass of smoke collected on
a ﬁlter, the mass loss of the sample, and the ratio of the mass ﬂow of air through the exhaust
duct to the mass ﬂow rate through the ﬁlter sample. The carbon balance method involves
the determination of the carbon mass in the smoke aerosol as a fraction of the carbon
mass in the total combustion products (CO2, CO, and smoke aerosols). These represent
the major carbon-containing products of combustion for overventilated burning. By this
method, the smoke yield is obtained as the product of the carbon fraction times the mass
fraction of carbon in the fuel. In some studies [5], the mass concentration of the smoke
is determined by a mass monitoring device such as a tapered element microbalance or
by performing a light extinction measurement that is calibrated by a series of gravimetric
measurements.
Smoke yield measurements are a challenge because of thermophoretic losses of the hot
smoke to cooler sampling lines, the difﬁculty in accurately weighing ﬁlter samples, and the
possible nonuniformity of the smoke concentration in the exhaust lines. The use of repeata-
bility studies or of two independent measurements to check smoke yield measurements
has been lacking. These factors may be responsible for some of the variability observed in
the literature for smoke yield results for nominally identical fuels. Other factors affecting
comparisons are incomplete speciﬁcation of the burning material or the combustion mode
(one sample may be collected only during ﬂaming combustion while the other is collect-
ing throughout the burning of the object including the smoldering phase), different sample
sizes, different radiant ﬂuxes to the sample, and different sample conﬁgurations.
Extensive small scale studies of ﬁre product generation as a function of fuel type have
been carried out by A. Tewarson using the ASTM E2058 ﬁre propagation apparatus designed
by the Factory Mutual Research Corporation [5]. In this experimental setup, small samples
on the order of 100 mm wide by 600 mm high are ignited under a collection hood. Smoke
generation rate is measured in the sampling duct above the hood using a light extinction
measurement based on measuring the ratio of the incident to transmitted light intensity and
a commercial smoke mass monitoring instrument. Table 1 lists smoke yields determined by
Tewarson for a range of fuels under well-ventilated ﬂaming conditions.
Table 1 illustrates that the amount of smoke generated is strongly dependent on the type
of material being burned. Oxygen-containing fuels such as alcohols approach the smallest
smoke yields, aromatics have the largest, and alkanes and alkenes are intermediate. Table 1
provides useful data for a wide range of simple fuels as well as for typical polymers found
in buildings.
In general, smoke yield increases moderately with increasing fuel size. For a pool ﬁre,
Evans et al. [6] found that increasing the diameter from 0.085 m to 2 m increased smoke
production from 0.06 g to 0.13 g of smoke per gram of crude oil. A comparison of large
scale test results for sugar pine and rigid PU crib structures with those for cone calorimeter
152
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
TABLE 1
Smoke Yields for Flaming Combustion in Air from Tewarson [5]
Material
Smoke Yield (gsmoke/gfuel)
Comments
Gases and Liquids
Ethyl alcohol
0.008
C H O
Ethane
0.013
C H
Propane
0.024
C H
Heptane
0.037
C H
Propylene
0.095
C H unsaturated
Acetylene
0.096
C H unsaturated
Styrene
0.177
C H aromatic
Toluene
0.178
C H aromatic
Solids (Polymers)
Teﬂon (PTFE)
0.003
C F halogenated linear structure
Wood (red oak)
0.015
C H O structure
Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
0.022
C H O structure
Polypropylene (PP)
0.059
C H branched structure
Polyethylene (PE)
0.060
C H linear structure
Nylon
0.075
C H O N linear structure
Polyester (PET)
0.089–0.091
C H O aromatic structure
Polycarbonate (PC)
0.112
C H O aromatic structure
Rigid polyurethane (PU) foam
0.104–0.130
C H O N aromatic structure
Flexible polyurethane (PU) foam
0.131–0.227
C H O N aromatic structure
Polystyrene (PS)
0.164
C H aromatic structure
Polyvinylchloride (PVC)
0.172
C H Cl halogenated linear structure
measurements of red oak and PMMA indicated that smoke yield was roughly equivalent
for comparable speciﬁc burning rate [4].
Finally, the ﬁre environment is an important factor. If the air ﬂow is less than what
is required for complete combustion (underventilated ﬁres), the soot yield usually in-
creases.Tewarsonfoundthatsmokegenerationefﬁciencyforsixmaterialsunderventilation-
controlled conditions increased by up to 2.8 times [7]. Measured smoke yields for wood
cribs were found to be an order of magnitude larger under underventilated conditions than
when well ventilated [8]. As mentioned in the previous section, the organic fraction of the
smoke aerosol also increases for underventilated burning. Such smoke aerosol is likely to
be more toxic than that produced during overventilated burning [9].
Fractal Morphology
A key characteristic of the structure of the soot is its fractal character. This is evident in the
power law dependence between the number N of primary spheres in an agglomerate and
the radius of gyration, Rg, which is deﬁned as the 2nd moment of the mass distribution:
N = C(Rg/rp)D f ,
(1)
whererp is the radius of the primary spheres and Df is the fractal dimension. The value of D f
often obtained by image analysis of transmission electron microscopy and light scattering is
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
153
found to be in the range of 1.70–1.85 [10–12]. Sorensen provides a comprehensive review
[13] of measurements of fractal dimension of soot and also of the prefactor C. The fact that
the dimension is less than two means that most of the primary spheres will be seen in a 2-D
projection, and that as the agglomerate size increases the density of the particle decreases.
This second feature leads to a particle settling velocity much smaller than a sphere with the
same radius of gyration. In the 1980’s there was active interest in computer simulation of
the agglomerate growth using molecular dynamics based on the Langevin equation [14] and
by Monte Carlo simulation [15, 16]. These studies involving cluster-cluster agglomeration
resulted in fractal dimensions and optical structure factors, which are related to the Fourier
transform of the cluster pair distribution function, similar to the experimental results. Later
in this paper we will discuss particle growth processes that might affect the agglomerate
size as the smoke moves through a building, as well as the key agglomerate properties for
particle deposition in the respiratory track and for particle losses during transport.
Aerodynamic Diameters and Size Distribution
In a plot of frequency vs. size for smoke aerosols, the distribution is strongly skewed, with
the number of smaller particles much greater than the number of larger ones. A Gaussian
distribution is thus a poor ﬁt to the data. Instead, smoke aerosols are often reasonably well
represented by a log-normal particle size distribution function [17, 18]. In this type of size
distribution, which provides certain mathematical advantages for particle size analysis [19],
the logarithm of the diameter, rather than the diameter itself, satisﬁes a Gaussian number
distribution. If ni is the number of particles with diameter di, the mean geometric diameter
dg is given by:
log dg =
 ni log di
 ni
(2)
and the geometric standard deviation σ g is:
log σg =
 ni(log dg −log di)2
 (ni) −1
1/2
.
(3)
Note that the value of σg is dimensionless; instead of adding or subtracting from the mean
diameter, σg is a multiplicative factor, with one geometric standard deviation representing
a range of particle sizes from (dg/σg) to (dg × σg) that contains 68.3% of all particles [20].
For a perfectly monodisperse distribution, σg = 1.
The average size of particles described by a log-normal size distribution function may be
quantiﬁed by any of a large number of median and weighted mean diameters. The wider the
size distribution, as measured by the geometric standard deviation, the larger the difference
between various measures of average diameter [18]. Since smoke particle size distributions
are typically quite broad, and since different experimental techniques measure different
average diameters, it is critical to select the average diameter measure and measurement
technique that best capture the information relevant to the speciﬁc problem at hand.
For the purpose of assessing health risk due to particle deposition in the respiratory tract,
the most appropriate measure of size is the aerodynamic diameter [17]. This is deﬁned as
154
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
the diameter of a unit density sphere (density = 1 g/cm3) having the same aerodynamic
properties as the particle in question. In other words, the settling velocity of a particle of
any shape or density with a given aerodynamic diameter is equal to that of a spherical water
droplet of the same diameter [17, 18]. Two major mechanisms of particle deposition in the
lungs are via sedimentation and impaction. In both cases the aerodynamic diameter is the
characteristic diameter independent of particle shape.
A cascade impactor [17] is the apparatus most frequently used to measure aerodynamic
diameter. In this device, the aerosol enters a compartment containing a series of collection
platforms known as stages. Inertial forces transport particles in a direction perpendicular
to the streamlines of the velocity ﬁeld in this compartment with a rate dependent on ﬂow
ﬁeld, size, and density, causing particles in successively smaller size ranges to impact on
successive stages. The mass of particulate matter on each stage is plotted on a log scale
as a cumulative distribution function. The mass median aerodynamic diameter is the 50%
point on this curve, and the degree to which the size distribution is described by a log-
normal distribution is established by how closely the curve represents a straight line. If the
distribution is indeed log-normal, the geometric standard deviation is given by the particle
size at the 50% probability point divided by the size at 15.9% probability [17, 18].
Size distribution data, including mass median aerodynamic diameter (MMAD) and
standard deviations, are presented in Table 2 for smoke aerosols produced by ﬂaming
combustion. This data is presented graphically in Figure 1. The reported median aero-
dynamic diameter for smoke aerosols ranges from 0.05 µm for ﬂaming wood to 10 µm
for acetylene. For all fuels except acetylene at high ﬂow rates, the MMAD is less than
3.5 µm, and for a majority of the fuels most of the smoke aerosol is in the sub-micrometer
range. Figure 1 illustrates a trend of aerodynamic diameter increasing as smoke yield
increases.
Figure 1. Smoke yields and mass median aerodynamic diameters for
ﬂaming experiments listed in Table 2.
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
155
TABLE 2
Size Distribution and Yield of Smoke Aerosols Produced During Flaming Combustion
Mass
Geom.
Fuel Size
Smoke Yield
Median Aero.
Stand.
Fuel Type
(m2 unless noted)
(gsmoke/gfuel)
Diam. (µm)
Dev.
Comments
References
Heptane
3.5 mm
NA
1.5
[67]
diam. cotton
wick bundle
Acetylene
67.5 cc/min
0.062–0.088
6.4–9.6
No ﬁt
Gas
[21]
72 cc/min
0.064
5.8
[68]
59.0 cc/min
NA
2.4, 3.8
No ﬁt
[21]
51.0 cc/min
NA
0.72
No ﬁt
43.3 cc/min
0.029–0.042
0.43–0.59
8.5–14
42 cc/min
0.48
[68]
39.5 cc/min
0.008–0.015
0.24–0.46
3.8–20
[21]
Kerosene
0.09
NA
3.2
12–13
Pool ﬁre
[69]
0.36
NA
1.56, 0.57
11, 31
Crude oil
113
0.12
1.0
Pool ﬁre
[6]
1.13
0.080
2.5
3.1
Aged 150 min
[34]
1.1
2.4
Aged 90 min
0.8
2.7
Fresh
0.28
0.085
0.5
6.8
Pool ﬁre
[70]
3.1
0.14
0.3
[6]
Asphalt
2.27
0.14
0.34
8.5
Shingles, 30◦angle
[8]
Douglas ﬁr
0.411 m3
0.035
1.28
3.1
Wood crib, Undervent.
[8]
0.006
0.025
0.43
2.37
Vert., 2.5 W/cm2, 4.8 l/s
[71]
2.23
0.002
0.18
16
Plywood, Vert., Parallel plates
[8]
0.137 m3
0.0009
0.056
46
Wood crib
(Continued on next page. )
156
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
TABLE 2
(Continued ).
Mass
Geom.
Fuel Size
Smoke Yield
Median Aero.
Stand.
Fuel Type
(m2 unless noted)
(gsmoke/gfuel)
Diam. (µm)
Dev.
Comments
References
Birch wood
0.0225
0.0035
0.053
16
Vert., Parallel plates
[72]
Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)
0.006
0.015–0.018
1.1
9
Varied heating rate, airﬂow, %O2
[73]
Polystyrene
0.006
0.041
1.0
4
Varied heating rate, airﬂow, %O2
[73]
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
0.006
0.105–0.185
0.4–3
2.5–7
Varied heating rate, airﬂow, %O2
[73]
Rigid PVC
0.006
0.012
0.44
2.02
Vert., 2.5 W/cm2, 10% O2
[71]
0.012
0.41
2.22
Same w/ air
Polypropylene
0.006
0.042
0.6
11
Varied heating rate, airﬂow, %O2
[73]
Rigid polyurethane foam
0.006
0.091
0.48
1.90
Vert., 2.5 W/cm2, 7.2 l/s
[71]
Flexible polyurethane foam
0.0225
0.034
0.29
16
Horiz.
[72]
High density polyethylene (HDPE)
0.006
0.018–0.023
0.17–0.4
3–6
Varied heating rate, airﬂow
[73]
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
157
Flame-generated smoke agglomerates have a broad range of geometric standard devia-
tions extending from 2 to 16 and even larger. Because of the complex shape of the agglom-
erates formed in the ﬂame, there is a lack of an independent veriﬁcation of the aerodynamic
size distribution of these particles. Cleary [21] found for soot generated by burning acetylene
as a laminar diffusion ﬂame that the aerodynamic diameter was a factor 3 to 5 smaller than
the overall agglomerate size. Cleary also reported that the nature of the impactor collection
substrate affects the measurement of both the aerodynamic median diameter and the range
of the distribution. A smooth surface such as aluminum foil, which was used in most of the
studies reported in Table 2, leads to “particle bounce” and a smaller apparent particle size
compared to the results with a surface coated with a greasy material.
There is a need for a better quantiﬁcation of the aerodynamic properties of smoke ag-
glomerates.
Changes in Smoke Aerosol due to Particle Transport
and Decay
A smoke aerosol is a dynamic entity in terms of its motion, the particle size distribution,
and its chemical content. The gross motion of smoke is determined by the ﬂuid mechanics
of buoyancy-driven ﬂow. To a large extent, the motion of the aerosol mimics that of the gas
ﬂow. However, there are smaller-scale transport processes affecting the concentration and
size distribution of the particles. There are several processes leading to losses in the parti-
cle concentration including particle sedimentation, particle diffusion in the boundary layer
region to the surface, and thermophoretic deposition from a hot smoke near a cooler sur-
face. This section describes each phenomenon, provides the formula deﬁning the transport
property, and gives estimates for the amount of smoke deposited as a result of each process.
The particle size distribution can also change as a result of individual particles coagulating
through collision and adhesion. The resulting increase in average particle size will affect the
aerodynamic diameter and thus the amount deposited in various portions of the respiratory
tract. Other growth processes are important for certain gaseous species. These include
condensational growth and the adsorption of gases on the particle surfaces.
Wall Loss
Should there be signiﬁcant loss of smoke particles at surfaces, the tenability of the ﬁre
environment could improve. There are three processes that can lead to wall losses: ther-
mophoresis, sedimentation and diffusion.
Thermophoresis. Small particles in the gas phase are driven from high to low temperature
regions. This becomes important in ﬁres because the gas temperature as it impinges on the
ceiling can be very high compared to the wall temperature. This is evident in ﬁres by the
black deposit on the ceiling directly above the ﬁre with decreasing evidence for deposition
as one goes out from the center. For particles much smaller than the mean free path of air,
the thermophoretic velocity is independent of particle size and is given by the following
equation [22]:
vT = −0.55η
ρgT
dT
dx ,
(4)
158
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
where dT/dx is the temperature gradient and η and ρg are the viscosity and density of
air respectively. In this limit the thermophoretic velocity in air for a temperature gradient
of 100 K/cm is 0.03 cm/s. Where the particle size is large compared to the mean free
path, the thermophoretic velocity depends on the thermal conductivity of both the gas and
the particle [17]. The velocity is lower in this limit by a factor of 3 to 10 depending on
the thermal conductivity of the particle. In the transition region between the free molec-
ular region and the continuum, the thermophoretic velocity lies between these limiting
values.
Sedimentation. The settling velocity of a particle is computed from the balance between
the gravitational force and the drag force [17] leading to the equation:
vS = ρpd2gC
18η
,
(5)
where d is the particle diameter, ρp is particle density, g is acceleration due to gravity, and
the Cunningham slip correction C accounts for non-continuum effects through the following
expression:
C(d) = 1 + Kn[A1 + A2 exp(−A3/Kn)],
(6)
in which the Knudsen number is the mean free path in air divided by the particle radius
(Kn = 2λ/d), and constants are A1 = 1.142, A2 = 0.558, and A3 = 0.999 [23].
Diffusion. Smoke particles undergo Brownian motion, manifested as random motion of the
aerosol particles as a result of collisions with other particles. The Stokes-Einstein equation
for the diffusion coefﬁcient D is given by [17]
D = kTC
3πηd ,
(7)
where k is Boltzmann’s constant and C is the Cunningham slip correction.
Relative Effects of Transport Processes. Table 3 compares the magnitude of the wall loss
effects for these three transport processes. We consider a uniformly distributed aerosol and
a surface with a sticking boundary condition for the case of diffusion, aerosol settling on a
surface for sedimentation deposition, and a ﬁxed temperature gradient of 100 K/cm for the
case of thermophoresis. In all cases, it is assumed that a particle touching the surface sticks.
It is apparent that for the case of a 100 K/cm temperature gradient, thermophoresis results
in a larger deposition rate than either of the other processes except for sedimentation of the
largest particle sizes.
Factors that impose signiﬁcant limitations to this type of calculation include turbulent
ﬂow effects and soot agglomeration.
The results in Table 3 assume a static ﬂow, while realistic ﬁre-driven ﬂows are buoyant and
turbulent. The general approximation made in realistic calculations of particle deposition
is that the particle concentration in the turbulent ﬂow is uniform until one approaches the
boundary layer, where the concentration decreases linearly to the surface. The diffusion
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
159
TABLE 3
Comparison of Calculated Particle Deposition Modes
Particle Diameter, µm
Thermophoresis
Diffusion
Sedimentation
0.01
2.8 × 106
2.6 × 105
6.7 × 102
0.1
2.0 × 106
2.9 × 104
8.6 × 103
1.0
1.3 × 106
5.9 × 103
3.5 × 105
10.0
7.8 × 105
1.7 × 103
3.1 × 107
Particles sticking to a 1 cm2 surface during a 100 s period for a suspended particle density of 106 particles/cm3.
velocity vD in this case is given by:
vD = D
δ ,
(8)
where δ is the boundary layer thickness. The rate of deposition is much greater for turbulent
buoyant ﬂow compared to diffusion in still air because of the much larger gradient near the
surface for the turbulent ﬂow. The difﬁculty in applying this analysis is in the determination
of the boundary layer thickness. The thermal gradient driving the thermophoretic deposition
will also have a boundary layer thickness that is typically much greater than the particle
concentration boundary layer thickness.
The other serious difﬁculty in making a quantitative analysis for the case of ﬂame-
generated soot arises from its complex particle shape. The particle deposition rates in Table 3
are for spherical particles. There is some evidence that Eq. (4) for the thermophoretic ve-
locity of particles small compared to the mean free path also applies to soot agglomerates.
The qualitative reason for this simpliﬁcation is that both the thermophoretic force acting
on the particle and the drag force are proportional to the number of primary particles in
the agglomerate for fractal dimensions less than 2. The thermophoretic velocity is obtained
by equating these two forces, and the dependence on the number of primary spheres can-
cels out. There is experimental evidence based on opposed ﬂow diffusion ﬂames that is
consistent with this result [24], but quantitative data is lacking for larger post-ﬂame ag-
glomerates. Since the cascade impactor measures the aerodynamic diameter, there is data
on the aerodynamic diameter, such as that in Table 2, from which the settling velocity can be
estimated. It would still be of value to do sedimentation experiments to verify that the ﬂow
through the impactor oriﬁces does not change the structure of the agglomerates. Several
studies [25–27] have been performed on the diffusive mobility of soot agglomerates. Wang
et al. [25] have developed a method for correlating the existing data for a range of Knudsen
numbers, extending from about 20 corresponding to in-ﬂame conditions for small agglom-
erates to about 0.03 for post-ﬂame conditions for large agglomerates. There is still a need
for more quantitative measurements of the diffusion coefﬁcient of well-characterized soot
agglomerates.
Experimental Data. For room ﬁres, there are no quantitative data on the soot deposited
within the enclosure or in the connecting corridor and adjacent rooms. Lacking such infor-
mation, we rely on a variety of studies providing deposition rate information for conditions
160
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
simulating some of the features of smoke deposition in a room ﬁre to provide an estimate
of the magnitude of the action of the smoke deposited. In a study by Dobbins et al. [28],
smoke from burning crude oil was collected in a hood above the ﬁre and drawn into a 1
m3 aging chamber. The initial temperature of the soot was about 100◦C, and it cooled to
within a few degrees of the walls in a few minutes. The mass concentration of the smoke
was monitored over a period of 90 min. There was about a 10% decrease in the aerosol
mass concentration in 15 min and about 25% over a period of 90 min. The dominant particle
deposition mechanisms in this case were sedimentation and diffusion with a small effect
from thermophoresis when the smoke ﬁrst entered the chamber. If the experiment were
scaled up to the size of a realistic enclosure, the deposition via diffusion and sedimentation
would be less because of the smaller surface area per unit volume.
Eventually, theoretical analysis of thermophoretic deposition may provide a simpliﬁca-
tion in predicting deposition for realistic conditions. For a ﬂow of a particle-laden gas toward
a cold isothermal surface, Batchelor and Shen [29] found for a range of ﬂow conditions that
the particle deposition is proportional to the heat ﬂux to the boundary. Rosner et al. [30] have
made a general analysis of the effects of heat transfer on the dynamics and transport of small
particles. The capability to compute the convective heat transport from a buoyant plume to
the ceiling and walls of an enclosure for a 3-dimensional transient boundary layer is just
now being developed by Baum and Rouson [31]. Combining this model with the particle
transport analysis [24, 30] could allow the computation of the thermophoretic deposition
of the smoke to the walls and ceiling at the same time that the convective heat transport is
computed.
A study by Mulholland et al. [4] provides a sense of the magnitude of the thermophoretic
deposition. Smoke generated using the Cone Calorimeter apparatus was drawn through
a 6.3 mm diameter stainless steel tube. The inlet temperature of the smoke, Ti, was in
the range of 450 K to 625 K with an outlet temperature To of 300 K. It was found that
the deposited fraction of smoke, fT , was approximately proportional to the ratio of the
temperature difference to the inlet temperature:
fT = 0.5Ti −To
Ti
.
(9)
Qualitatively, this expression suggests that the particle deposition is proportional to the heat
loss even in the case where the wall temperature is not isothermal.
We can make an upper bound estimate of the thermophoretic deposition from a hot smoke
layer by using Eq. (9) with the assumption that the gas changes temperature solely through
convective heat exchange with the ceiling. We assume that the initial ceiling temperature
is 1300 K and the temperature leaving the building is 300 K. For these assumptions, we
compute fT = 0.38. A more realistic assumption is that only half of the heat transfer is to
the ceiling while the other half is to the entrained ﬂow beneath the ceiling layer. This results
in a value of 0.19 for fT .
The rough estimates given above suggest that about 10% to 30% of the smoke produced
would be deposited within the room containing the ﬁre over a period of 10 min to 30 min.
The value could be less than this if the ﬁre were small or could be larger if the fuel produces
very large soot agglomerates such as is the case with polystyrene. The deposition over a
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
161
long period could be larger if there is very little ﬂow into or out of the enclosure such as
the case with a closed door.
Smoke Coagulation/Agglomeration
Changes in the size of smoke particles affect their movement toward surfaces and their
surface area, which in turn affects the mass of toxicants they can transport. Smoke aerosols
are dynamic with respect to their size distribution function. Smoke particles or droplets
undergoing Brownian motion collide and stick together, leading to the formation of ag-
glomerates. The coagulation equation expresses the rate of change in the concentration for
a given particle size as a second order kinetic process involving gains due to collisions of
two agglomerates to form a larger agglomerate and losses resulting from an agglomerate
with a speciﬁed number of primary spheres colliding with any other agglomerate [32].
Integrating the coagulation equation over all particle sizes assuming a size-independent
coagulation coefﬁcient  leads to an equation for the rate of change of the total number
concentration N:
dN
dt = −N 2.
(10)
The value of the coagulation coefﬁcient was estimated to be 1.0 × 10−9 for smoke from
ﬂaming α-cellulose [33] and 1.5 × 10−9 for smoke produced by the burning of crude oil
[28]. Integrating equation (10), we obtain an expression for the total number concentration
as a function of time based on a homogeneously distributed aerosol with initial total number
concentration N0:
N =
N0
1 + N0t .
(11)
The total number concentration within a ﬂame is on the order of 109 particles/cm3 to
1010 particles/cm3, and the coagulation coefﬁcient is greater than the values given above be-
cause of the increased temperature. Assuming a number concentration of 1010 particles/cm3
and a coagulation coefﬁcient of 5 × 10−9, one ﬁnds based on Eq. (11) that the number con-
centrationhasdecreasedbyafactorof26after0.5sresidencetimeintheﬂame.Thissuggests
that there would be a signiﬁcant amount of agglomeration within the ﬂame. Agglomerates
with as many as 100 spheres have been observed by transmission electron microscopy for
soot sampled thermophoretically within the ﬂame.
The equation above applies to a uniformly distributed smoke aerosol, while smoke pro-
duced by a ﬁre is being continuously diluted by the entrainment of air. There is a lack of
direct experimental data on the effect of the coagulation process on the size distribution of
the smoke as the smoke travels from near the ﬁre to a remote location where it might be
inhaled by someone escaping the ﬁre. If the smoke particle size increases by a large amount
during this trip, this may mean that less of the smoke will penetrate deep into the respiratory
system.
The smoke aging study carried out by Dobbins et al. [28] provides insight regarding
the coagulation process. The smoke from a crude oil pool ﬁre was collected in a hood
about 2 m above the base of the ﬁre and then sampled into a 1 m3 aging chamber. The
162
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
temperature (100◦C) and concentration (100 mg/m3, 6 × 106 particles/cm3) of the smoke
entering the chamber are estimated to be similar to what the smoke properties would be
for the plume as it reaches the ceiling of a room. Over a 90-min period, it was found that
the smoke number concentration decreased by a factor of 24 during which time the mass
concentration decreased by only 25%. From these concentrations and assuming a density
of 2 g/cm3 for soot, we compute that the diameter of average mass increases from 0.25 µm
to 0.72 µm. The aerodynamic mass median diameter increased from 0.8 µm to 1.1 µm
during this same aging period, as shown in Table 2 [34]. The reason for the relatively small
change in the aerodynamic diameter is the broadness of the size distribution, resulting in a
peak in the number distribution about a factor 4 lower than the peak in the mass distribution.
Coagulation of small particles with each other has a large effect on the number concentration
and on the count median size, but coagulation of a small particle or agglomerate with a large
agglomerate has little effect on the mass of the large particle. The example given here is
probably an overestimate for the effect of coagulation on the aerodynamic diameter, since
in a more realistic scenario the smoke would be diluted by entrained air.
The above scenario suggests that there may not be a large change in the mass median
aerodynamic diameter as a result of coagulation for an enclosure ﬁre from the time the
smoke aerosol leaves the room of ﬁre origin until it reaches another location. Thus, if the
initial size distribution indicates a large fraction of respirable particles, this will still be true
for the aged particles some distance from the ﬁre.
The agglomeration process is most effective at reducing the concentration of the smallest
clusters or small spheres by large agglomerates. The particle coagulation coefﬁcient involves
a product of the effective collision cross-section and the particle diffusion coefﬁcient. Both
of these terms are large for collisions between a large particle and a small particle because of
the large collision cross-section of the large agglomerate and the large diffusion coefﬁcient
of the small agglomerate. The implication of this process in removing very small particles
produced by the burning of PTFE will be discussed in a later section.
While the above analysis suggests that coagulation may have only a small effect on the
aerodynamic mass median diameter, this result is based on a limited data set for a single
fuel burning at a ﬁxed heat release rate. It would be valuable to measure the size distribution
of smoke collected at various regions in a multi-room test facility for a range of burning
materials and ﬁre sizes to assess the effect of aging on the size distribution.
Adsorption and Desorption of Toxic Gases
on Smoke Particles
The preceding sections considered the state of knowledge of characteristics of particles
produced in a ﬁre and their transport through the ﬁre environment. In this section we
consider the question of the type and quantity of toxic gases that are likely to be carried
and deposited in the respiratory tract as a result of being adsorbed on the smoke particles or
water droplets. The topic of nanoparticle toxicity is also discussed in the context of smoke.
Gas adsorption relates to the transport of gas to a surface and the attachment to the
surface through physical or chemical interactions. In thermodynamic equilibrium for a
speciﬁed gas adsorbed on a speciﬁed solid at a ﬁxed temperature, the quantity of gas taken
up by the surface is a function of its pressure, n = f (p), or relative pressure, n = f (p/p0),
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
163
where p0 is the saturation vapor pressure of the adsorbate [35]. This relationship, known
as an isotherm, has played a central role in the development of models for adsorption and
the understanding of adsorption mechanisms. Even though a ﬁre environment is not in
equilibrium as a system, it is still a good approximation at the scale of vapor adsorbing on
a particle.
During adsorption, unsaturated forces at the surface of a condensed phase material, the
adsorbent, are at least partially saturated by interactions with gas-phase molecules, the
adsorbate [36]. Two types of adsorption are distinguished by chemical versus physical
bonding.
r Chemisorption refers to the formation of a true chemical bond between the adsorbate
molecule and the surface of the adsorbent. The process is strongly exothermic, releasing
in excess of 0.5 eV per adsorbate molecule, but the energy barrier in breaking exist-
ing chemical bonds within the gas molecule or surface structure or both must ﬁrst be
overcome.
r In physisorption, the interaction between gas molecules and surface is controlled by
weaker electrostatic or van der Waals forces, the same forces as those involved in con-
densation. Since no energy barrier exists, physisorption is reversible and occurs over a
much more rapid time scale than chemisorption.
There are also intermediate classes of bonding including dipole interactions, multi-layer
bonding, and hydrogen bonding.
Desorption, the removal of the gas molecule from the condensed phase smoke particle
surface, is an endothermic process that occurs to some extent for all types of bonding except
chemisorption. The deposition of toxic gases in the respiratory tract after transport by smoke
molecules depends on the bonding of the gas to the particle and on the surface forces exerted
by the respiratory tract tissue on the molecules adsorbed on the smoke particle.
Soot Surface Effects
A good review of the ﬁeld of surface adsorption is provided by Rudzi´nski et al. [37].
Adsorption processes for soot have been the subject of considerable recent research because
of concerns about the effects of man-made particulates on atmospheric chemistry and human
health. Soot particle surfaces are highly complex due to both the wide variety of surface
chemical functionalities and their agglomerate physical structures, which result in large
surface areas. Their strong afﬁnity for gases of many kinds has long been noted, with many
industrial processes employing specially-designed “activated carbons” to remove impurities
and act as reducing agents.
Considerable research has been done on the adsorption properties of carbon blacks and
activated carbon. Care must be taken in projecting those results to adsorption on naturally-
occurring smoke, however, since the engineering of these commercial products has modiﬁed
their chemical and physical properties signiﬁcantly. Both carbon black and activated carbon
have considerably larger surface areas, due to the rapid cooling of soot to produce carbon
black [38] and to the dehydration, carbonization, and activation processes that create the
extensive network of pores in activated carbon [39]. In addition, mineral matter is incorpo-
rated into commercial activated carbons to improve reactivity, and surface properties such
as polarity and pore size are designed to optimize adsorption.
164
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
Particulate characteristics affecting the rate and extent of adsorption include: (1) surface
functional groups and (2) pore structure.
Surface Functional Groups. Carbonaceous aerosols formed by combustion processes vary
widely in their surface properties depending on their origins, thermal history, and the com-
position of the surrounding environment as they form and develop. The range of responses
of soot particles to hydration, for example, is due to differences in chemistry during soot
development [40]. Subsequent surface oxidation of a soot particle during aging increases
the acidity and polarity of the carbonaceous surface, probably due to the formation of car-
boxylic acid groups, making the surface more hydrophilic with time. Physisorbed O2 and
incorporation of trace elements such as sulfur increase soot hydration as well [41].
The chemical content of soot may include elemental carbon (graphite), organic matter
from incompletely-burned fuel, and other elements derived from the burning object such as
nitrogen from polyurethane. Soot consists of randomly oriented graphitic microcrystallites,
or platelets. The most chemically reactive areas are likely to be at the edges of these platelets
[40]. Along the edges, where aliphatic and aromatic chains are exposed, highly reactive sites
may be found where carbon is not exerting its full valency of four bonds and is attached to
other atoms with only three bonds. Only a percentage of the carbonaceous surface is active.
For example, coverage of the surface by oxygen-containing functional groups has been
measured at about 50% for n-hexane soot [41]. While the maximum adsorptive capacity
of a particle is largely determined by its surface area, the surface functionalities, which are
speciﬁc to the type of fuel and combustion history, are important at lower adsorbate partial
pressures [38, 42].
Pore Structure. The adsorption properties of a soot particle are also affected by its porous
structure. Pores are classiﬁed in three basic size ranges. Macropores, with pore width greater
than 50 nm, provide access into the interior of the particle. Mesopores, with pore width
in the range of 2 nm to 50 nm, are of the proper size for the formation of a meniscus of
the liqueﬁed adsorbate, and therefore provide sites where capillary condensation may take
place. Pore sizes larger than about 10 nm are in part a result of primary sphere sizes on the
order of 30 nm to 50 nm for the soot agglomerates. Micropore widths are under 2 nm and
can represent a large fraction of the surface area available for adsorption. This category is
further divided into supermicropores, from 0.7 nm to 2.0 nm, and ultramicropores, less than
0.7 nm in width [40, 43], compared to a molecular dimension of about 0.2 to 0.4 nm.
Information on the characteristics of the porous structure of real materials can be ob-
tained from the shape of the measured gas adsorption isotherm, a plot of adsorbed amount
versus relative pressure. An isotherm generally falls into one of ﬁve classes [35, 44]. For a
nonporous solid, gas adsorption follows a Type II isotherm, in which the quantity adsorbed
increases rapidly with relative pressure. After a monolayer has formed, the slope of the plot
decreases, then gradually increases again as multilayers build up. The presence of microp-
ores in the solid causes increased adsorption at low relative pressures due to the interactions
of these sites followed by a leveling of the plot as adsorption sites ﬁll, resulting in a Type I
isotherm. The presence of mesospheres results in capillary condensation at higher relative
pressures, increasing the adsorption over that of a nonporous surface and causing hysteresis
in adsorption and desorption processes (Types IV and V). A small slope of adsorbed gas vs.
low relative pressure (Types III and V) indicates that the adsorbent-adsorbate interaction is
particularly weak.
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
165
Micropores less than 2 nm were found by Jaroniec and Choma [45] to play an important
role in the surface adsorption of benzene on activated carbon by a factor of 10 or more
times that of water. It is of interest whether soots also display this enhanced adsorption and
whether it also occurs for other organics such as acrolein. The authors also report a high
degree of surface irregularity for the activated carbons with a fractal dimension of about 2.6.
The increase over a spherical surface exponent of 2 is mainly attributed to the micropore
structure.
Adsorbate Gas Effects
The adsorption of a particular gas onto a soot particle is strongly dependent on the properties
of the gas molecules.
Polar Molecules. In the case of polar molecules (e.g., H2O, HF, HCl, HBr, CO, NH3, NO,
and HCHO), atom electronegativity and molecular structure result in a molecular dipole
moment. Such molecules are preferentially adsorbed by sites with unpaired electrons and
by acidic oxide groups. In addition to the weaker van der Waals forces that control the
physisorption of non-polar molecules, polar molecules are likely to be held by hydrogen
bonding [42]. Also, molecules with high dipole moments are preferentially adsorbed over,
and may even displace, those with smaller dipole moments [40, 41]. This factor is of
particular importance in the presence of highly polar water molecules, which is discussed
in more detail below.
Paramagnetic Molecules. Paramagnetic molecules such as O2, NO2, and NO have unpaired
electronswithparallelspins.Sincemanychemicalfunctionalitiesonthesootparticlesurface
also contain unpaired electrons, the attraction of this type of adsorbate molecule to these
sites will be strong. The presence of paramagnetic molecules in the soot environment is
expected to affect the adsorption properties of the soot toward other adsorbates, at least for
those that may be adsorbed by these same sites. Study of the soot adsorption of these gases
in combination with other diamagnetic or paramagnetic gases has provided insights into
the coadsorption of multiple adsorbates [46].
Aromatic Molecules. Aromatic adsorbates, such as benzene and toluene, interact most
strongly with carbonyl groups (carbon-oxygen double bond) on the soot surface [40]. The
afﬁnity of aromatic adsorbates is enhanced by an increase in the number of carbonyl groups,
such as through soot aging, and decreased by acidic surface oxides.
Other Organic Compounds. Non-polar parafﬁnic compounds are hydrophobic in nature and
adsorb preferentially on carbonaceous surfaces free from acidic surface oxides [40]. Such
surfaces preferentially adsorb hydrocarbon vapors relative to water vapor [41]. Unsaturated
organic compounds are preferred to saturated compounds on polar surfaces [39].
Soot Hydration
Hydration of soot particles from adsorption of water molecules already present in the
atmosphere, generated in the ﬁre, or introduced during suppression is a cooperative process.
The more H2O molecules adsorbed, the stronger is the surface attraction toward additional
H2O molecules [38]. If water were adsorbed onto the surface of a soot particle in sufﬁcient
quantities to change the local surface appearance to that of a water droplet, its adsorption
properties with respect to other gases would be quite different.
166
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
Chughtai et al. [38] used the following expression to describe the mass of water ad-
sorbed per gram of soot a as a function of humidity ρ/ρ0 for a variety of soots and carbon
blacks:
log a = log a0 −D[log(ρ0/ρ)]2
(12)
This equation applies for ρ/ρ0 up to about 0.55 and allows determination of the chemisorp-
tion limit, soot surface coverage at that limit, and the onset of multilayer formation. For
the soots tested, chemisorption takes place at low relative humidities up to about 25%. The
corresponding limiting surface coverages range from 6% to 18% for pine needle, n-hexane,
coal, JP-8 (aviation fuel), and diesel fuel soots, reﬂecting the density of surface sites for
irreversible adsorption of H2O (oxygen-containing surface functionalities) for each soot.
For ρ/ρ0 between 25% and 55%, the dominant mechanism is quasi-reversible adsorption
possibly facilitated by hydrogen bonding between surface sites, and for ρ/ρ0 from about
55% to 83%, multi-layer adsorption dominates through the cooperative interaction between
adsorbed and gas phase molecules, again through hydrogen bonding.
Even at 83% relative humidity, the mass of water adsorbed per gram of soot is only in
the range of 0.02 g H2O/g soot to 0.06 g H2O/g soot for natural soots. For liquid water to
play an important role in transporting HCl to the alveolar region of the lungs, the mass of
water must be comparable to the mass of smoke rather than only a small fraction of it.
Under certain conditions the humidity in the ﬁre environment may be quite high, even
saturated. The concentration of water vapor in a ﬁre plume can be as large as a volume
fraction of 0.1. The smoke plume cools as a result of thermal radiation, heat loss to the
ceiling and walls, and entrainment of cool air. If the humidity of the ambient air is near 100%,
which corresponds to a volume fraction of water vapor of about 0.03 at room temperature,
it is possible that a water droplet cloud can occur from the condensation of water vapor on
the soot. A supersaturation of a couple percent is adequate for the condensation to occur.
Mikhailov et al. [47] studied the hygroscopicity of soot aerosol in a chamber at 95% ±
2% relative humidity containing water droplets. While some coagulation of soot and water
droplets occurred, the size distribution of the pure carbon soot aerosol did not change
appreciably on exposure to the water droplets. For soot treated to increase the hydrophilicity
of its surface, however, the mean size decreased by a factor of three. This is attributed to the
compaction of wettable soot particles by capillary forces and subsequent water evaporation.
More work is needed to verify that adsorbed water on soot in real ﬁres does not increase
markedly for saturated conditions.
Transport of Speciﬁc Toxic Gases
Table 4 contains a list of toxic gases that may be transported by smoke particles and some
common materials that produce them during combustion. It also indicates the magnitudes
of inhalation exposures that can cause sublethal effects ranging from signiﬁcant sensory
irritation to lung edema. Higher exposures can be fatal. Missing from Table 4 are CO
and CO2. Although these are signiﬁcant components of the ﬁre gases, it is unlikely that
smoke transport will play a signiﬁcant role compared to the gas phase transport, because
the gas phase concentration can far exceed the mass concentration of the smoke. Also, these
molecules lack the polarity, solubility, and other molecular features needed for adsorption
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
167
TABLE 4
Major Transportable Toxic Gases from Combustion
Sublethal
Toxic Gas
Potential Sources
Effects
Acrolein (CH2 CHCHO)
Cellulosic materials, e.g., wood, cotton, paper; polystyrenes, ABS
A
Toluene diisocyanate (TDI)
Flexible polyurethane foams
A
Formaldehyde (HCHO)
POM, polypropylenes
B
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN)
Nitrogen-containing materials, e.g., wool, silk, PAN, ABS,
C
acrylic ﬁbers, nylons, urea/formaldehyde, melamine,
polyurethanes, polyacrylamide
Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)
Nitrogen-containing materials
B
Hydrogen chloride (HCl)
PVC and chlorinated additives
B, D
Hydrogen ﬂuoride (HF)
PTFE, other ﬂuorinated compounds and additives
B
Hydrogen bromide (HBr)
Brominated compounds and additives
B, D
Sulfur dioxide (SO2)
Sulfur-containing materials, e.g., wool, vulcanized rubbers,
B
poly(phenylene sulﬁde)
Hydrogen sulﬁde (H2S)
Sulfur-containing materials
C
Ammonia (NH3)
Nitrogen-containing materials
C
Styrene (C8H8)
Polystyrenes, ABS
C
Toluene (C7H8)
Polystyrenes, PVC, polyurethane foams
D
Benzene (C6H6)
Polystyrenes, PVC, polyesters, nylons
C
Sublethal effects occurring: A, below 10−5 volume fraction (10 ppm by volume; B, 10−5 to 10−4 volume fraction (tens of ppm
by volume); C, at 10−4 to 10−3 volume fraction (hundreds of ppm by volume); D, at 10−3 to 10−2 volume fraction (thousands of
ppm by volume [74].
of a large mass onto the soot. All of the gases in Table 4 are irritants except HCN, which is
an asphyxiant.
Despite the awareness of the importance of aerosols in affecting smoke toxicity, there
is relatively little quantitative information regarding the transport on particles of sufﬁcient
mass of noxious molecules to cause toxicological effects. The following summarizes the
available information, the best of which is for HCl, with only limited data on HCN and
other toxicants.
Hydrogen Chloride. The transport of HCl has been studied largely because it is a major
pyrolysis and combustion product of polyvinylchloride (PVC), a polymer in widespread
use. Chlorine is also present in a number of ﬂame retardant additives. Further, other halogens
(bromine and ﬂuorine) are present in a number of commercial products, whose combustion
generates the analogous halogen acids, HBr and HF. The transport for HBr should behave
much like HCl; however, since HF is a weak acid due to the strong H-F bond, it is expected
to penetrate farther in the respiratory tract. Still, HCl may be considered a surrogate for any
toxic combustion product with high polarity and high solubility in water.
Wall Losses for HCl.
For soot, the dominant mechanism for particle loss was ther-
mophoresis. For gases such as HCl, the dominant mechanism is diffusion. It is important
to be able to estimate the deposition of HCl to the walls to determine the gas and particle
phase concentration of HCl transported away from the ﬁre. Galloway and Hirschler [48]
168
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
have developed a ﬁve parameter model to predict the adsorption of HCl vapor on a variety
of surfaces. The model includes a bulk gas phase, a boundary layer with a mass transfer
rate of the HCl across the boundary layer, equilibrium between the gas phase concentration
and surface concentration, and ﬁrst-order reaction with the surface. The values of the mass
transfer coefﬁcients for the ceiling and walls were obtained from Cooper’s analysis of the
convective heat transfer to ceilings above enclosure ﬁres together with the Reynolds analogy
between heat and mass transfer [49]. Once the parameters were determined empirically, the
measured and predicted concentrations of HCl concentration for a wide range of surface-to-
volume ratios and different kinds of ﬂow agreed to within about 20% in all cases reported,
and often agreed within the measurement uncertainty. This model was incorporated within
FAST [50] to describe the surface adsorption of HCl for large-scale experiments.
For one set of experiments involving a room and a corridor [51], agreement between ex-
periment and model prediction of the remaining gas-phase HCl concentration was typically
within about 20%. The amount of HCl deposited was about 25% for the 50 kW ﬁre and
about 15% for the 200 kW ﬁre.
A second set of experiments involved a room, a corridor, and a target room where the
concentration was monitored in the second room [52]. The agreement between measurement
and prediction was about 30%. In this case, the deposition was much greater, ranging from
60% to 85%. This is due to the much smaller ﬁre size (10 kW) together with the lower
velocity for a “dead-end” ﬂow into a second room compared to a ﬂow through a corridor.
The full-scale tests demonstrate the sensitivity of the HCl loss to the details of the
conﬁguration and the ﬁre size. It appears that the general approach used by Galloway and
Hirschler could be applied for determining the parameters for other gases and then used to
estimate the losses in full-scale tests. Such a study could incorporate the adsorption model
into a ﬁeld model for the smoke dynamics such as the Fire Dynamics Simulator developed
by McGrattan and Forney [53].
HCl Adsorption on Smoke Particles.
In order to transport HCl into the alveolar regions
of the lungs and deposit it there, the molecule must be loosely bound to a smoke particle.
To determine the partition of HCl gas molecules among those remaining in the gas phase,
those bonded weakly to soot particles through physisorption, and those bonded tightly, or
chemisorbed, Stone et al. [54] analyzed smoke products from combustion of cylinders of
PVC ﬁlm interleaved with sheets of polyethylene (PE). Nearly all chloride (98.4%) was
found in the gas phase, 0.7% was easily desorbed from the soot during a 22 h purge,
and 0.9% was tightly bound to the soot. This corresponds to about 20 mg of physisorbed
HCl per gram of soot for a gas phase HCl volume fraction of 2.7 × 10−3 (2700 ppm by
volume).
ThequantityofphysisorbedHClprovidesanotherdemonstrationoftheafﬁnityofHClgas
for water. A comparison of the measured surface area of soot particles from this experiment
with the 0.15 nm2 covered by a single HCl molecule suggests that HCl coats each particle
to a depth of 1.5 monolayers. This thick coating is best explained by mixed adsorption of
water vapor and HCl together by the soot.
The authors also estimated the amount of HCl that may be deposited within the alveolar
regions of the lungs. Assuming that the density of soot is equivalent to the aerosol in this
experiment at 1.57 g/m3, that 40% of soot particles travel into the alveolar sacs, and that
the breathing rate is 18 L/min over an exposure time of 1 h, the mass of HCl retained in the
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
169
lower lungs would be 13 mg [54]. This is equivalent to inhaling a volume fraction of about
1 × 10−5 HCl into the lungs for one hour and having it all be deposited.
Inhalation of smoke and gases from a ﬁre containing halogenated materials is therefore
expected to result in signiﬁcant irritation to the upper respiratory tract from HCl gas with
transport of a relatively small amount of HCl into the alveolar regions of the lungs by small
soot particles.
HCl Solution in Water Droplets.
Soot is not the only smoke particulate with the potential
to transport HCl deeply into the lungs. Since HCl gas is highly water-soluble, it could also
attach to small water droplets. To determine the fraction of HCl that could be transported by
a water aerosol, Stone [55] set up a ﬂow of HCl gas through a wetted wall tube of dimensions
similar to those of the upper respiratory tract. The effect of a water aerosol stream on the
transport of HCl through the tube was determined by comparing the amount of chloride
deposited in the liquid ﬁlm layer when the aerosol is present to that when it is not. A roughly
even partition of HCl between gas phase and aerosol was found. Stone estimated that water
droplets of 3 µm or less in diameter are nine times as effective as soot in transporting HCl
into the lungs.
This ﬁnding suggests that measurements are needed of the number and size distribution
of water aerosols produced during ﬁres. These are difﬁcult measurements to make, but they
would put the contribution of particle-borne acid gases in perspective.
HCN. Stone and Williams applied the same apparatus used to investigate HCl transport to
consider the possibility that HCN could be transported into the lungs by a water aerosol
[56]. The difference in the amount of HCN measured in the gas phase with and without
the aerosol stream was negligible, indicating that the amount of HCN carried on the water
droplets was under 1%. Water aerosol transport of HCN into the lungs would therefore not
be a primary concern.
Other Toxic Gases. The main focus of most studies of adsorption of gases onto soot par-
ticles is on the effects of atmospheric particulates on human health and the environment.
Much research has been done on gases such as CO, CO2, O2, NH3, NO2, NO, and other
NOx, PAH, and SO2, but the adsorption of other gases of particular concern in ﬁres, such
as acrolein and TDI, has not been studied. Chughtai et al. [46] have studied the adsorption
and reaction of a variety of molecular species found in the atmosphere on the surface of
soot. Their analysis methods include microgravimetry and electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR). Table 5 displays results for some gases of interest during combustion. The adsorption
of SO2 and NO2 for gas concentrations on the order of 0.2 volume percent is approximately
0.01 g of gas per g of soot, indicating that surface adsorption of such gases is negligi-
ble. The ability to distinguish different modes of surface adsorption for NO2 compared to
SO2 from the EPR indicate that the SO2 is primarily physisorbed while NO2 is primarily
chemisorbed.
Toxicity of Ultraﬁne Particles
Ultraﬁne particles are deﬁned as having an aerodynamic equivalent diameter less than 0.1
µm. Ultraﬁne particles with diameters of about 0.03 µm and smaller have been found to
cause an inﬂammatory response in the respiratory system not seen with ﬁne particles about
170
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
TABLE 5
Gas Adsorbate Data: from Chughtai et al. [46]
Polar
Para- or
%
%
Adsorbate
Molecule
Dia-magnetic
Chemisorbed
Physisorbed
Temp.
Comments
NO2
Weak
P
90.3
9.7
22◦C
1010 ppm NO2, 15 mg soot
NO
Weak
P
0
100
NH3
Moderate
D
100
0
17, 34, 57, 68 ppm NH3
w/20 mg soot
34 ppm NH3 w/5, 10, 15, 20
mg soot
0.21 mg NH3/g soot, surface
coverage 1.2
SO2
Moderate
D
17.7
82.3
22 ◦C
1010 ppm SO2, 15 mg soot,
19.0
81.0
34 ◦C
surface coverage 8.58, 6.84,
22.8
77.2
46 ◦C
4.79, 2.25
23.7
76.3
66 ◦C
0.25 µm in diameter, even though the material itself is inherently nontoxic [57]. For particles
withintrinsictoxicity,thecelldamageandreleaseofinﬂammatorymediatorsismuchgreater
for ultraﬁne than for larger particles. Epidemiological studies also indicate a link between
the smallest particulate sizes and adverse effects on cardiopulmonary health [58]. Although
the mechanisms of damage are not yet completely understood, recent research has provided
some insights.
The lung damage mediated by ultraﬁne particles is hypothesized to result from the pen-
etration of these particles into the interstitium in the alveolar regions of the lungs [57]. In
this scenario, particles travel into the alveoli, where they overcome the capability of the
macrophages to clear the lungs by engulﬁng foreign material and ingesting it or transporting
it to the mucociliary escalator for removal. This may occur due to injury to the macrophage
cells themselves, to particle numbers that overload the system [57], or to contamination of
the pulmonary surfactant [59]. Ultraﬁne particles that escape the macrophages are small
enough to pass through the epithelium into the interstitium, where it is hypothesized that
they may act as a chronic irritant to cells or be transported to the lymph nodes. This damage
may occur even for particles that are chemically inert, as has been seen in experiments with
ultraﬁne particles of TiO2 and carbon black [60].
There is one type of combustable material for which the issue of smoke toxicity due
to ultraﬁne particles has been raised. Under experimental conditions, the vapors from
combustion of pure perﬂuoropolymers (PFP), such as polytetraﬂuoroethylene (PTFE) and
tetraﬂuoroethylene-hexaﬂuoropropylene copolymer (FEP) were found to manifest toxic
potency up to a thousand times that of the combustion gases from other materials or PTFE
in other toxicity tests. In a small-scale combustion toxicity test, rats were found to die from
30 min exposure to as little as 0.04 mg of PTFE combustion products per liter [61], as
compared to a 30 min LC50 of 3.8 mg/l for CO gas and 20 mg/l to 50 mg/l for combustion
products from woods and most plastics. Further testing established that the lethality of
these fumes was signiﬁcantly reduced or eliminated by aging, ﬁltering, and co-combustion
products with other materials, and that the high toxic potency could be restored during
the aging process by reheating [9, 62, 63]. These results pointed to ultraﬁne monodisperse
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
171
particulates as a causal factor. Measurements of highly toxic PFP aerosols showed that a
signiﬁcant number of particles are 0.02 µm in diameter or smaller, presumably formed
by condensation of a dilute vapor of relatively low molecular weight ﬂuoropolymer [64].
Experiments with rats show that PTFE fumes containing ultraﬁne particles cause severe
inﬂammatory damage involving pulmonary macrophages and epithelial cells [65]. As the
PFP aerosol cools and ages, however, or in the presence of a dense particle concentration,
thermal coagulation of these primary particles causes the formation of much larger aggre-
gates, and the high toxic potency is eliminated. The complexity of this research area is
further demonstrated by recent results by Johnston et al. [66] that neither PTFE particles
denuded of the gas phase species by generation in argon nor the gas phase species with
particles removed by ﬁltration are highly toxic. This suggests a role for surface chemistry
or adsorbed reactive gases.
Summary
r Most of the initial smoke aerosol is in the size range for effective transport to the alveolar
regions of the respiratory tract. Flaming combustion produces soot agglomerates with
mass median aerodynamic diameters of approximately 0.5 µm.
◦“Ultraﬁne” particles with a diameter of 0.02 µm and less may be much more toxic
than particles with a larger diameter.
r Smoke yield, the mass of smoke generated for a given mass of fuel burned, varies from a
fraction of a percent to 20% of the fuel mass. Flaming combustion of wood is at the low
end of this scale and aromatic fuels are at the high end.
r For the large ﬁres of most consequence, there is little expected change in the nature of
the smoke as one moves further from the ﬁre room.
◦Changes in respirability resulting from changes in aerosol dimension are expected to
be modest. An exception may be the mitigation of the high toxicity of PFP fumes
through aggregation of ultraﬁne particles.
◦The total smoke wall loss from ﬁres in buildings is predicted to be a small fraction of
the total smoke generated.
◦Losses of gas phase toxicants from the breathable atmosphere are also expected to be
relatively modest.
r Surface adsorption of gases on the smoke aerosol surface is likely to be small compared
to the amount of the gas needed for a toxic effect.
r It is possible for toxicologically signiﬁcant quantities of polar gases, such as halogen
acids, to dissolve in water droplets.
Research Needs
The quality of ﬁre hazard and risk assessment with regard to toxicants in smoke would be
improved by:
r Measurement of mass median aerodynamic diameter of soot agglomerates avoiding pos-
sible agglomerate structural changes with impactors.
172
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
r Quantitative information on the adsorption of irritant gases on ﬁre generated soot aerosol;
r Quantitative information on the losses of toxicants to walls for a range of realistic ﬁres.
r Development of model for predicting smoke aerosol and vapor loss to the walls for a ﬁre
in an enclosure.
r Information on the size distribution of water droplets at ﬁres, the conditions under which
they are formed, and the amount of gases adsorbed on the droplets.
r Understanding the role of nanoparticles regarding the toxic effect of PCP fumes.
References
[1] D.A. Purser, “Toxicity Assessment of Combustion Products,” in The SFPE Handbook of Fire
Protection Engineering, P.J. DiNenno et al. Eds., 3rd ed., Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection
Association, 2002, sec. 2, chap. 6.
[2] I.M. Kennedy, “Models of Soot Formation and Oxidation,” Progress in Energy and Combustion
Science, vol. 23, 1997, pp. 95–132.
[3] S. Leonard, G.W. Mulholland, R. Puri, and R.J. Santoro, “Generation of CO and Smoke During
Underventilated Combustion,” Comb. and Flame, vol. 98, 1994, pp. 20–34.
[4] G.W. Mulholland, V. Henzel, and V. Babrauskas, “The Effect of Scale on Smoke Emission,”
in International Association for Fire Safety Science: Fire Safety Science, Proceedings of the
Second International Symposium, Tokyo, Japan, June 13–17, 1988, New York: Hemisphere
Publishing Corp., 1989, pp. 347–357.
[5] A. Tewarson, “Generation of Heat and Chemical Compounds in Fires,” in The SFPE Handbook
of Fire Protection Engineering, P.J. DiNenno et al. Eds., 3rd ed., Quincy, MA: National Fire
Protection Association, 2002, sec. 3, chap. 4.
[6] D.D. Evans, W.D. Walton, H.R. Baum, K.A. Notarianni, J.R. Lawson, H.C. Tang, K.R. Keydel,
R.G. Rehm, D. Madrzykowski, R.H. Zile, H. Koseki, and E.J. Tennyson, “In-Situ Burning of
Oil Spills: Mesoscale Experiments,” in Proceedings of the Fifteenth Arctic and Marine Oil Spill
Program Technical Seminar, Edmonton, Alberta, June 10–12, 1992, Ministry of Supply and
Services Canada Cat. No. En 40-11/5-1992, 1992, pp. 593–657.
[7] A. Tewarson, F.H. Jiang, and T. Morikawa, “Ventilation-Controlled Combustion of Polymers,”
Comb. and Flame, vol. 95, 1993, pp. 151–169.
[8] R.L. Dod, N.J. Brown, F.W. Mowrer, T. Novakov, and R.B. Williamson, “Smoke Emission
Factors from Medium-Scale Fires: Part 2,” Aerosol Science and Technology, vol. 10, no. 1,
1989, pp. 20–27.
[9] D.A. Purser, “Recent Developments in Understanding the Toxicity of PTFE Thermal Decom-
position Products,” Fire and Materials, vol. 16, 1992, pp. 67–75.
[10]
¨U. ¨O. K¨oyl¨u and G.M. Faeth, “Optical Properties of Overﬁre Soot in Buoyant Turbulent Dif-
fusion Flames at Long Residence Times,” Journal of Heat Transfer, vol. 116, 1994, pp. 152–
159.
[11] R.J. Samson, G.W. Mulholland, and J.W. Gentry, “Structural Analysis of Soot Agglomerates,”
Langmuir, vol. 3, 1987, pp. 272–281.
[12] C.M.Sorensen,J.Cai,andN.Lu,“Light-ScatteringMeasurementsofMonomerSize,Monomers
per Aggregate, and Fractal Dimension for Soot Aggregates in Flames,” Applied Optics, vol. 31,
1992, pp. 6547–6557.
[13] C.M. Sorensen, “Light Scattering by Fractal Aggregates: A Review,” Aerosol Science and Tech-
nology, vol. 35, 2001, pp. 648–687.
[14] R.D. Mountain and G.W. Mulholland, “Light Scattering from Simulated Smoke Agglomerates,”
Langmuir, vol. 4, 1988, pp. 1321–1326.
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
173
[15] P. Meakin, “Diffusion Limited Aggregation in Three Dimensions: Results from a New Cluster-
Cluster Aggregation Model,” Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, vol. 102, 1984,
pp. 491–512.
[16] C.M. Sorensen and G.C. Roberts, “The Prefactor of Fractal Aggregates,” Journal of Colloid and
Interface Science, vol. 186, 1997, pp. 447–452.
[17] W.C. Hinds, Aerosol Technology; Properties, Behavior, and Measurement of Airborne Particles,
New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1982.
[18] P.C. Reist, Introduction to Aerosol Science, New York: Macmillan Publishing Co., 1984.
[19] O.G. Raabe, “Particle Size Analysis Utilizing Grouped Data and the Log-Normal Distribution,”
Aerosol Science, vol. 2, 1971, pp. 289–303.
[20] G.W. Mulholland, “Smoke Production and Properties,” in The SFPE Handbook of Fire Pro-
tection Engineering, P.J. DiNenno et al. Eds., 2nd ed., Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection
Association, 1995, sec. 2, chap. 15.
[21] T.G. Cleary, “Measurements of the Size Distribution and Aerodynamic Properties of Soot,”
Ph.D. thesis, College Park, MD: University of Maryland, 1989.
[22] L. Waldmann and K.H. Schmitt, “Thermophoresis and Diffusiophoresis of Aerosols,” in Aerosol
Science, C.N. Davies Ed., New York: Academic Press, 1966, chap. VI.
[23] M.D.AllenandO.G.Raabe,“SlipCorrectionMeasurementsofSphericalSolidAerosolParticles
in an Improved Millikan Apparatus,” Aerosol Science and Technology, vol. 4, no. 3, 1985,
pp. 269–286.
[24] A. Gomez and D.E. Rosner, “Thermophoretic Effects on Particles in Counterﬂow Laminar
Diffusion Flames,” Combustion Science and Technology, vol. 89, 1993, pp. 335–362.
[25] G.M. Wang and C.M. Sorensen, “Diffusion Mobility of Fractal Aggregates over the Entire
Knudsen Number Range,” Physical Review E, vol. 60, 1999, pp. 3036–3044.
[26] S.N. Rogak, R.C. Flagan, and H.V. Nguyen, “The Mobility and Structure of Aerosol Agglom-
erates,” Aerosol Science and Technology, vol. 18, no. 1, 1993, pp. 25–47.
[27] A. Schmidt-Ott, “In Situ Measurement of the Fractal Dimensionality of Ultraﬁne Aerosol Par-
ticles,” Applied Physics Letters, vol. 52, no. 12, 1988, pp. 954–956.
[28] R.A. Dobbins, G.W. Mulholland and N.P. Bryner, “Comparison of a Fractal Smoke Optics
Model with Light Extinction Measurements,” Atmospheric Environment, vol. 28, no. 5, 1994,
pp. 889–897.
[29] G.K. Batchelor and C. Shen, “Thermophoretic Deposition of Particles in Gas Flowing Over
Cold Surfaces,” Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, vol. 107, no. 1, 1985, pp. 21–37.
[30] D.E. Rosner, D.W. Mackowski, M. Tassopoulos, J. Castillo, and P. Garcia-Ybarra, “Effects of
Heat Transfer on the Dynamics and Transport of Small Particles Suspended in Gases,” Industrial
and Engineering Chemistry Research, vol. 31, no. 3, 1992, pp. 760–769.
[31] Personal communication from Howard R. Baum, 2000.
[32] S.K. Friedlander, Smoke, Dust, and Haze, New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1997.
[33] G.W. Mulholland, T.G. Lee, and H.R. Baum, “The Coagulation of Aerosols with Broad Initial
Size Distribution,” Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, vol. 62, no. 3, 1977, pp. 406–420.
[34] D.D. Evans, H.R. Baum, G.W. Mulholland, N.P. Bryner, and G.P. Forney, “Smoke Plumes from
Crude Oil Burns,” in Proceedings of the Twelfth Arctic and Marine Oil Spill Program Technical
Seminar, Calgary, Alberta, June 7–9, 1989, Ministry of Supply and Services Canada Cat. no.
En 40-11/5-1989, 1989, pp. 1–22.
[35] S.J. Gregg and K.S.W. Sing, Adsorption, Surface Area and Porosity, 2nd ed., New York:
Academic Press, 1982.
[36] G.F. Cerefolini and W. Rudzi´nski, “Theoretical Principles of Single- and Mixed-Gas Adsorption
Equilibria on Heterogeneous Solid Surfaces,” in Equilibria and Dynamics of Gas Adsorption on
Heterogeneous Solid Surfaces, W. Rudzi´nski et al., Eds., Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier
Science B.V., 1997, pp. 1–104.
174
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
[37] W. Rudzi´nski, W.A. Steele, and G. Zgrablich (eds.), Equilibria and Dynamics of Gas Adsorption
on Heterogeneous Solid Surfaces, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Science B.V., 1997.
[38] A.R. Chughtai, G.R. Williams, M.M.O. Atteya, N.J. Miller, and D.M. Smith, “Carbonaceous
Particle Hydration,” Atmospheric Environment, vol. 33, no. 17, 1999, pp. 2679–2687.
[39] P.N. Cheremisinoff and A.C. Morresi, “Carbon Adsorption Applications,” in Carbon Adsorption
Handbook,P.N.CheremisinoffandF.Ellerbusch,Eds.,AnnArbor,MI:AnnArborSciencePubl.,
Inc., 1978, pp. 1–53.
[40] J.T. Cookson, Jr., “Adsorption Mechanisms: The Chemistry of Organic Adsorption on Activated
Carbon,” in Carbon Adsorption Handbook, P.N. Cheremisinoff and F. Ellerbusch, Eds., Ann
Arbor, MI: Ann Arbor Science Publ., Inc., 1978, pp. 241–279.
[41] D.J. Lary, D.E. Shallcross, and R. Toumi, “Carbonaceous Aerosols and Their Potential Role in
Atmospheric Chemistry,” Journal of Geophysical Research—Atmospheres, vol. 104, no. D13,
1999, pp. 15,929–15,940.
[42] K.-U. Goss and S.J. Eisenreich, “Sorption of Volatile Organic Compounds to Particles from a
Combustion Source at Different Temperatures and Relative Humidities,” Atmospheric Environ-
ment, vol. 31, no. 17, 1997, pp. 2827–2834.
[43] K. Kaneko, “Heterogeneous Surface Structures of Adsorbents,” in Equilibria and Dynamics of
Gas Adsorption on Heterogeneous Solid Surfaces, W. Rudzi´nski et al., Eds., Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: Elsevier Science B.V., 1997, pp. 679–714.
[44] M. Kruk and M. Jaroniec, “Gas Adsorption Characterization of Ordered Organic-Inorganic
Nanocomposite Materials,” Chemistry of Materials, vol. 13, 2001, pp. 3169–3183.
[45] M. Jaroniec and J. Choma, “Characterization of Geometrical and Energetic Heterogeneities of
Active Carbons by Using Sorption Measurements,” in Equilibria and Dynamics of Gas Adsorp-
tion on Heterogeneous Solid Surfaces, W. Rudzi´nski et al., Eds., Amsterdam, The Netherlands:
Elsevier Science B.V., 1997, pp. 715–744.
[46] A.R. Chughtai, M.M.O. Atteya, J. Kim, B.K. Konowalchuk, and D.M. Smith, “Adsorption and
Adsorbate Interaction at Soot Particle Surfaces,” Carbon, vol. 36, no. 11, 1998, pp. 1573–1589.
[47] E.F.Mikhailov,S.S.Vlasenko,L.Kr¨amer,andR.Niessner,“InteractionofSootAerosolParticles
with Water Droplets: Inﬂuence of Surface Hydrophilicity,” Aerosol Science, vol. 32, 2001,
pp. 697–711.
[48] F.M. Galloway and M.M. Hirschler, “A Model for the Spontaneous Removal of Airborne Hy-
drogen Chloride by Common Surfaces,” Fire Safety Journal, vol. 14, no. 4, 1989, pp. 251–268.
[49] L.Y. Cooper, “Convective Heat Transfer to Ceilings Above Enclosure Fires,” in 19th Symposium
(International) on Combustion, Haifa, Israel, August 8–13, 1982, Philadelphia, PA: Combustion
Institute, 1982, pp. 933–939.
[50] W.W. Jones, “A Model for the Transport of Fire, Smoke and Toxic Gases (FAST),” NBSIR
84-2934, National Bureau of Standards, 1984.
[51] F.M. Galloway and M.M. Hirschler, “The Use of a Model for Hydrogen Chloride Transport and
Decay to Predict Airborne Hydrogen Chloride Concentrations in a Full-Scale Room—Corridor
Scenario,” Fire Safety Journal, vol. 19, no. 1, 1992, pp. 73–101.
[52] F.M. Galloway and M.M. Hirschler, “Transport and Decay of Hydrogen Chloride: Use of a
Model to Predict Hydrogen Chloride Concentrations in Fires Involving a Room—Corridor—
Room Arrangement,” Fire Safety Journal, vol. 16, no. 1, 1990, pp. 33–52.
[53] K.B. McGrattan, H.R. Baum, R.G. Rehm, A. Hamins, and G.P. Forney, “Fire Dynamics
Simulator—Technical Reference Guide,” NISTIR 6467, Gaithersburg, MD: National Institute
of Standards and Technology, 2000.
[54] J.P. Stone, R.N. Hazlett, J.E. Johnson, and H.W. Carhart, “The Transport of Hydrogen Chloride
by Soot from Burning Polyvinyl Chloride,” Journal of Fire and Flammability, vol. 4, no. 1,
1973, pp. 42–51.
Generation and Transport of Smoke Components
175
[55] J.P. Stone, “Transport of Hydrogen Chloride by Water Aerosol in Simulated Fires,”
JFF/Combustion Toxicology, vol. 2, no. 2, 1975, pp. 127–138.
[56] J.P. Stone and F.W. Williams, “Transport of Hydrogen Cyanide by Water Aerosol in a Simulated
Fire Atmosphere,” Journal of Combustion Toxicology, vol. 4, no. 2, 1977, pp. 231–235.
[57] K. Donaldson, X.Y. Li, and W. MacNee, “Ultraﬁne (Nanometre) Particle Mediated Lung Injury,”
Journal of Aerosol Science, vol. 29, nos. 5/6, 1998, pp. 553–560.
[58] C.A. Pope III, “Epidemiology of Fine Particulate Air Pollution and Human Health: Biologic
Mechanisms and Who’s at Risk?” Environmental Health Perspectives, vol. 108, Suppl., 2000,
pp. 713–723.
[59] T.R. Sosnowski, L. Gradon, and A. Podg´orski, “Inﬂuence of Insoluble Aerosol Deposits on the
Surface Activity of the Pulmonary Surfactant: A Possible Mechanism of Alveolar Clearance
Retardation?” Aerosol Science and Technology, vol. 32, no. 1, 2000, pp. 52–60.
[60] A. Churg, B. Gilks, and J. Dai, “Induction of Fibrogenic Mediators by Fine and Ultraﬁne
Titanium Dioxide in Rat Tracheal Explants,” American Journal of Physiology—Lung Cellular
and Molecular Physiology, vol. 277, no. 5, 1999, pp. L975–L982.
[61] B.C. Levin, “The National Bureau of Standards Toxicity Test Method,” Fire Technology,
vol. 21, no. 2, 1985, pp. 134–145.
[62] P.J. Fardell, “UK Studies of the Toxic Potency of PTFE in Fire,” in Proceedings of Interﬂam
’90, 5th International Fire Conference, Canterbury, England, September 3–6, 1990, London,
England: Interscience Communications Ltd., 1990, pp. 257–271.
[63] F.B. Clarke, H. van Kuijk, R. Valentine, G.T. Makovec, W.C. Seidel, B.B. Baker, Jr., D.J.
Kasprzak, J.K. Bonesteel, M. Janssens, and C. Herpol, “The Toxicity of Smoke from Fires
Involving Perﬂuoropolymers: Full-Scale Fire Studies,” Journal of Fire Sciences, vol. 10, 1992,
pp. 488–527.
[64] F.B. Clarke, W.C. Seidel, K.V. Scherer, D. Cline, A. Olson, and J.K. Bonesteel, “Formation,
Identity and Coagulation of Fluoropolymer-Derived Smoke Aerosols. The Relationship Be-
tween Aerosol Behavior and Observed Toxicity of Fluoropolymer Smoke,” in Proceedings of
Interﬂam’90, 5th International Fire Conference, Canterbury, England, September 3–6, 1990,
London, England: Interscience Communications Ltd., 1990, pp. 297–304.
[65] C.J. Johnston, J.N. Finkelstein, R. Gelein, R. Baggs, G. Oberd¨orster, “Characterization of the
Early Pulmonary Inﬂammatory Response Associated with PTFE Fume Exposure,” Toxicology
and Applied Pharmacology, vol. 140, no. 1, 1996, pp. 154–163.
[66] C.J. Johnston, J.N. Finkelstein, P. Mercer, N. Corson, R. Gelein, and G. Oberd¨orster, “Pulmonary
Effects Induced by Ultraﬁne PTFE Particles,” Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology, vol. 168,
2000, pp. 208–215.
[67] T.G. Lee and G.W. Mulholland, “Physical Properties of Smokes Pertinent to Smoke Detector
Technology,” NBSIR 77-1312, Gaithersburg, MD: National Bureau of Standards, 1977.
[68] R.J. Samson, G.W. Mulholland, and J.W. Gentry, “Structural Analysis of Soot Agglomerates,”
Langmuir, vol. 3, no. 2, 1987, pp. 272–281.
[69] R.C. Corlett and G.A. Cruz, “Smoke and Toxic Gas Production in Enclosed Fires,”
JFF/Combustion Toxicology, vol. 2, no. 1, 1975, pp. 8–33.
[70] D. Evans, G. Mulholland, D. Gross, H. Baum, and K. Saito, “Environmental Effects of Oil Spill
Combustion,” NISTIR 88-3822, Gaithersburg, MD: National Bureau of Standards, 1988; also
in Proceedings of the Tenth Arctic and Marine Oil Spill Program Technical Seminar, Edmonton,
Alberta, June 9–11, 1987, Ministry of Supply and Services Canada, Cat. no. En 40-11/5-1987E,
1987, pp. 91–130.
[71] C.P. Bankston, R.A. Cassanova, E.A. Powell, and B.T. Zinn, “Review of Smoke Particulate
Properties Data for Burning Natural and Synthetic Materials,” NBS-GCR 78–147, Gaithersburg,
MD: National Bureau of Standards, 1978.
176
Fire Technology Second Quarter 2004
[72] R.L. Dod, F.W. Mowrer, L.A. Gundel, T. Novakov, and R.B. Williamson, “Size Fractionation
of Black and Organic Particulate Carbon from Fires. Final Report,” LBL-20654, Berkeley, CA:
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, 1985.
[73] E.M. Patterson, R.M. Duckworth, C.M. Wyman, E.A. Powell, and J.W. Gooch, “Measurements
of the Optical Properties of the Smoke Emissions from Plastics, Hydrocarbons, and Other
Urban Fuels for Nuclear Winter Studies,” Atmospheric Environment, vol. 25A, no. 11, 1991,
pp. 2539–2552.
[74] C.J. Hilado, Flammability Handbook for Electrical Insulation, Westport, CN: Technomic Pub-
lishing Co., 1982.
