Department of Veterans Affairs 
VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
Veterans Health Administration 
Transmittal Sheet 
Washington, DC  20420 
June 27, 2006 
 
INPATIENT PHARMACY SERVICES 
 
 
1.  REASON FOR ISSUE.  This Veterans Health Administration (VHA) Handbook provides 
specific direction and procedures related to the appropriate storage, handling, and dispensing of 
medications and supplies for VHA medical center inpatients.  
 
2.  SUMMARY OF MAJOR CHANGES.  This VHA Handbook incorporates updates to the 
previous Manual M-2, Part VII, Chapter 3, new United States Pharmacopeia (USP), Chapter 
<797> requirements for sterile products, new guidelines for automated pharmacy systems, and 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 requirements. 
 
3.  RELATED DIRECTIVE.  VHA Directive 1108 (to be published). 
 
4.  RESPONSIBLE OFFICE.  The Chief Consultant, Pharmacy Benefits Management Strategic 
Health Group (119) is responsible for the contents of this Handbook.  Questions may be 
addressed to (202) 273-8429. 
 
5.  RECISSIONS.  VHA Manual, M-2, Part VII, Chapter 3, Inpatient Services, dated  
July 20, 1995, is rescinded. 
 
6.  RECERTIFICATION.  This VHA Handbook is scheduled for recertification on, or before, 
the last working day of June 2011.   
 
 
 
 
Jonathan B. Perlin, MD, PhD, MSHA, FACP 
 
Under Secretary for Health 
 
DISTRIBUTION: CO: 
E-mailed 6/27/06 
 
FLD: 
VISN, MA, DO, OC, OCRO, and 200 – E-mailed 6/27/06 
 
 
T-1 
June 27, 2006 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
 
 
i 
CONTENTS 
 
INPATIENT PHARMACY SERVICES 
 
PARAGRAPH 
PAGE 
 
1.  Purpose ...................................................................................................................................... 1 
 
2.  Authority ................................................................................................................................... 1 
 
3.  Scope ......................................................................................................................................... 1 
 
4.  Responsibility of the Chief, Pharmacy Service ........................................................................ 1 
 
5.  Medication Management Systems. ........................................................................................... 2 
 
6.  Administration of the Medical Management Systems .............................................................. 2 
 
7.  Automated Pharmacy Systems ................................................................................................. 3 
 
8.  Medication Brought into the Medical Center by Patients ........................................................ 4 
 
9.  Medication Orders .................................................................................................................... 5 
 
10.  Compounded Sterile Preparations .......................................................................................... 6 
 
11.  Radiopharmaceuticals ............................................................................................................. 8 
 
12.  Bulk Compounding and Prepackaging ................................................................................... 8 
 
13.  Pharmacy Staffing During Off-hours ...................................................................................... 9 
 
14.  Drug Recalls ........................................................................................................................... 9 
 
15.  Medication Safety ................................................................................................................. 10 
 
16.  Hand Hygiene ....................................................................................................................... 12 
 
17.  References ............................................................................................................................. 13 
 
 
 
June 27, 2006 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
 
 
 
1 
 
INPATIENT PHARMACY SERVICES 
 
 
1.  PURPOSE  
 
 This Veterans Health Administration’s (VHA) Handbook provides specific direction and 
procedures related to the appropriate handling and dispensing of all medications and medication-
related ancillary products to inpatients.   
 
2.  AUTHORITY 
 
 
The Pharmacy Service must be in compliance with relevant standards of the Joint 
Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations (JCAHO); the practice standards, 
guidelines, and technical bulletins of the American Society of Health System Pharmacists 
(ASHP); and the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) Chapter <797> (entitled “Pharmaceutical 
Compounding – Sterile Preparations); and requirements of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) as they pertain to patient privacy.  The Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) follows all applicable Federal and state laws (where adopted) and regulations 
concerning the dispensing of medications to hospitalized patients. 
 
3.  SCOPE 
 
 
The scope of this Handbook encompasses the medication management systems utilized for 
all inpatients and, where applicable, to other bed services (i.e., same-day-surgery, hemodialysis 
units, etc.) in VA medical facilities. 
 
4.  RESPONSIBILITY OF CHIEF, PHARMACY SERVICE 
 
 
The Chief of Pharmacy Service is responsible for: 
 
 
a.  The provision of a safe medication management system. 
 
 
b.  The utilization of Veterans Health Information Systems and Technology Architecture 
(VistA) applications for all information management. 
 
 
c.  A planned and systematic monitoring program to evaluate, on an annual basis, the quality 
and the appropriateness of pharmacy services in regard to the medication use process.  NOTE:  
This monitoring and evaluation program is an integral part of the overall Performance 
Improvement Program of the medical center. 
 
 
d.  Adequate staffing and space, as defined by existing criteria, provided for inpatient 
medication distribution, and clinical and administrative programs. 
 
 
e.  Clean, orderly, well-lit, free of clutter, distraction, and noise workspaces where 
medications are prepackaged.  
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
June 27, 2006 
 
 
2 
 
 
f.  Ensuring the provision of ongoing educational activities and the competency of all 
pharmacy professional, technical, and ancillary support staff. 
 
 
g.  Disposing of all patient-specific information as soon as possible in a manner to ensure 
privacy. 
 
 
h.  Ensuring that Pharmacy Service provides adequate direction for the receipt, distribution, 
control, accountability, and quality of medications used throughout the medical center. 
 
 
i.  Ensuring that an annual assessment is conducted of the processes used throughout the 
medical center for compounding sterile medications, consistent with established standards and 
best practices. 
 
5.  MEDICATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 
 
 
a.  Unit-Dose Drug Distribution System.  A unit-dose drug distribution system, which 
permits identification of the drug up to the point of administration, must be the primary 
distribution system for all inpatient areas.  Medications dispensed are to be contained in single 
unit packages and dispensed in ready-to-administer forms, when possible.  The exceptions are 
patients authorized for self-medication in select bed sections (see VHA Handbook 1108.3 Self 
Medication Program).  
 
 
b.  Automatic Replenishment Drug Distribution System.  The automatic replenishment 
drug distribution system is one in which medications are prepackaged in an amount, or volume, 
consistent with established par levels.  These medications are dispensed in the most ready-to-
administer forms available from the manufacturer, or if feasible, in unit-doses that have been 
repackaged by the pharmacy or licensed repackager.  
 
6.  ADMINISTRATION OF THE MEDICATION MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 
 
 
The Chief of Pharmacy Services, or designee, must ensure that: 
 
 
a.  All medication orders are reviewed by a licensed pharmacist prior to the administration of 
the drug, except when required for emergent need where all processes are controlled by a 
licensed independent practitioner (LIP).  In those instances where a prior review is not possible, 
the pharmacist must review the order as soon as possible (within 24 hours) in accordance with 
JCAHO requirements. 
 
 
b.  Orders are dispensed for individual patients up to a 24-hour period.  In the case of nursing 
home care units (NHCU), or long-term units, quantities in excess of a 24-hour supply may be 
issued (i.e., 48 hours, 72 hours, or up to 30 days when a cardex system is utilized), if 
appropriately packaged.  Cart-less systems meet the intent of this requirement and are considered 
unit-dose medication supply systems. 
 
 
c.  Standardized administration times and response times for first doses are to be established 
in local medical center policy to ensure the timely administration of medications.  Off-schedule 
June 27, 2006 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
 
 
 
3 
dispensing of "STAT," "NOW," and change orders must be addressed in local medical center 
policy. 
 
 
d.  Bar-coded medications are delivered to the inpatient units at scheduled times and in 
suitable containers that fully identify the patient.  When point-of-care delivery systems (i.e., 
Pyxis, Omnicell, AcuDose, etc.) are used, patient profiling interfaces are required.  
 
 
e.  If local medical center policy permits the use of starter packs or sample medications, these 
items are controlled and dispensed by Pharmacy Service, and meet all applicable medication 
management standards; all prepackaging and repackaging of unit doses must have the 
appropriate packaging records. 
 
 
f.  The VistA Automatic Replenishment system is utilized to record usage data including the 
unit or clinic, the item(s) provided, and the quantities provided as the record of inventory 
accountability.  Pharmacy personnel maintain and utilize these computer records for inventory 
accountability. 
 
 
g.  Stock levels consistent with the needs of the using unit or clinic are established by 
pharmacy, unit and/or clinic personnel.  
 
 
h.  All prepackaged units contain the name of the medication, its formulation (i.e., tablet, 
capsule), strength, lot number, barcode, and expiration date.   
 
 
i.  Appropriate prepackaging records, such as the VA Form 10-1362, Pharmacy Service 
Prepackaging Record or the electronic equivalent, is maintained to ensure complete 
identification in the case of a drug recall or other need for validation.  These records are to be 
retained for a period of three years. 
 
 
j.  Only pharmaceutical items are permitted in medication storage refrigerators.  Medication 
refrigerator temperature monitoring must be handled according to local medical center policy. 
 
 
k.  Commercially available sterile product solutions are bar-coded and available on nursing 
care units as stated in local medical center policy.  Those admixtures requiring storage at reduced 
temperatures are to be placed in the designated medication refrigerators. 
 
 
l.  All approved medication storage areas (including pharmacy storage areas) are inspected 
by Pharmacy personnel every 30 days and in accordance with all applicable standards.  NOTE:  
Storage of medication in areas other than approved locations is not authorized.   
 
7.  AUTOMATED PHARMACY SYSTEMS 
 
 
a.  “Automated Pharmacy Systems” include, but are not limited to, mechanical systems that 
perform operations or activities (other than compounding or administration) relative to the 
storage, packaging, dispensing, or distribution of medications.  These systems may collect, 
control, and maintain all transaction information.   
 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
June 27, 2006 
 
 
4 
 
b.  Automated pharmacy systems must be utilized by Pharmacy Service to improve 
efficiency and accuracy. 
 
 
c.  Pharmacy service must establish written policy and procedures to assess workflow, 
establish training programs, and standardize the use of the equipment to include minimum 
competency requirements for all personnel who have access to, and operate the equipment.  The 
use of automated pharmacy systems requires written policy and procedures in place prior to their 
installation to ensure safety, accuracy, security, and patient confidentiality.  This policy must 
define access limits to the equipment and medications. 
 
 
d.  Automated pharmacy systems must include a standardized Health Level 7 (HL-7) 
interface to the VistA system. 
 
 
e.  Pharmacy service must establish performance requirements for the manufacturer, 
pharmacy service personnel, and the automated pharmacy system during and after 
implementation, including installation, workflow assessment, maintenance, and training. 
 
 
f.  Pharmacy Service must develop a plan for ensuring safe and efficacious use of the 
system(s) with a focus on patient safety.  The plan needs to identify the minimum standards that 
are routinely assessed through an established monitoring and quality assurance program.  The 
plan needs to address high-risk drugs, medication errors, and controlled substance discrepancies.  
  
 
g.  Pharmacy Service must establish a contingency plan in the event of a system, power, or 
process failure.  This plan needs to include who is contacted when the system is down and how 
medications stored in the system are to be secured and/or obtained.  It is recommended that a 
system be established to determine how to recognize when a system failure occurs or is 
imminent; how to compensate to protect patient safety when failures occur; and how failures are 
to be corrected expeditiously. 
 
 
h.  Pharmacy Service must ensure that patient confidentiality is maintained in accordance 
with HIPAA standards.  Safeguards must be established to prevent "outside" access to patient 
data. 
 
 
i.  Pharmacy Service must implement an ongoing quality assurance program that monitors 
performance of the automated pharmacy system.  Standards and required documentation must be 
included in local policies and procedures.  NOTE: See subparagraphs 17b, 17e, and 17g for 
sources of standards. 
 
8.  MEDICATION BROUGHT INTO MEDICAL CENTER BY PATIENTS 
 
 
a.  A process must be established to safely control, or manage, medications brought into the 
medical centers by patients or family members.  Local medical center policy must provide 
guidance as to the disposition, storage, or destruction of these medications. 
 
 
b.  For those facilities that allow patients to bring non-VA medications(s) into the medical 
center, these medications must not be administered unless the treating provider makes the 
June 27, 2006 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
 
 
 
5 
determination that its use is appropriate and required.  The provider must give specific written 
orders to administer the medication(s).  
 
 
c.  If the medication is required and the pharmacy service cannot obtain the medication in a 
timely manner through the regular or everyday procurement methods, a pharmacist must identify 
and validate the medication. 
 
 
d.  If authorized for use, the pharmacy service relabels and reissues the medication in 
accordance with the provider’s instructions, using standard labeling as required for inpatient 
dispensing. 
 
9.  MEDICATION ORDERS   
 
 
a.  Electronic order entry using the Computerized Patient Records System (CPRS) must be 
utilized whenever possible.  If unavailable, a legible copy of all prescriber’s medication orders 
must be directly transmitted to the pharmacy.  These orders must include all information required 
by CPRS. 
 
 
b.  All medication orders must be reevaluated by the provider with any change in patient 
status or relocation to another ward or service.  Blanket reinstatement of previous orders for 
medications discontinued as a result in change of patient status or patient movement is not 
acceptable.  NOTE:  In instances when the same treatment team follows the patient after 
relocation to another ward or unit, local medical center policy may define requirements for stop 
orders or the reinstatement of prior orders for medications. 
 
 
c.  To ensure that only medications needed to treat the patient’s condition are ordered, a 
pharmacist must verify all inpatient orders taking into consideration the current diagnosis and the 
indication for each medication. 
 
 
d.  The medical center must develop a local written policy to establish the required elements 
of a complete medication order. 
 
 
e.  Since the generic name of a medication is preferred, only the generic name is to be 
documented in the medication profile.  Providers are encouraged to use the generic name 
whenever possible during the prescribing process.  Once the order is verified by the pharmacist, 
the generic name must be expressed in the patient’s medication record. 
 
 
f.  The medical center must develop a written policy that identifies the requirements for 
indication-for-use on the medication order. 
 
 
g.  Non-formulary medications prescribed for humanitarian or compassionate use must be 
submitted using the non-formulary request process and receive the Pharmacy and Therapeutics 
Committee approval prior to use.  NOTE:  Additional details are available in Directive 2001-
044 VA National Formulary Process. 
 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
June 27, 2006 
 
 
6 
 
h.  The medical center must develop a written policy that establishes the special precautions 
or procedures for ordering drugs with look-alike or sound-alike names. 
 
 
i.  Pharmacists are to take appropriate actions, as established by medical center policy, for 
medication orders that are incomplete, illegible, or unclear.   
 
 
j.  A written policy must be developed that specifies the required elements of any of the 
following types of orders deemed acceptable for use:  As needed, or pro re nata (PRN), or if 
needed (SOS) orders; standing orders; hold orders; automated stop orders; resume orders (see 
subpar. 9b); titrating orders; taper orders; range orders; compounded medications; medication-
related devices (e.g., nebulizers, catheters, etc.); investigation medications; and medications at 
discharge.   
 
 
k.  The Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee must establish a mechanism for reviewing 
and updating preprinted order sheets, if approved in medical center policy.  Preprinted order 
sheets are only to be considered when prescribing cannot take place utilizing CPRS order entry. 
 
 
l.  A listing of non-approved abbreviations to be avoided during the act of prescribing must 
be established.  This listing must be reviewed by the Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee and 
established in local medical center policy. 
 
 
m.  Allergy and adverse drug reaction (ADR) information must be recorded in the electronic 
medical record.  When the electronic medical record is not available and medications are to be 
administered, documentation must include an allergy or ADR assessment.  Medications are only 
to be dispensed if an allergy assessment has been completed. 
 
 
n.  Pharmacy Service must develop a written facility-approved contingency plan for 
implementation in the event of computer system failures. 
 
 
o.  Where electronic order entry is unavailable, all medications, including parenteral fluids, 
must be ordered on VA Form 10-1158, Doctor's Orders, or other approved form.  The 
medication order must have the medication name, dosage, dosage schedule or desired flow rate, 
duration of therapy, and other information as established by local medical center policy.  
Automatic stop dates are determined by local medical center policy in accordance with JCAHO 
standards.  NOTE:  The notation, keep vein open (KVO) or, to keep open (TKO), must be 
accompanied by the appropriate flow rate determined by the physician. 
 
 
p.  Verbal or telephone orders are discouraged, however, they may be accepted in an 
emergency when urgency is a factor and it clearly is in the best interest of the patient.  The 
pharmacist or nurse receiving the verbal or telephone order must immediately commit it to 
writing and read it back to the provider to verify the accuracy in accordance with local medical 
center policy.  (The verbal order must then be made available electronically according to local 
VistA recovery plans.) 
 
10.  COMPOUNDED STERILE PREPARATIONS 
 
June 27, 2006 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
 
 
 
7 
 
a.  Risk levels of all areas must be assessed where sterile products are prepared.  All 
compounded sterile preparations (CSP) must be accurately identified, measured, diluted, and 
mixed; and be correctly purified, sterilized, packaged, sealed, labeled, stored, dispensed, and 
distributed in a manner consistent with USP Chapter <797> provisions (entitled “Pharmaceutical 
Compounding – Sterile Preparations”) and the ASHP Guidelines found at 
http://www.ashp.org/SterileCpd/797guide.pdf . 
 
 
b.  All hazardous (e.g., cancer chemotherapy) CSPs must be prepared in an appropriate area 
separate from routine sterile product preparation.  Such preparations of potentially hazardous 
medications must be prepared in a hood that meets all USP, ASHP, and National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) requirements. 
 
 
c.  Pharmacy personnel are responsible for the preparation and storage of all CSPs, except in 
emergency circumstances where immediate use is warranted, or when preparation stability is an 
issue. 
 
 
d.  A pharmacist must check and verify each CSP.  The preparation must be discarded if 
there is any evidence of compounding error, contamination, precipitation, or other physical or 
chemical incompatibility.  If the CSP contains a controlled substance, then a record of the 
destruction on VA Form 10-2638, Controlled Substance Administration Record, must be 
completed.  This record must have the signatures of two pharmacists who have witnessed the 
destruction. 
 
 
e.  Manufacturer pre-mixed CSPs that have an outer wrapper must be dispensed for the 
patient with a label (i.e., double stick, flagged label) that can be affixed to the CSP once the outer 
wrapper is removed.  Local medical center policy must state how pre-mixed CSPs are to be 
stored, handled, and labeled. 
 
 
f.  The CSP label is to be affixed directly to the preparation and delivered to the patient care 
area.  When a light protective outer bag is required, the label must be affixed directly to the 
Intraveneneous (IV) product, in addition to the outer bag.  These labels must contain the 
following: 
 
 
(1)  Patient's name; 
 
 
(2)  Identifier number; 
 
 
(3)  Ward and/or medical center locations; 
 
 
(4)  Date prepared; 
 
 
(5)  Identity of each additive, diluents, volume, and flow rate (if specified); 
 
 
(6)  Special instructions (if specified); 
 
 
(7)  Identifier of the preparer and/or checker; 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
June 27, 2006 
 
 
8 
 
 
(8)  Beyond use date; and 
 
 
(9)  Barcode or the equivalent. 
 
NOTE: Outer wraps on pre-mixed products must be removed prior to labeling. 
 
 
g.  All orders and CSPs must be checked by a pharmacist prior to dispensing the product. The 
following are the minimum requirements for the pharmacist check. 
 
 
(1)  The CSP is checked for accuracy and completeness.  Particular attention is to be given to 
patient identity, identity of the drug additive, amounts added as evidenced by the empty vials or 
ampoules used, and solutions used.  The pharmacist then places their unique identifier on the 
product label. 
 
 
(2)  Authorized nursing personnel must check the intravenous (IV) label against the 
physician's order in the virtual due list in Bar Code Medication Administration (BCMA) prior to 
administering the product to a patient.  If there is any discrepancy, the nurse must contact the 
Pharmacy Service for problem resolution or correction. 
 
 
h.  Unless otherwise specified on the IV label, all unused CSPs must be returned to the 
pharmacy within 24 hours of receipt.   
 
 
i.  CSPs containing hazardous ingredients must be disposed of according to medical center 
policy and in accordance with all applicable local, state, and Federal requirements. 
 
11.  RADIOPHARMACEUTICALS 
 
 
a.  A radiopharmaceutical is a radioactive compound used for diagnosis and/or therapy of 
disease.  It is a pharmaceutical and, as such, must conform to all legal, ethical, and professional 
handling requirements of other pharmaceuticals.  As it is a radioactive drug, it must conform to 
all legal and safety requirements established by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).  
 
 
b.  Nuclear Medicine Service is responsible for the storage and compounding of 
radiopharmaceuticals unless a nuclear pharmacist is on staff. 
 
 
c.  Appropriate credentials for all pharmacists involved in the preparation of 
radiopharmaceuticals are required. 
 
 
d.  Quality control must be in accordance with current Federal Regulations concerning 
radiopharmaceuticals and radioactive diagnostic agents.  Records of all compounded and 
dispensed material are to be maintained in accordance with current Federal Regulations. 
 
 
e.  Designated areas that conform to Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 
standards are required for the storage, preparation, and disposal of radiopharmaceuticals.   
 
12.  BULK COMPOUNDING AND PREPACKAGING 
June 27, 2006 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
a.  Quality control of both the production and the product for bulk compounding must be in 
accordance with USP Chapter <795>, Professional Standards and Federal Regulations. 
 
 
b.  Appropriate records must be maintained. 
 
 
(1)  A standardized formula or recipe is to be established using VA Form 10 – 2423, 
Compounding Master Formula card, for the bulk compounded product. 
 
 
(2)  Each manufacturing action of the standardized formula requires the completion of VA 
Form 10-1361, Pharmacy Manufacturing and Assay Record. 
 
 
(3)  A VA Form 10-1362, Pharmacy Service Prepackaging Record, must be completed to 
record all unit packaging of a bulk compounded product. 
 
13.  PHARMACY STAFFING DURING OFF-HOURS 
 
 
a.  When the onsite pharmacy is not open 24 hours-a-day and 7 days-a-week, a LIP must 
review the medication order in the pharmacist’s absence.  This review must be in addition to the 
prescriber’s review, completed before the first dose is administered, and be in accordance with 
Professional Standards.  The pharmacist must conduct a retrospective review of the order as soon 
as possible, or when the pharmacy opens. 
 
 
b.  Access to medications must be limited to those individuals approved by local medical 
center policy.  Open access to the entire pharmacy by a non-pharmacist is not allowed.  Those 
medications deemed to be emergent can be stored in a night cabinet, automated storage and 
distribution device, or a controlled section of the pharmacy.   
 
 
c.  A qualified pharmacist must be available either on-call or at another location to answer 
questions and/or provide access to medications that are not available in the night cabinet, 
automated storage and distribution device, or the controlled section of the pharmacy. 
 
 
d.  The process for providing after-hours medication must be evaluated on an ongoing basis 
to determine what medications are accessed routinely and why.  Changes must be implemented, 
as appropriate, to reduce the number of times that non-pharmacist staffs are required to obtain 
medications from emergency storage. 
 
14.  DRUG RECALLS 
 
 
a.  Upon receipt of a written or verbal notification from the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), a pharmaceutical manufacturer, the Facility Recall Coordinator, or other sources, the 
Chief of Pharmacy Service is responsible for initiating appropriate drug recall procedures. 
 
 
b.  The FDA Recall Guidelines categorizes all recalls into three classes according to the level 
of potential hazard.  Under these guidelines, it is the institution’s duty to take full responsibility 
for product recalls.  These duties include follow-up checks to ensure that recall is started, 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
June 27, 2006 
 
 
10 
initiation of progress reports to FDA regarding the recall, and when required, the institution of 
drug recall from patients.  Drug classifications are available at 
http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/oivd/presentations/041905-bernier_files/textonly/slide16.html
 
 
c.  If a Class I Recall is announced requiring drug recovery from the patient, a computerized 
VistA search is to be used to identify all patients who have recently received the recalled drug. 
 
 
d.  The pharmacy’s Designated Area Specialist is required to notify the Facility Recall 
Coordinator to ensure that the VHA Recall Cascade has been initiated.  
 
 
e.  Depending on the nature of the recall, the Chief of Pharmacy Service, or designee, 
initiates proper documentation for the disposition of the product in accordance with existing 
Federal Supply Service Regulations.  For Class I Recalls, a follow-up report to the Pharmacy 
Benefits Management Service of all findings and actions may be required. 
 
 
f.  Pharmacy personnel must review all storage areas for the recalled drug including 
automated dispensing equipment and approved ward stock locations.  All recalled drugs must be 
sequestered so as to prohibit any further use. 
 
 
g.  Pre-packing records must be checked and all applicable lot numbers must be immediately 
suspended from use.   
 
 
h.  Pharmacy personnel must check all incoming stock to ensure that subsequent receipt of 
the recalled drug is sequestered.  
 
 
i.  The disposition of all drug recalls must be reported to the Pharmacy and Therapeutics 
Committee for review and documentation in their meeting minutes. 
 
15.  MEDICATION SAFETY 
 
 
a.  It is the responsibility of the Chief, Pharmacy Services, in conjunction with the 
appropriate Department or Service representatives, to ensure that the medical center identifies 
drug-related problems and implements measures to improve medication safety.  
 
 
b.  Services or processes that may be utilized to successfully measure or improve medication 
safety are: 
 
 
(1)  Computerized physician order entry; 
 
 
(2)  Bar Code Medication Administration; 
 
 
(3)  Medication error reporting and multidisciplinary analysis; 
 
 
(4)  Adverse drug event reporting and multidisciplinary analysis; 
 
 
(5)  Utilization of Clinical Pharmacy Specialists to provide: 
 
June 27, 2006 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
 
 
 
11 
 
(a)  Pharmacist-based Anticoagulation Clinics; 
 
 
(b)  Pharmacist-based Pharmacotherapy or other specialty clinics; 
 
 
(c)  Multidisciplinary team rounds or meetings; 
 
 
(d)  Concurrent medication review in long-term care facilities; 
 
 
(e)  Pharmacokinetic dosing services; 
 
 
(f)  Antibiotic surveillance services; 
 
 
(g)  Diabetic teaching services; 
 
 
(h)  Pain management services; 
 
 
(i)  Non-formulary and/or restricted drug request review and approval; 
 
 
(j)  Nutritional support services for parenteral nutrition; 
 
 
(k)  Medication use measures; and  
 
 
(l)  Drug information services and newsletters. 
 
 
c.  All necessary actions to reduce the likelihood of intentional or unintentional untoward use 
of selected point-of-care medications must be taken at each facility.  Some of these agents are 
insulin, potassium, epinephrine, digoxin, lidocaine, pancuronium, succinyl choline, atropine, 
verapamil and diazepam.  Appropriate controls over ward-stocked medications must be included 
in local medical center policy.  This policy must include, at a minimum, the prior-listed agents.  
These controls ensure the availability of these and similarly stocked agents, provide for patient 
safety, and facilitate accountability of doses dispensed.  Local policy needs to ensure: 
 
 
(1)  Stock levels are limited to necessary quantities, as determined by actual use; 
 
 
(2)  Stock locations are appropriate and necessary, as determined by actual use; 
 
 
(3)  A process of accountable distribution is in place; 
 
 
(4)  Medications are stored in a secure manner; 
 
 
(5)  Access to medication is limited to those persons who dispense or administer medication; 
 
 
(6)  Administration is documented in the permanent patient and hospital or clinic record; 
 
 
(7)  Means to track return and destruction of outdated and unused products (i.e., a return 
goods contract) is in place; and 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
June 27, 2006 
 
 
12 
 
 
(8)  A means to reconcile distribution with use exists. 
 
 
d.  The local Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committees must review the issue and consider 
point-of-care automated dispensing systems to support any manual accountability systems 
currently in place. 
 
 
e.  The establishment of a multidisciplinary Medication Safety Committee is required for the 
review of both institutional and national reports of adverse drug events and the development of 
strategies for improving the safety of the medication use process.  
 
16.  HAND HYGIENE 
 
 
a.  Hand hygiene must be a consideration in pharmacy practice and management.  Hand 
hygiene and other hygienic and procedural practices associated with preparing sterile 
compounded medications are described in the USP, Chapter <797>.  Hand hygiene practices for 
those who provide direct patient care are described in the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) Guideline for Hand Hygiene in Healthcare Settings.  See Website 
www.cdc.gov/handhygiene/download/hand_hygiene_core.ppt.   
 
 
b.  For pharmacy staff working to prepare non-sterile preparations and packaging drugs for 
distribution to inpatients, the following practices are to be observed: 
 
 
(1)  Pharmacy Staff must wash their hands with antimicrobial soap and water (or alcohol 
based antimicrobial hand rub) in the following situations:  
 
 
(a)  Whenever hands are visibly soiled; 
 
 
(b)  Prior to starting work and prior to returning to work after leaving the pharmacy area; 
 
 
(c)  After all patient contact; 
 
 
(d)  After removal of gloves; 
 
 
(e)  After using the bathroom; and 
 
 
(f)  Before eating.  NOTE:  Eating and drinking must be confined to those areas of the 
pharmacy where it is not prohibited. 
 
 
(2)  Pharmacy Staff must decontaminate their hands with antimicrobial soap and water or 
with an alcohol-based hand rub in the following situations; 
 
 
(a)  After coughing, sneezing, or wiping their nose with a tissue or handkerchief; and 
 
 
(b)  Before donning gloves for any pharmacy work that requires gloving to maintain good 
hygiene practices. 
 
June 27, 2006 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
 
 
 
13 
 
d.  All health care workers who provide direct, hands-on care to patients must not wear 
artificial fingernails or extenders; this includes non-supervisory and supervisory personnel who 
regularly or occasionally provide direct, hands-on care to patients.  In addition, pharmacy staff 
preparing sterile products such as medications that will be administered intravenously must not 
wear artificial fingernails.  
 
 
e.  Management must ensure that disposable gloves, antimicrobial soap, alcohol-based hand 
rub, and hand lotion designed for use in health care settings are all made available in the work 
area of pharmacy staff. 
 
17.  REFERENCES 
 
 
a.  American Society of Health-System Pharmacists.  ASHP Guidelines on the Safe Use of 
Automated Medication Storage and Distribution Devices. American Journal of Health System 
Pharmacists (AM J Health-Syst Pharm) 1998; 55:1403-7. 
 
 
b.  American Society of Health-System Pharmacists.  ASHP Guidelines on the Safe Use of 
Automated Compounding Devices for the Preparation of Parenteral Nutrition Admixtures.  AM J 
Health-Syst Pharm. 2000; 57:1343-8. 
 
 
c.  American Society of Health-System Pharmacists.  ASHP statement on the pharmacist’s 
role with respect to drug delivery systems and administration devices.  American Journal of 
Hospital Pharmacists (AM J Hosp Pharm) 1993; 50:1724-5. 
 
 
d.  American Society of Consultant Pharmacists.  ASCP Policy Statement on Automation in 
Pharmacy.  ASCP July 18, 1997. 
 
 
e.  Felkey BG, Flynn EA, Barker KN et al.  Automation and information technology – 
satisfying pharmacy’s needs while complying with state board regulations.  National Association 
of the Boards of Pharmacy-US. Pharmacy, 1999. 
 
 
f.  Barker KN., Felkey BG, Flynn EA, Carper JL.  White paper on automation in pharmacy.  
Consultant Pharm.  1998;13(3):256-93. 
 
 
g.  Barker KN.  Ensuring safety in the use of automated medication dispensing systems.  Am 
J Health-Syst Pharm.  1995;52:2445-7. 
 
 
h.  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, 1996. 
 
 
i.  National Association of Boards of Pharmacy Model State Pharmacy Act and Model Rules 
of the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy June 2003. 
 
 
j.  Title 38 United States Code (U.S.C.) Part V, Chapter 73, Subchapter 3, Section 7332, 
“Confidentiality of Certain Medical Records.” 
 
 VHA HANDBOOK 1108.06 
June 27, 2006 
 
 
14 
 
k.  Pharmaceutical Compounding - Sterile Preparations, (General Information Chapter 
<797>). In: The United States Pharmacopoeia, 28th rev., and the National Formulary, 23rd ed. 
Rockville, MD: United States Pharmacopoeia Convention; 2005:2461-2477. 
 
 
l.  Pharmaceutical Compounding – Nonsterile Preparations, (General Information Chapter 
<795>).In: The United States Pharmacopoeia, 28th rev., and the National Formulary, 23rd ed. 
Rockville, MD: United States Pharmacopoeia Convention; 2005:2457-2460. 
 
