NOCTURNAL OLFACTORY RESPONSE TO SMOKE ODOR 
EXECUTIVE DEVELOPMENT 
BY: 
J. L. Lynch 
Irondale Fire and Rescue Service 
Irondale, Alabama 
An applied research project submitted to the National Fire Academy 
as part of the Executive Fire Officer Program 
June 1997 
- 115 -
- 116 -
ABSTRACT 
The Irondale Fire and Rescue Service has been teaching its constituents that they could 
not smell during sleep and therefore needed the protection of a smoke detector. A challenge to 
this idea produced the problem of not knowing whether the sense of smell will awaken a human to 
smoke odor stimulus. The only way to answer that challenge was to perform an inquiry 
(research) to affirm or deny the existence of olfactory fire protection during sleep. Through 
descriptive and evaluative research methods, this research project evaluated the sense of smell 
during sleep to learn if a sleeping adult could detect the odors of water, smoke, or citrus. These 
odors were first introduced to conscious subjects to screen them for olfactory response. The 
subjects went to sleep and a compressor pump nebulized three different odorants through an 
elaborate delivery system into the sleep rooms. EKG, EEG, EMG, and EOG biomeasurements 
were monitored for response to the stimuli. The following research questions were identified for 
use: (a) Can a defined group of conscious adults detect the presence of the smell of smoke odor? 
(b) Will the smell of smoke odor awaken a defined group of sleeping adults? and (c) Will the 
smells of water, smoke, or citrus odors arouse a defined group of sleeping adults? The results 
revealed that although a significant number of subjects responded to the stimuli, only two of the 
ten subjects awoke. The integration of an olfactometer into smoke detectors, the use of smell-
sensitive components in building materials and household goods, a greater emphasis on smoke 
detector compliance, and the dissemination of the knowledge gained in this study to convince 
citizens to protect themselves with smoke detectors were all recommended as a result of this 
study. 
- 117 -
- 118 -
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PAGE 
Abstract ................................................................................................................. 
117 
Table of Contents................................................................................................... 
119 
Introduction ........................................................................................................... 
121 
Background and Significance.................................................................................. 
121 
Literature Review................................................................................................... 
125 
Procedures ............................................................................................................. 
129 
Results ................................................................................................................... 
135 
Discussion.............................................................................................................. 
136 
Recommendations .................................................................................................. 
137 
Reference List ........................................................................................................ 
139 
Appendix A (Typical EEG Patterns)....................................................................... 
143 
Appendix B (Various Monitoring Rhythms) ........................................................... 
145 
Appendix C (Letter of Introduction)....................................................................... 
147 
Appendix D (NFA Brochure) ................................................................................. 
149 
Appendix E (Patient Information Sheet) ................................................................. 
151 
Appendix F (Permission to Participate Form) ......................................................... 
153 
Appendix G (Record of Observations).................................................................... 
155 
Appendix H (Photographs of Sleep Study) ............................................................. 
157 
Appendix I (Diagram of Sleep Room) .................................................................... 
159 
Appendix J (Photographs of Odor Delivery System)............................................... 
161 
Appendix K (Results of Odor Tests Table) ............................................................. 
163 
- 119 -
- 120 -
INTRODUCTION 
Smoke detectors provide the most common and inexpensive form of early warning to the 
presence of night fires. Compliance issues that involve detectors continue to be a fire protection 
obstacle. Prior research has shown that apathy is primarily responsible for noncompliance 
(Management Internship Program, 1991). The only way apathy can be addressed is through a 
cognitive learning experience in which a value change has occurred. Because of this, it has always 
been the intent of the Irondale Fire and Rescue Service to effect a change in the attitude of those 
citizens who can be identified as being apathetic toward smoke detector compliance issues. 
For more than 20 years, representatives from the Irondale Fire and Rescue Service have 
delivered lectures and demonstrations to various groups concerning the need for properly 
maintained smoke detectors. A key component of the lecture rationale was the inability of 
humans to smell smoke during sleep. Recently the validity of this point was called into question. 
A major problem developed when a review of the scientific literature failed to affirm this 
hypothesis as fact. No one knows if the sense of smell will awaken a human to smoke odor 
stimuli. Because of the importance of this issue for fire protection, a decision was made to 
investigate olfactory response to smoke odor during sleep. The purpose of this research is to 
affirm or deny the existence of olfactory fire protection during sleep. The descriptive and 
evaluative research methods were chosen to describe the results of this research and compare 
them with the findings reported in similar studies. 
The following research questions will be answered in this study: 
1. 
Can a defined group of conscious adults detect the presence of the smell of smoke 
odor? 
2. 
Will the smell of smoke odor awaken a defined group of sleeping adults? 
3. 
Will the smell of water, smoke, or citrus odors arouse a defined group of sleeping 
adults? 
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE 
Have other fire prevention educators ever dedicated a tremendous amount of energy and 
expense to a noble idea and later realized that they were disseminating misleading information to 
the very individuals they were trying to help? The author of this report realized he was and 
embarked on a personal mission of validation. While the specifics of his error will be exposed 
later, understanding the contributing circumstances of this dilemma is important for the reader of 
this report. Please note that the sources for the presentation are also cited in the reference list of 
this paper. 
- 121 -
The saga began some 22 years ago when a very young and inexperienced firefighter 
addressed a group of citizens concerned about fire prevention. Since then, more than 200 
performances of the "show" have started by citing, "when fire occurs in your home, your chances 
for survival are two times better when smoke detectors are present than when they are not 
(Federal Emergency Management Agency [FEMA], 1993, p. 103)," and this is "without 
specifying complete coverage or operational detectors" (Cote, 1991, p. 10-21). This was 
repeated to target audiences ranging from the very young to the very old because young children 
and the elderly represent the two highest fire death risk groups (FEMA, 1990). 
The firefighter's convictions were founded in the published mandates of notable reports 
addressing our nation's fire problem. Since their introduction in 1955 (Bukowski, 1993), 
residential smoke detectors were immediately embraced by public fire educators who proclaimed 
their promising role in cutting our national fire death rate (National Commission on Fire 
Prevention and Control [NCFPC], 1973). "Their economical designs and fire service support 
have led to their installation in the majority of American homes" (Brachtler & Brennan, 1995, p. 
991). Those early prevention pioneers documented their beliefs at a number of historical 
gatherings. In 1966, a group of dedicated individuals met at the Wingspread Conference Center 
in Racine, Wisconsin, to discuss the fire problems in the U.S. Published under the building's 
namesake, the Wingspread I Conference Report identifies a public complacent about the rising 
trend of both property and life loss. Wingspread II occurred in 1976 and went on to say, "it 
appears that residential smoke detectors hold the most practical potential at this time for saving 
lives" (Rubin, 1996, p. 28). The fire service should take the leadership role in encouraging their 
widespread use and proper maintenance. It was reported that "public fire safety education will 
not achieve its potential until it is organized in a systematic manner based on human behavior" in 
the Wingspread III Conference of 1986 (Rubin, 1996, p.30). Just last year, Wingspread IV 
produced, as an ongoing issue, similar concerns about the subjects of prevention, public 
education, and loss of life (Rubin, 1997). 
The United States government's interest in smoke detectors has been profound since the 
publishing of America Burning. The findings of this 1973 report were considered a pivotal event 
in the nation's fire safety evolution. Along with the recommendation of establishing a permanent 
Federal agency specifically concerned with fire, and a National Fire Academy, the assembled 
caucus of fire safety leaders advised Americans "to protect themselves and their families by 
installing approved early warning fire detectors and alarms in their homes" (NCFPC, 1973, p. 
119). Fourteen years later, the government continued its fire protection agenda by addressing 
smoke detector compliance issues in the report entitled American Burning Revisited. It was 
stated in this report that "maintenance problems are eroding detector effectiveness" (FEMA, 
1990, p. 57). 
Enlightened by the various subject matter expert reports, the firefighter was convinced of 
the accuracy and validity of his lesson plan. An orientation concerning the various types of 
detectors and the common reasons for their failures initiated the instruction. The first reason for 
smoke detector failures involves the error of not using the product as it was designed. Learning 
that photoelectric detectors are superior at sensing large particles while the ionization type 
responds more quickly to fast hot fire partially addressed the "placing the detector in the wrong 
- 122 -
place" reason for failures. The second reason for nonactivation of detectors was cited as failure 
to maintain them by cleaning the sensing passages on a regular basis. "Of course, the biggest 
reason smoke detectors fail is likely due to dead or missing batteries" ("How It Works," 1993, p. 
4). By examining these categories of failure, he hoped to see a changed behavior similar to one 
experienced in Ann Arundel County, Maryland, and Bullhead City, Arizona, that were reported by 
Charles A. Parks (1990) and Rick A. Southey (1995) in their Executive Development projects. In 
Parks' project, a mailer was sent out defining the need for detectors and the common maintenance 
problems. This increased public awareness campaign led to greater smoke detector code 
compliance. In Southey's project, public fire education sessions in the local elementary schools 
led to more than 248 household visits by fire department crews for installation of smoke detectors 
and the replacement of defective batteries. 
Because less than two percent of households have tested their alarms using smoke, testing 
smoke detectors was the next topic discussed (Narriott, 1995). The test button method of 
evaluation does not always signify that a detector will sound in case of a fire (Cooper, 1996). The 
firefighter introduced an aerosol smoke detector testing product to the patrons of his show and 
identified a vendor for this product. A demonstration of the CRC Smoke Test® brand of smoke 
detector testing products was performed according to the instructions contained in the Technical 
Data Sheet produced by CRC (1997). It was noted that smoke detectors, like other electrical 
appliances, wear out and may need to be replaced at a future date (Coughlin, 1994). 
Like detector failures, false smoke alarm activations were identified as problematic. The 
common ionization type of detector is much less expensive than the photoelectric type; however, 
they are prone to false alarms (Cooper, 1996). Cooking odors, steam from bathing, tobacco 
smoke, paint stripping, and the use of coal gas and electric bar fires were all listed as common 
reasons for false activation of the ionization detectors (Narriott, 1995). 
The show ended with a recital of information concerning the use of smoke detectors and a 
question-answer opportunity. Reciting from facts provided by the National Fire Data Center, the 
firefighter announced that "in 1990, detectors were present in only 27 percent of the one- and 
two-family homes that experienced fire deaths and 43 percent of the homes that had fires" 
(FEMA, 1993, p. 103). By 1994, a national average of 88 percent of households reported having 
detectors. Unfortunately, 20 percent of all households have detectors that are nonoperational 
(FEMA, 1997). 
To verify the accuracy of these figures, the 1996 annual report of the Phoenix (Arizona) 
Fire Department was obtained, and it revealed that only 3 of the 13 residents that suffered fire 
deaths had detectors installed in their homes. The 1996 Birmingham (Alabama) Fire and Rescue 
annual report was also consulted, and it listed two of the five residential fire death structures as 
being protected with smoke alarms. Amazingly, the firefighter discovered that 13 of the 18 deaths 
reported in these 2 cities occurred in structures that were not protected by smoke alarms and that 
figure is the exact percentage reported earlier (FEMA, 1997). 
- 123 -
To help target at-risk groups, the firefighter explained that there exists a direct relationship 
between the socioeconomic characteristics of poverty, race, age, and other factors with the risk of 
having a fire (Hall, 1994). Furthermore, he announced that those having fires do not usually 
protect themselves. With adequate numbers of detectors on each floor, 3 minutes of warning was 
provided 89 percent of the time in experiments; whereas the same amount of warning was 
provided in only 35 percent of the experiments when a single detector was placed near the 
bedrooms (Bukowski, 1993). At this point, he used a small interactive presentation board with 
moveable transparent shapes to teach where important safety devices belong in the home. The 
visual aid used was provided as part of the First Alert Junior Fire Inspector Program© (Timmons, 
1996), and it referenced the appropriate standards that established these rules. Installation 
guidelines from the National Fire Protection Standard [NFPA] Number 74 (1996) and the 
American National Standards Institute [ANSI] Standard Number 217 (1993) were abridged for 
the sake of time. (The ANSI standard is also known as the United Laboratories standard.) If 
time permitted, he occasionally used videos to dramatize his message. For children, the he used 
the cartoon video "Donald's Fire Survival Plan" (Disney Educational Productions, 1987), which 
ironically starts with Uncle Donald saying, "Fire can't happen to me." For adult audiences, he used 
the NFPA movie entitled "Fire Power" (MacClary & Estus, 1986), which graphically shows the 
effects of fire. At this point, the show moved into its final act. 
After summarizing the major points of the presentation, the firefighter gave the audience 
an opportunity to ask questions. If no inquiries were generated, a third person's perspective was 
used for addressing commonly asked questions and myths concerning home protection. Referring 
to product information, he explained that ionization detectors are easy to install, easy to test, and 
can be obtained for as little as $ 3.99 per unit (Jameson, 1994). Quoting from the NFPA 
Standard Number 72 (1996, p. 72-28), he advised the audience that "smoke detectors should be 
installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and on 
each additional story of the family living unit, including the basements, and they should be tested 
in an approved manner weekly." To address any health risk concerns, he announced that the 
ANSI Standard No. 217 (1993) requires all ionization detectors to meet safety criteria 10-CFR 
32.27 of the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission and that the radioactive source within 
the detector cannot be harmful to those who handle or use the device (Bare, 1977). A brochure 
entitled Smoke Detectors: Don't Stay Home Without One was distributed for reinforcement of the 
concepts covered in the presentation (FEMA, 1988). 
Just before the curtain fell, he took on a dangerous but commonly held myth concerning 
home fire protection. Unbeknownst to the firefighter, it was at this point that his credibility took 
a nose dive. Armed with the results of a report by the graduate students of the University of 
South California that stated "a popular reason for not choosing to protect one's self from fire is--I 
know about things like fire and I am able to handle this problem myself" (Management Internship 
Program, 1991, p. 1), he mounted his stump for the grand finale. 
Feeling very confident and righteous, the firefighter dramatically exclaimed that because 
humans have no sense of smell while sleeping, our lives are in peril without the protection of a 
smoke detector! He had always considered this line as the "coup de grace" to any holdouts, and 
no challenge was ever raised to this point. Although this concept had been handed down from 
- 124 -
previous public fire education officers who had influenced him, he realized that he had never seen 
a reference attesting to this fact. His naiveté was destroyed in the summer of 1996 when a 
multiple fatality residential fire occurred in south Alabama. Local officials (frustrated with the 
progress of the investigation) turned their attention to a suspected smoke detection device. Since 
the occupants had awakened from their sleep only to perish near a window, they surmised that the 
detector had activated. They were also under the impression that humans could not smell during 
sleep. A quick literature check revealed that there were no supporting data to justify that 
position. It was overwhelming to consider that for over 20 years, he had based his entire life 
safety message on a belief that could not be substantiated. It was at this point that he decided to 
try to reclaim his convincing argument by researching smell during sleep. The Executive Fire 
Officer program of the National Fire Academy facilitated this research by exposing him to the 
systematic problem-solving model covered in Unit 4 (Problem-Solving) of the Executive 
Development class. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
To perform a complete literature review, 25 separate libraries, medical institutions, trade 
organizations, governmental entities, or private companies were queried for information. 
Surprisingly, a very limited amount of research has been documented in this area of behavioral 
science. Any discussion or review of the previous related studies must begin with a short 
introduction about the bodily functions of sleep and smell. 
Sleep 
"Sleep is a normal, easily reversible, recurrent, and spontaneous state of decreased and 
less efficient responsiveness to external stimulations" (Goetz, 1991, p. 298). Research has shown 
that a number of basic states of sleep exist. These states are known as waking, REM (rapid eye 
movement), and NREM (nonrapid eye movement). REM sleep and NREM sleep are controlled 
by a separate groups of brain cells, or neurons, located in the brain stem. The brain stem is the 
hindmost part of the brain that regulates basic survival functions (Pollak, 1996). Specifically, the 
control of NREM sleep likely resides in widely ranging circuits from the area around the solitary 
track in the medulla, through the dorsal raphe, and in the basal forebrain area (Hauri, 1992). The 
responsible groups of brain cells or neurons (all located in the brain stem area) communicate with 
each other with chemical messengers known as serotonin and norepinephrine (Pollak, 1996). 
NREM is further characterized as having four distinctive stages. Humans progress 
through theses stages in a predetermined order or rhythm. Stage 1 of NREM can be thought of 
as the boundary between wakefulness and sleep, while stage 2 is the first (lightest) bonafide level 
of sleep. Stages 3 and 4 represent the most remote levels of responsiveness. A person in stage 4 
sleep is very hard to arouse by any outside stimuli (Coren, 1996). Specific stages of sleep have 
been defined through the "presence of certain electroencephalograms (EEG) patterns that occur 
during specific behavior sleep periods" (Hauri, 1992, p.4) (see Appendix A for typical EEG 
patterns). The typical sleep pattern is represented by the following model: Conscious--NREM 
- 125 -
Stage 1, 2, 3, 4, 3, 2, REM, NREM 2, 3, 4, 3, 2, REM, etc., (Hauri, 1992). The pattern takes 
approximately 70 to 90 minutes to be completed and is repeated throughout the night (Goetz, 
1991). Dreaming occurs in REM, and it is the easiest state of sleep from which to be aroused. 
Most sleep studies are performed in stage 2 (NREM) sleep because we spend 50 percent 
of our time in light sleep. Stage 2 sleep is determined by a mixed voltage pattern of EEG, "Stage 
2 combines spindles and K complexes with a stage 1 background" (Hauri, 1992, p. 4). Sleep 
spindles are naturally occurring and are the brain's electrical sleep signature. They are further 
defined as spindle-shaped bursts of 11.5- to 15.5-Hz waves lasting 0.5 to 1.5 seconds. K-
complexes or sharp biphasic waves lasting 0.5 seconds also occur naturally or can be induced by 
external stimulation. Sleep is normally defined as a state in which there is a limited amount of 
alpha rhythm. Alpha rhythm, or conscious state, is an EEG rhythm with a frequency of 8 to 13 
Hz in human adults. Although this rhythm is blocked when the eyes are open, it is very 
discernible when a person is conscious with their eyes closed. Alpha intrusions are considered 
brief superimpositions of EEG alpha activity (arousals) during a stage of sleep (Pegram, 1997). 
Drug abuse can cause an inordinate amount of sleep spindles or alpha intrusions during NREM 
sleep (Russell Laney, personal communication, May 9, 1996). 
Sleep centers use polysomnography machines to monitor patients during their study. 
These machines typically monitor the electroencephalogram (EEG), eye movements 
(electrooculogram or EOG), muscle activity (electromyogram or EMG), electrocardiogram 
(EKG), nasal and air flow, breathing effort (measured at the chest and abdomen), and oximetry. 
The tracings obtained on a polysomnogram machine represent electrical activity within the 
cerebral cortex (EEG), voltages generated by muscle fibers (EMG), voltage shifts caused by the 
movements of the eyes (EOG), and voltages generated by the heart (EKG) (see Appendix B for 
examples of the various monitoring rhythms). 
There are a number of factors that influence the quality of a person's sleep. Age tends to 
limit the number of hours and, consequently, the completed sleep cycles or patterns humans enjoy. 
The average senior adult sleeps six hours a day while an infant sleeps fourteen (Howard, 1994). 
Many drugs (i.e., phenobarbital, secobarbital, et al.) reduce the amount of time spent in REM 
sleep while other drugs (i.e., barbiturates, amphetamines, and narcotics) have been shown to 
produce withdrawal symptoms characterized by high percentages of REM sleep (Goetz, 1991). 
Periods of alpha intrusions are commonly observed in NREM sleep of drug abusers (Russell 
Laney, personal communication, May 9, 1996). The data clearly supports the position that drugs 
can have a dramatic effect on sleep 
Sleep apnea, night terrors, narcolepsy, hypersomnia, somniloquy (sleep talking), 
somnambulism (sleepwalking), enuresis (bed wetting), bruxism (tooth grinding), and snoring are 
all disorders that affect the quality and patterns of sleep. Considerable attention is given to these 
sleep barriers in current physical as well as mental therapy plans (Goetz, 1991). 
- 126 -
The last sleep factor to address in this study is the circadian rhythm or "body's clock" 
mechanism. Current research suggests that our bodies are regulated by an internal rhythm that 
ebbs and flows on a regular schedule. Charles Czeisler of Harvard University and the Center for 
Circadian and Sleep Disorders at Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston states that "triggered 
by a daily pattern of sunrise and sunset, the clock can be reset by bright lights" (Howard, 1999, p. 
94). If the body's clock gets thrown out of kilter by disease, aging, travel, or some other factor, 
our sleep patterns will be affected. 
Smell 
Smelling, the most primitive sense, is the other bodily function under consideration in this 
project. Smelling (also known as olfaction) is performed by odoriferous molecules attaching to 
receptor sites located in the nasal cavity. Via a chemical interaction within the receptor sites, a 
transfer of odor data is accomplished through olfactory dendrites, specialized nerves, and the 
hypothalamus region of the brain. This is a direct-link, instinctual response system that animals 
depend on for survival (Piotrowski, 1996). Smelling, like sleep, is controlled in the stem or base 
area of the brain (Pollak, 1996). This area is described as a continuation of the spinal cord into 
the brain, and the lowest division of the encephalon. The medulla is truly the connection between 
the brain and the body (Pick & Howden, 1977). 
Smells are classified according to at least the following primary odors: camphor-like, 
musky, floral, ethereal, pungnant, and putrid. Woody, spicy, and burned have also been 
suggested as bonafide odor classifications (Piotrowski, 1996). 
Due to their fragile nature, olfactory nerves regenerate in a 28-day cycle; nevertheless, 
about 1 percent of the sites die each year due to damage and general wear. The loss in the ability 
to smell (anosmia), the state of hyposmia (which is a decrease of the smell function), and 
dysosmia (an altered sense of smell) can all manifest themselves in numerous ways (Piotrowski, 
1996). The common medical problems associated with the loss of smell are smoking habits, nasal 
polyps, allergic rhinitis, viral and bacterial infections, head injuries, and complications of nasal 
surgery and brain tumors (Larson, 1996). There is an overall weakening of our ability to smell as 
we get older (Petraglia, 1991). In 1957, Clalke and Dewhurts reported that 30 percent of a 
defined group of people over the age of 65 was unable to smell propane gas (Stevens, Cain, and 
Weinstein, 1987). 
Historical Review of Olfactory Sleep Studies 
Due to the limited amount of research in this area, the critical findings of others who have 
performed smoke tests on olfactory senses were somewhat hard to obtain. Early in my literature 
review, I talked with two medical professionals who had performed fundamental sleep research. 
When queried about the accumulated body of knowledge in this area, both individuals responded 
in a similar fashion. Dr. Pietro Badia of the Bowling Green State University Department of 
Physiology stated that "very few studies have been performed on olfactory response during sleep" 
- 127 -
(personal communication, May 9, 1997). Dr. Alan Hirsch of the Chicago Smell and Taste 
Research Foundation suggested that "much more effort needs to be committed to this type of 
research" (personal communication, May 9, 1997). As a barometer of the sincerity of their 
responses, I humbly offer their interest in the results of this research. Both individuals requested a 
copy of this report, and it will be forwarded to them at completion. 
Related research was performed by Bryant and Woods during the 1970s. Smoke, along 
with other fire indicators, was introduced to the study groups to learn how people became aware 
of the presence of fire (DiNenno, 1988). Latane and Darley duplicated these efforts by 
introducing smoke into rooms that college students were using for the purpose of completing a 
written questionnaire (DiNenno.) In every one of these studies, the largest reported "means of 
awareness" category was smelt smoke. 
In 1973, Kahreman concluded his report by stating that "what one perceives is largely 
dependent on one's needs, experience, and attitudes as well as on the physical characteristics of 
stimuli (Schwalm, 1991, p. 119)." He declared this after obtaining prior information on 56 
subjects and then exposing them to a set of simulated fire scenarios. To obtain performance data, 
smoke, heat, and sound threats were presented in this experiment. The subjects were evaluated 
by the time they took to detect simulated fire clues, the time they took to respond to those clues, 
and the appropriateness of their responses (Schwalm). 
Canter, Breaux, and Sime suggested that males and females might react differently when 
confronted with smoke or fire itself. Their research suggested conventional sex role behavior 
during fire scenarios and problems associated with nonresponse to stimuli due to negative 
conditioning. Canter, Breaux, and Sime defined conventional sex role behavior for females as 
passive and for males as active (Paulsen, 1984). 
Murray and Campbell (1970) studied 3-day-old infants to determine their olfactory 
response. Though their study suggested the presence of olfactory produced response during 
sleep, it was completed without the benefit of polygraphic recordings and without the 
consideration of infantile startle response. 
Odorous response during sleep was again assessed in a nonpublished proprietary study 
that was commissioned by a large midwestern public utility. Dr. Alan Hirsch exposed a study 
group to the principal odorant in natural gas to determine if it would arouse a sleeping subject. It 
was determined that an extraordinary concentration of the odorant (methyl mercaptan) was 
required to produce the desired result. In fact, Dr. Hirsch stated (personal communication, May 
9, 1997) that "trigeminal or fifth cranial nerve level response was required to awake a person by 
the smell of methyl mercaptan." The trigeminus nerve is the great sensory nerve of the head and 
face and the motor nerve of the muscles of mastication (Pick & Howden, 1997). Dr. Hirsch went 
on to say that "this is equivalent to the odor generated by smelling sauce or a strong onion." From 
a fire protection point of view, the most important conclusion drawn from Dr. Hirsch's research 
was the finding that a response derived from a trigeminal level of methyl mercaptan also 
constitutes an explosive concentration of gas when mixed with an ambient atmosphere. 
- 128 -
Intrinsically, the most valuable work in the area of olfactory responses during sleep was 
published by Micheal J. Kahn and Pietro Badia. In 1983, Kahn studied sleep response to the 
stimulus of a smoke odor, heat sensations, and auditory alarms. Twenty-four college-aged males 
were divided into two groups and exposed to smoke alarm sounds of different intensities. By test 
design, both groups were exposed to heat and smoke odor. Kahn found that sleeping subjects 
exposed to higher signal-to-noise ratios responded more quickly than those who were not. Kahn 
also attempted to address an hypothesis concerning the time required for a sleeping adult to 
respond to a smoke odor. Unfortunately, he reported that "comparing smoke alarm and sleeping 
human proficiency in detecting a smoke presentation could not be tested meaningfully" (Kahn, 
1983, p. 51). He finished his presentation by calling for additional research in this area. In 1991, 
Pietro Badia evaluated the effects of fragrances on the quality of a person's sleep. In his 
discussion, he also indicated the need for additional inquiries into the perplexing topic of odor 
research during sleep. 
In 1989, Pietro Badia, Nancy Wesenstern, William Lammers, Joel Culpepper, and John 
Harsh wrote a report entitled "Responsiveness to Olfactory Stimuli Present in Sleep." The results 
of their study showed that although the overall responsiveness to olfactory stimuli presented in 
sleep was low, statistically significant differences in responsiveness to odors were found for micro 
switch closures, EEG, EMG, and heart rate. The condition of micro switch closure involved the 
physical manipulation of an electrical switch attached to the patient. Ten patients were presented 
a peppermint and a nonfragrance air supply via a modified oxygen mask during sleep. 
Polysonograph machines recorded the biomeasurements listed above to assist the researchers in 
detecting a psychophysiological response. The patients were presented the fragrance multiple 
times during the night so that the related dependent variables were repeatedly assessed during the 
test period. The number of times a patient responded to the condition divided by the 
opportunities a patient had to respond resulted in a percentage of response variable. These 
percentages of responses were determined to be statistically significant (Sign test =p<0.05) for the 
overall group. The methodology for reporting these before and after observation was the 
nonparametric Sign or paired-samples t-test. All fragrance presentations occurred in stage 2 
sleep. Awakenings were noted and evaluated separately to determine their rate of occurrence. 
Sign tests failed to reveal any significant awakening occurrences (Sign test=p>0.05). Although 
multiple trials were presented on each of the 10 patients, only 3 awakenings occurred during the 
study. Discovering the obvious lack of documentation in the area of olfactory sleep research 
challenged my natural drive for closure; however, it was the studies involving Badia that excited 
my aforementioned curiosity in this project and identified a methodology by which smoke odor 
response could be evaluated. 
PROCEDURES 
In order to perform a sleep study, one must be affiliated with a sleep clinic. Therefore, the 
first procedure was to convince one of the local bonafide sleep clinics to assist me in this 
endeavor. A letter of introduction was prepared and hand delivered to the offices of Dr. Vernon 
Pegram (800 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213), who is the director of the Sleep 
Disorder Centers of Alabama [SDCA] (see Appendix C for the letter of introduction). The 
- 129 -
National Fire Academy's brochure explaining the Applied Research Projects was also included to 
validate my request (see Appendix D for the NFA brochure). Within a week of Dr. Pegram's 
receiving the letter, a meeting was scheduled to discuss the possibility of performing the study 
with the medical and business staff. Issues concerning the compatibility of this study with that of 
the primary study were reviewed along with the topics of feasibility and liability. Each issue was 
resolved and a consensus decision was made to go forward with the project. Clearly, the 
significance of this subject matter and the lack of recorded data available influenced the decision 
making process. All parties agreed that the research was needed, important, and achievable 
before a possible commercial application of this concept was mentioned. A leading manufacturer 
of smoke detectors is interested in the results of this study, and there existed a good possibility of 
parlaying this superficial study into a comprehensive commercially funded study. (The SDCA will 
explore this opportunity after this project has been completed.) A timetable for conducting the 
research was agreed upon and implemented. The sleep studies were completed during the month 
of April, 1997. 
The subjects or patients in this research were 10 sleep disorder patients of the SDCA who 
properly responded to the olfactory screen process. This is the defined group for the purposes of 
this study. The number of patients to be involved in the study was predetermined to be the same 
number of subjects (10) used in Badia's, et al., test (1989). Dr. Vernon Pegram of the SDCA 
agreed that this would be an appropriate number to evaluate for similar responses. This is also the 
minimum population versus sample size identified in the research section of the National Fire 
Academy course Executive Development. The demographics of the group were five Caucasian 
females, four Caucasian males, and one African-American male. Their ages ranged from 26 to 61 
years of age. The mean age for the subjects was 45.60 years of age. They were screened before 
participation for medication use, health concerns, allergy problems, and for responsiveness to 
olfactory stimuli in the waking state. The screening process was designed to identify patients with 
health problems that would either place the patient in jeopardy or corrupt the results of the tests. 
Two possible subjects were eliminated prior to the sleep portion of the study. The first subject (a 
Caucasian male) developed an allergic rhinitis condition immediately after the exposure to the 
smoke odor. This condition effectively blocked his nasal passages. This subject later admitted to 
being allergic to products of combustion and the event was short in duration. This reaction can be 
thought of as a form of validation of the authentic nature of the smoke odor selected for use in 
this study. The second subject (a Caucasian female) eliminated from the study failed to detect any 
of the odors in the screening process. This subject was referred to the medical staff for evaluation 
and followup. A total of 12 subjects was evaluated for participation and 2 were eliminated 
All patients participating in this study were undergoing sleep studies for other reasons. 
They were not paid for participating in the smoke odorant research. None of the patients 
reported a history of smoking. All patients appeared conscious and alert prior to the sleep 
studies. No specialized breathing equipment such as CPAP (Continuous Positive Airway 
Pressure) or a nasal cannula was used in this research. Since new patients begin their sleep 
studies on Monday and Wednesday night, a decision was made to use these patients as the 
research database. The sleep studies were performed in six different sessions between the hours 
of midnight and 0200. 
- 130 -
For statistical purposes in answering research question three, a determination was made to 
use three different odorants in this project. In each test, the patient was exposed to all three 
odorants in a predetermined order: first, a neutral odorant, then a smoke odorant, and finally, a 
smoke-eliminating citrus odorant. The first odorant used was a placebo of only drinking water. 
The second odorant administered was a product known as Charsol C-10® that is normally used as 
a food additive and is produced by the Red Arrow Products Co., Inc., of Manitowoc, Wisconsin. 
They produce the majority of smoke flavoring used in barbeque sauces in this country. Charsol 
C-10® smells like smoke generated by a house fire and is described in the product information as 
"an aqueous solution of natural smoke flavors produced by controlled pyrolysis of mixed 
hardwoods" (Red Arrow, 1997, p. 1). From a fire or smoke study perspective, it could be said 
that although there are many causes of smoke odors, the smell of burning wood is considered 
unmistakable. Wood smoke is the most recognizable of all the smoke odors and there is a 
perceived danger associated with its presence (Montagna, 1995). Charsol C-10® was chosen after 
consultations with the technical research staffs of the U. S. Flavors and Fragrances Company 
(Chicago, Illinois) and the International Flavors and Fragrances Company (Union Beach, NJ). 
The final odorant selected for the tests was a product known as Ultra Citrus®. It is produced by 
Medo Industries, Inc., of Tarrytown, New York. This product yields a strong citrus smell that 
effectively eliminates other odors. 
These odorants were chosen for a number of reasons. By using water as a placebo, the 
background effects on the patient can be identified. Since water was administered in the same 
manner as the smoke odorant, stimuli resulting from the process of administration could be 
eliminated. The smoke and citrus odorants were used during the conscious test to establish the 
capability of the subjects to discern the smoke odor. The conscious tests were always performed 
prior to the sleep tests so that the subjects could associate the smoke odorant with the threat from 
fire. The citrus odorant was included for two reasons. Primarily, the role of the citrus product 
was to stimulate the sleeping subjects in a nonthreatening manner. By doing this, a smoke/citrus 
comparative analysis can be performed in the results of the study. The secondary reason for using 
the citrus odorant was to absorb the offensive and lingering smoke odor. Medo states on their 
product's packaging that "Ultra Citrus® chemically absorbs odors." Since this product was 
delivered last, the test rooms were left in a deodorized manner so that the patients could continue 
their primary sleep study. 
Patients arrived at SDCA at 2030 hours to be prepared for the night's monitoring. The 
staff of the SDCA explained the research project and presented the information sheet and 
permission to participate form to the patients for their review and authorization (see Appendix E 
for a sample of the patient information sheet, and Appendix F for a sample of the permission to 
participate form). After the patient signed the release, a series of tests were performed to 
determine if the patient could discern a difference in the odorants while in a conscious state. 
These tests were performed to verify the patient's ability to smell the scents used during the sleep 
study. The conscious or olfactory sensitivity tests were performed by the staff of the SDCA and 
consisted of a spray discharge of 120 micro liters of the three odorants into the ambient 
atmosphere. These tests were performed in rooms other than the sleep rooms. After every 
discharge, the patients were asked to identify the smell of the odorant, and their responses were 
- 131 -
indicated on a record of observation (see Appendix G for the record of observation). All of the 
patients responded in a correct manner when identifying the odorants. 
The patients were then given an orientation to the various monitoring leads that are 
customarily attached to a sleep study patient. Electrodes were secured for recording central 
responses known as brain waves or EEG (C3, C4, O1, O2, left and right mastoids), autonomic 
responses of pulse and heart rhythm (modified Lead II), eye movement or EOG (outer canthi, 
above and below midline), muscle movement or EMG (supra- and submental), oxygen 
concentration, and breathing muscle movement. The respiration belt was secured comfortably 
around the rib cage at or about the 4th or 5th ribs (figure H1 is a picture of a patient with the 
various leads attached). For approximately 30 minutes, the staff of the SDCA calibrated their 
monitoring devices to choreographed movements the patients were required to perform. Once 
the calibration ritual was complete, the patients were allowed to go to sleep. The 
polysomnography machine used during this study was a Nihon Kohden model 125 (figure H2 is a 
picture of a Nihon Kohden model 125 polysomnography machine). Observations of the patients 
during sleep were also of a visual nature. In addition to a regular closed circuit camera, the 
SDCA uses an infrared camera by which behavioral responses of the patient can be recorded in 
total darkness from "lights out" to "lights on." 
The patients slept in electrically shielded and sound-attenuated bedrooms. The rooms that 
the patients sleep in contain approximately 32.5 cubic meters of ambient atmosphere (see 
Appendix I for a diagram of the sleep room). To isolate the patient's environment, the entrance 
doors of the sleep rooms were shut. The HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) 
system discharge and return vents were allowed to work in their proper or designed manner to 
simulate normal air current patterns. None of the ionization smoke detectors activated during the 
sleep tests. 
The patients were told that the same odors presented to them earlier in the night would be 
presented to them during their sleep and that they should let the observers know if they reached a 
state of consciousness. The tests were administered while the patients were in stage 2 sleep and 
this was verified by EEG. 
The odorant delivery system for the sleep study was much different from that of the 
conscious study. The delivery system started with a W. R. Brown Company Speedy® model PC 
201 AC compressor pump rated at .35 CFM at 20 P.S.I. or 9,800 milliliters per minutes (Federal 
Equipment Company, 1991). The compressor discharged into a 6mm (i.d.) plastic Teflon tubing 
that was approximately 256 centimeters long. Connected to the end of the tubing was a standard 
banded screw-type automotive hose clamp and the receiving end of a Hudson R.I. Neb-U-Mist® 
nebulizer (figure J1 is a picture of the setup). The hose clamp ensured that the nebulizer would 
not be blown off during the tests. The Hudson Respiratory Care, Inc., Company of Temecula, 
California, manufactures the Neb-U-Mist® style of nebulizer consisting of two different pieces. 
The first piece is called the nebulizer jar, and it usually contains the fluid or medicine to be used. 
This particular brand of nebulizer has the advantage of having a ribbed inlet stem that ensures a 
tight connection with the compressor hose. In this case, one milliliter of odorant was used in each 
of the three procedures. The odorant was dispensed from standard medical syringes calibrated to 
determine one milliliter of fluid. The second piece of the nebulizer is called the nebulizer cap, and 
- 132 -
its primary function is to catch the atomized odorant and route it into a delivery hose (figure J2 is 
a picture of the nebulizer). The delivery hose used in this study was a piece of 2.5-centimeter 
(minimum i.d.) corrugated plastic polyvinylchoride ventilator hose approximately 2.44 meters in 
length. This hose was routed through the ceiling membrane in the hallway, through the double 
firewall barrier with its insulation, and down through the ceiling membrane into the patient's room. 
Because the hose is flexible and semitranslucent, installation took place in such a way that the fire 
wall integrity was never compromised during the study (figure J3 is a picture of the hose passing 
through ceiling membrane). The delivery hose terminated approximately 218 centimeters away 
from where the nose of a prone positioned patient would be (Figure J4 is a picture of the delivery 
hose terminating in the sleep room). To make sure that sound would not interfere with the study, 
the compressor pump and the nebulizers were operated in a remote location from where the 
patients slept. The complete odor delivery system was tested to determine if the odor of smoke 
and citrus was significant enough to test olfactory senses prior to the beginning of the sleep tests. 
The intent of the odor delivery process was to produce a concentration of odor that is similar to 
that of a fire in an early stage of development. The odor generated in the sleep rooms did this and 
was strong enough to produce a residual odor for several hours after administration. 
Usually around 0030, the SDCA technicians confirmed that the patient had reached stage 
2 sleep and it was time to administer the tests. Each patient was exposed to the discharge 
produced from 90 seconds of pump operation in which 1 milliliter of odorant was completely 
nebulized. As in the previous tests, the order of delivery was predetermined and administered by 
the following schedule: water, smoke odorant, and citrus odorant. A minimum of two minutes of 
time elapsed between each of the tests conducted. Along with the visual observation of the 
patient, the SDCA technicians scanned the 12 electrical tracings on a polysomnogram to 
determine if the patient had been aroused in some way (see Appendix B for a polysomnogram 
tracing example). Along with any significant reactions, the beginning and ending of each of the 
three tests were indicated on each of the patient's hard copy monitor recording, computer file, and 
progress report. The computer software used for scoring (interpreting) sleep studies at the SDCA 
is called Sandman©, and it is produced by the Nellcor Puritan Bennett Corporation of Ottawa, 
Ontario. These three sources of patient data were customarily reviewed and scored by the 
medical staff during the following business day. 
Data Analysis 
The results of this study will be reported statistically from a Cochran's Q test format. The 
results were obtained with the assistance of a computer program known as SPSS for Windows 
6.1©- PC Plus Student Ware. The program is manufactured by the Statistical Package for Social 
Sciences Company located in Chicago, Illinois. This methodology of reporting is a non-
parametric form used to test whether several dichotomous variables have the same proportion of 
responses. Basically, the Cochran's Q test allows a statistical analysis of single response to 
conditions or tests that are of a yes-no nature. In the study performed by Pietro Badia, et al., the 
nonparametric Sign or paired-samples t-test was performed to evaluate the percentages of 
observed responses in a repeated process. Both tests evaluate similar responses as variables to 
the conditions of odors and nonodors presented during sleep. The difference between the tests 
- 133 -
involves the number of opportunities a subject has to respond, the breathing atmosphere the 
patient was exposed to, and the nature of odorants used in the tests. 
In this project, each subject had the opportunity to respond once to each stimulus or 
condition. In Badia's, et al., test, each subject had a number of opportunities to respond and a 
percentage of responses was determined. The method of administration of odorant was through 
ambient air in this research and by modified oxygen masks in Badia's, et al., project. Using the 
ambient environment allows the simulation of a normal air current delivery of odors as opposed to 
the artificial environment of a mask. Using the ambient environment was also necessary due to 
the multiple evaluations being performed during the same sleep period (see limitations). Finally, 
the odorants of water, smoke, and citrus were used in this research, whereas Badia, et al., used 
nonscented air and peppermint. In order to make an inferential comparison between Badia's, et 
al., study and this one, water is considered a comparable condition to Badia's, et al., nonscented 
air while citrus and smoke odors are considered comparable conditions to his fragrance of 
peppermint. The combined variable responses of awakenings and arousals in EEG and EMG are 
inferentially comparable in both studies and thus form the basis for the evaluative portion of this 
research project. 
Assumptions and Limitations 
All subjects participating in this study were patients in a sleep research clinic. They were 
being evaluated for sleep disorders before, during, and after the various odor tests were being 
administered. To some degree, all of the subjects had some type of sleep disorder. However, the 
symptoms of the disorders were monitored and evaluated to prevent the corruption of odor 
research data. 
Another possible limitation of this study involves the design and type of analysis 
performed. Each subject had one opportunity to respond to the three conditions. A better 
analysis might be performed in a repeated measures type of study in which each subject would 
have multiple opportunities to respond to various conditions, and a percentage of responses could 
be determined. This was not possible due to the fact that the primary reason for the sleep study 
was to diagnose sleep disorders. 
Although the odor delivery process (identified under Procedures section) can be 
objectively reproduced, the condition of representing an equivalent amount of odor to that of an 
early stage of fire development was a subjective standard of the researcher. This assumption was 
made after three different staff members sampled the air in the sleep rooms to determine if the 
process produced a satisfactory odor. All three agreed that the concentration of the odor was 
significant and fairly represented the desired effect. The equipment necessary to define the 
concentration of ambient odors in the sleep rooms was not available to give a scientific 
measurement for that condition. Due to odor diffusion, that measurement would vary according 
to the sampling position in the room and the time a sample was taken. If complete saturation of 
the odorant was achieved, that concentration could be determined by dividing the capacity of the 
room (32.5 cubic meters) by the one milliliter of odor concentrate (see Appendix I for the various 
- 134 -
measurements of the sleep room). 
Although smoke odor was assessed during this study, none of the customary fire gases 
were present that contribute to the problem of fire deaths. For example, an ambient exposure 
resulting in a 20 percent blood saturation of carbon monoxide (a common fire gas) will cause 
disorientation. Increase this exposure to a 40 percent saturation and unconsciousness will occur. 
Many of the common fire gases tend to cause loss of smell and the depression of the central 
nervous system. A few of the fire gases will actually cause a sleeping person to fall deeper into 
unconsciousness after a limited exposure (Meidl, 1970). The results of a sleep study performed in 
an environment of fire gases would probably be heavily influenced by this condition. 
The last identified limitation involves the lack of smell deficient subjects being represented 
in the study. All of the subjects in this study were nonsmokers and could easily identify the odors 
in the screening process. There are however, a significant number of people in the general 
population of the United States who have a reduced olfactory ability due to smoking or medical 
reasons (see Smelling under Literature Review). Mr. Bill Orz of the Tobacco Institute in 
Washington, DC, reports that "there are between forty-two and forty-five million adult smokers in 
the United States alone" (personal communication, May 22, 1997). If we add the people who 
have medical problems, the statistics reveal that quite a few people are grouped into the category 
of diminished smellers. The addition of this group into our research process would probably 
influence the results. 
RESULTS 
Appendix K shows the results of the conscious fragrance screening and the proportion of 
responses (variables) to the three conditions of the sleep tests. Each of the 10 sleeping subjects 
were scored on the variables of awakenings, EEG (alpha waves or multiple K complexes), and 
EMG (spontaneously occurring muscle movements) arousals. If one, two, or all three of these 
variables occurred during a condition, the subject was scored 1 for that condition. 
Answers to Research Questions 
Research Question 1.  The first question was whether a defined group of conscious 
adults could detect the presence of smoke odor. The answer is yes; all 10 subjects identified the 
smoke odor. They also gave appropriate responses to the conscious sensitivity tests for citrus and 
water odors. 
Research Question 2.  The second question was if the smell of smoke odor would 
awaken a defined group of sleeping adults. Two of the 10 subjects, or 20 percent, were actually 
aroused out of stage 2 sleep by the stimulus of smoke odor. This was verified by infrared camera 
and EEG. Remember that sustained alpha waves indicate a state of consciousness also. The 
answer to the second question is that smoke odor will awaken 20 percent of a defined group of 
adults. 
- 135 -
Research Question 3.  The third question was if the smell of water, smoke, or citrus 
odors aroused a defined group of sleeping adults. All 10 subjects were monitored by infrared 
camera, EEG, and EMG for variables or responses to the three conditions of water, smoke, and 
citrus. Cochran's Q test was used a nonparametric alternative to test overall differences in the 
proportion of responses among the three conditions. The study resulted in a Cochran's Q =9.00, 
p=.011. These figures indicated a significant difference among the test conditions. 
Next, I followed up with two planned subanalyses performed to determine differences in 
the proportion of variables or responses to two of the conditions of the study. The degree of 
freedom rule allows only two subanalyses of the three conditions. The water-smoke and the 
citrus-smoke comparisons were chosen for subanalysis. Proportional results were established by 
reporting the number of variables occurring to each condition over the total number of subjects 
participating. 
The water-smoke subanalysis to determine differences in the proportions of responses or 
variables to these two conditions resulted in a Cochran's Q = 6.00, p=.0143. The proportions 
(with standard deviations in parentheses) were as follows: smoke proportion = 6/10 (.51640) and 
water proportion = .00 (.00). These figures indicate a significant difference among the test 
subjects. 
The citrus-smoke subanalysis to determine differences in the proportions of responses or 
variables to these two conditions resulted in a Cochran's Q = 3.00, p=.0833. The proportions 
(with standard deviations in parentheses) were as follows: citrus proportion = 3/10 (.48305) and 
smoke proportion = 6/10 (.51640). These figures do not indicate a significant difference among 
the test subjects. The third question has two answers: no, the smell of water will not awaken or 
arouse a defined group of sleep adults, and yes, the smell of smoke and citrus will cause arousals 
in the same group. These arousals occur in different proportions when responding to different 
conditions 
DISCUSSION 
The following can be said regarding olfactory sensitivity in sleep. There were significantly 
more EEG and EMG responses to fragrances than to nonfragrances. The present data not only 
indicate that sensitivity to olfactory stimuli presented in sleep can be assessed using central (EEG) 
and autonomic (EKG and EMG) measures, but it also yields the finding that those measures 
varied markedly in the various subjects. 
The results of this research project can be inferentially compared with the study made by 
Pietro Badia, et al., discussed in the literature review. The overall results of Badia's, et al., study 
indicated a significant difference in the percentages of responses (variables) the subjects made to 
the various conditions of the study. Likewise, the overall results of this study indicate a 
significant difference among the subjects in their responses (variables) to similar conditions. The 
implications of these comparisons support a hypothesis that adults do respond to olfactory stimuli 
- 136 -
during sleep. 
The subanalysis performed within the set of conditions of this study reveals some 
interesting data. When the condition of smoke was compared with the condition of water, the 
subjects responded in a significantly different proportion; however, when the condition of smoke 
was compared with the condition of citrus, a less than significant proportion of responses 
occurred. Considering this, it may be that it is just the presence of some type of fragrance versus 
no fragrance (i.e., water) that is important for subject response in sleep. 
Unexpectedly, the data reflect that awakenings in this research occurred only to the 
condition of a smoke odor. Perhaps, a smoke odor is more meaningful than the citrus odor due to 
an association the subject(s) may have with this condition and danger. 
By far, the most relevant to life safety finding derived from this research is the affirmation 
of Badia's, et al., observation that few people are actually awakened from a state of sleep by an 
odor stimulus. In this study, 2 of the 10 subjects (20 percent) awoke to the conditions of water, 
smoke, or citrus odors. In Badia's, et al., research, 3 of the 10 subjects (30 percent) awoke to the 
repeated conditions of air or peppermint odors. Statistically, these figures represent a significant 
difference among the test conditions. Very few of either study's sleeping subjects responded to 
any of the conditions mentioned by actually waking up. The implications of these findings are 
astonishing. The fire protection afforded by residential smoke detectors is the only prudent 
manner to protect oneself from the threat of fires occurring during sleep. 
The results of this research project allow the Irondale Fire and Rescue Service to reclaim 
(with credibility) the convincing argument of smoke failing to awaken 80 percent of the 
participants of this study as the reason for having smoke detectors. 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
Recommendation 1.  Fire prevention programs should incorporate the rationale that 
olfactory functions cannot be relied on to provide protection from fire occurring while we sleep. 
Manufacturers of smoke detectors, trade associations and organizations, teaching institutions, and 
government bodies should embrace these findings and incorporate them into print as well as 
audiovisual media. 
Recommendation 2.  Since olfactory functions cannot be relied on to provide protection 
during sleep, manufacturers of smoke detectors should begin a program of research and 
development to emulate our conscious olfactory ability. Olfactometers are currently being used 
for other purposes and could be incorporated into the design of smoke detectors. This would 
provide a reduced threshold of the detection time required to sound an alarm and therefore 
activate during incipient fires. The desired effect of this would be saving lives by earlier detection 
of fires. One of the first steps in developing an olfactometer-detector would be the integration of 
the carbon monoxide meter into the common smoke detector. Since most fire deaths occur as a 
result of carbon monoxide poisoning (DeHaan, 1991), this would be the logical place to start. 
- 137 -
Recommendation 3.  Additional sleep studies should be performed to identify odors that 
are likely to arouse us from sleep. If specific odors can be identified, products that liberate that 
odor during fires can be incorporated into the manufacture of common building materials and 
home furnishings. Consequently, an incipient fire would therefore provide notice of its existence 
by production of chemically manipulated fire products. This concept is very similar to the 
industrial process of adding a chemical odorant known as methyl mercaptan to natural gas for the 
purpose of providing early detection. 
Recommendation 4.  Now that we know that our olfactory sense will not protect us from 
the threat of fire during sleep, we should rededicate ourselves to public fire education initiatives 
that address smoke detector compliance. This is not merely a fire prevention activity. In the text 
Essentials of Fire Fighting, the writer states that "while an early warning is often credited with 
saving the lives of the home's occupants, do not forget that the smoke detector's warning may 
have also protected a firefighter having to enter the structure" (Wieder, Smith, & Brackage, 1992, 
p. 535). Early notification of firefighters can easily translate into safer fire attack scenarios. It is 
usually much safer to engage in a firefighting operation in the early stages of fire development. 
Considered in this light, a public education campaign addressing smoke detector compliance is 
also addressing the firefighter's personal safety. 
- 138 -
REFERENCE LIST 
American National Standards Institute. (1993). Standard for Safety Single and Multiple Station 
Smoke Detectors (217). New York: Author. 
Bachtler, J. R. & Brennan, T. F. (Eds.). (1995). The fire chief's handbook. (5th ed., p. 991). 
Saddle Brook, NJ: Fire Engineering. 
Badia, P., Wesensten, N., Lammers, W., Cullpepper, J., and Harsh, J. (1989, September). 
Responsiveness to olfactory stimuli presented in sleep¹. Bowling Green, OH: University 
of Bowling Green State University, Department of Psychology. 
Badia, P. (1991). Olfaction sensitivity in sleep: effects of fragrances on the quality of sleep. 
Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State University, Department of Psychology. 
Bare, W. K. (1977). Fundamentals of fire prevention. (pp. 14-15). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 
Bukowski, R. W. (1993, January-February). Studies assess performance of residential detectors. 
NFPA Journal, pp. 48-54. 
City of Birmingham, Alabama, Fire Department. (1997). 1996 Annual Report. Birmingham, 
AL: Author. 
City of Phoenix, Arizona Fire Department. (1997). 1996 annual report. Phoenix, AZ: Author. 
Cooper, L. (1996, October). Does your smoke detector really work? Consumers' Research, 
pp. 30-32. 
Coren, S. (1996). Sleep thieves: An eye-opening exploration into the science and mysteries of 
sleep (pp. 23-35). New York: The Free Press. 
Coughlin, P. (1994, August). Are aging smoke detectors a safety threat? Operation Life Safety, 
p. 7. 
Cote, A. E. (Ed.). (1991). Fire protection handbook. (17th ed., chap. 10-3, p. 21). Quincy, 
MA: National Fire Protection Association. 
CRC Industries, Inc. (1997, January). Technical Data Sheet-Smoke Test.  Warminster, PA: 
Author. 
DeHaan, J. D. (1991). Kirk's fire investigation. (3rd ed., pp. 310-314). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall. 
DiNenno, P. J. (Ed.) (1988). SFPE handbook of fire protection engineering. (lst ed., chap. 1-
16, pp. 269-285). Quincy, MA: National Fire Protection Association. 
- 139 -
Disney Educational Productions. (1987). Donald's Fire Survival Plan (Rev. ed.) [video tape]. 
(Available from Disney Educational Productions, 105 Terry Drive, Suite 170, Newtown, 
PA 18940-3425). 
Federal Emergency Management Agency. (1990). America Burning Revisited (USFA 
Publication No. 1990-724-156/20430, p. 57). Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office. 
. (1993). Fire in the United States 1983-1990 (USFA Publication No. FA-140, p. 103). 
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 
. (1997). Fire in the United States 1985-1994. (pp. 78-91). Unpublished raw data. 
. (1988, October). Smoke Detectors: Don't Stay Home Without One, (L-163) 
[Brochure]. Washington, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office. 
Federal Equipment Company. (1991). Equipment specifications-Speedy [Brochure]. North 
Chicago, IL: Author. 
Goetz, R. (Ed.). (1991). The New Encyclopedia Britannica. (15th ed., Vol. 27, pp. 298-308.) 
Chicago: Encyclopedia Britannica. 
Hall, J. R. (1994, September-October). The U. S. experience with smoke detectors: Who has 
them? How well do they work? When don't they work? NFPA Journal, pp. 36-45. 
Hauri, P. J. (1992). Sleep disorders (pp. 4-7). Kalamazoo, Michigan: The Up John Company. 
How it works. (1993, Spring). Fire Findings, p. 4. 
Howard, P. J. (1994). The owner's manual for the brain (pp. 92-104). Austin, TX: Leornian 
Press. 
Jameson Home Products. (1994, August). Owners manual (Code One 2000 Smoke and Fire 
Alarm-110-284J) [Brochure]. Downers Grove, IL: Author. 
Kahn, M. J. (1983, June). Detection times to fire-related stimuli by sleeping subjects. Raleigh: 
North Carolina State University, Department of Psychology. 
Larson, D. E. (Ed.). (1996). Mayo clinic family health book. (2nd ed.). New York: Morrow. 
MacClary, M. (Producer), & Estus, B. (Director). (1986). Firepower [videotape]. (Available 
from the National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, MA) 
- 140 -
Management Internship Program. (1991, May). Final report for the fire sprinkler advisory 
board of southern California.  Los Angeles: University of Southern California, Graduate 
School of Business Administration. 
Marray, B., & Campbell, D. (1970). Difference between olfactory thresholds in two sleep states 
in the newborn infant. Pyschonomic Science, 18, 313-314. 
Meidl, J. H. (1970). Explosive and toxic hazardous materials  (pp. 288-305). New York: 
Macmillian. 
Montagna, F. C. (1995, March). Odor of smoke. Fire Engineering, pp. 69-72. 
Marriott, M. D. (1995, June). Reliability and Effectiveness of Domestic Smoke Alarms. Fire 
Engineers Journal, pp. 10-13. 
National Commission on Fire Prevention and Control. (1973). America Burning (Publication 
No. 1973-0-495-792). Washington, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office. 
National Fire Protection Association. (1996). National Fire Alarm Code (NFPA 72, pp. 101-
102). Quincy, MA: Author. 
Parks, C. A. (1990). Smoke Detector Compliance in Single Family Dwellings. Executive Fire 
Officer Research Paper, Emmitsburg, MD: National Fire Academy. 
Paulsen, R. L. (1984, May). Human behavior and fires: An introduction. Fire technology, pp. 
15-27. 
Pegram, V. (1997). Training manual 1 (pp. 3-26). Birmingham, Alabama: Author. 
Petraglia, J. S. (1991, March-April). Fire and the aging of America. NFPA Journal, 37-46. 
Pick, H, & Howden R. (Eds.). (1977). Gray's Anatomy (p. 725). New York: Bounty. 
Piotrowski, N. A. (Ed.). (1996). Magill's medical guide-health and illness supplement (Vol. 6, 
pp. 1603-1607). Pasadena, CA: Salem Press. 
Pollak, C. (1996). Sleep [CD-ROM]. The 1996 Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia (Version 
8.01). Danbury, CT: Grolier Electronic Publishing. 
Red Arrow Company. (1997, February). Red Arrow Products Specifications: Charsol C-10 
(Item 100110) [Brochure]. Manitowoc, WI: Author. 
Rubin, D. L. (1996, November). Chief concerns--Wingspread IV. Firehouse, pp. 28-30. 
. (1997, March). Wingspread IV--a practical look. Firehouse, pp. 42-44. 
- 141 -
Schwalm, N. D. (1981, July). The effects of attitudes and experience on human behavior in fires. 
Fire Journal, pp. 118-122. 
Southey, R. A. (1995). Smoke detectors: a Bullhead City, Arizona experience. Executive Fire 
Officer Research Paper, Emmitsburg, MD: National Fire Academy. 
Stevens, J. C., Cain, W. S., Weinstein, D. E. (1987, August). Aging impairs the ability to detect 
gas odor. Fire Technology, 23 (3), 198-204. 
Timmons, R. (Ed.). (1996, Summer). First Alert Junior Fire Inspector Program. (Available 
from BRK Brands, Inc., 3901 Liberty Street Road, Aurora, IL 60504-8122) 
Wieder, M. A., Smith, C., and Brackage, C. (Eds.). (1992). Essentials of fire fighting. (3rd ed., 
p. 535). Stillwater, OK: Fire Protection Publications. 
- 142 -
Appendix A 
Typical EEG Patterns 
- 143 -
- 144 -
Appendix B 
Various Monitoring Rythums 
- 145 -
Appendix B 
Various Monitoring Rhythms 
- 146 -
Appendix C 
Letter of Introduction 
2-26-97 
Dr. Vernon Pegram 
University of Alabama at Birmingham 
Sleep Wake Disorder Center 
1713 6th Ave. South 
Birmingham, Alabama 35294-0018 
Dear Dr. Pegram, 
Let me start with a small introduction-My name is Joe Lynch and I need your help! Part 
of my responsibilities to the City of Irondale is to attend the National Fire Academy annually and 
to perform meaningful research associated with the various programs of the Irondale Fire 
Department. Smoke detector education is a fundamental element of our public education 
program and it is mostly driven by compliance issues. Apathy seems to be the primary cause of a 
noncompliance with our local smoke detector laws and ordinances. It is my belief that many of 
our noncompliant citizens would respond to meaningful information about the limitation of our 
sleep-time olfactory senses if evidence of this could be substantiated. This is the focus or reason 
behind my request. 
I would like to determine if adult subjects can detect the odor of smoke while asleep. I 
propose that informed, willing, and monitored adults be subjected to a safe exposure of odorants 
for a brief time during sleep and after your primary studies have been completed. I would also 
like to have a copy of the various monitor outputs immediately before, during, and immediately 
after the test for the study. I am prepared to develop an information sheet to be given to the 
patients and a consent form for participation in the study. I will also provide a report copy back 
to the participants and you when my project is completed. It is my desire to perform this research 
on ten adults of various genders and ethnic backgrounds. I am willing to be present and 
administer the odorants. The method of administration would be a standard air freshener spray 
pump bottle delivering one (1) 120 microliter spray from a predetermined distance from the 
patient. The odorant will be delivered in the ambient room atmosphere. I would also like to 
administer the odorant tests to the subjects while they are awake to determine their ability to 
detect the odors. This could be performed the morning after the sleep study. 
Additional information about my applied research project requirement and a copy of prior 
related studies is attached for your review. 
- 147 -
Page -2-
Since this is part of the responsibilities associated with being the fire chief, the city’s 
liability insurance would provide coverage for this process. 
I would also like to mention that the makers of the First Alert brand of smoke detector is 
very interested in this project and I can see the possibility of them funding a comprehensive 
project in this area. 
Please review this package and I will contact you next week to arrange a time in which I 
can show you the odorants as well as the administration pump bottles. 
Sincerely, 
Joe Lynch, Fire Chief 
- 148 -
Appendix D 
NFA Brochure 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
United States Fire Administration 
National Fire Academy 
Executive Fire Officer 
Applied Research Projects 
Philosophy 
A significant measure of the professionalism of any occupation is the quality and quantity 
of the research upon which the discipline is based. The Executive Fire Officer Research project 
helps the National Fire Academy achieve its mission of increasing the professionalism of the fire 
service. 
Purpose 
The Applied Research Project in the Executive Fire Officer Program is designed to allow 
students to investigate a key issue or problem that has been identified as being important to their 
fire service organization. Upon completing the investigation, students will be able to reach 
conclusions and offer recommendations which will contribute to the improvement of their 
organization. 
Through this process, students have an opportunity to translate what they have learned in 
the Executive Fire Officer courses into real-world applicants. By writing the applied research 
project in a professional paper format, Executive Fire Officer students are contributing to the fire 
service literature. 
Process 
Students are required to complete one applied research project for each of the four 
courses in the Executive Fire Officer Program. The reports are to be sent to the National Fire 
Academy within 6 months of completing each course. A project must be evaluated as acceptable 
in order for the student to continue in the Executive Fire Officer program. To be acceptable, a 
project must receive a grade of "C" or higher. 
Product 
Specific products are developed as a result of the Executive Fire Officer Applied Research 
Project which are beneficial to the student, local government, fire service, and the National Fire 
Academy. Students receive individualized evaluation to their critical thinking skills; local 
problems are solved; a computer data base containing the research projects is available to the 
Nation's fire service; and the National Fire Academy receives feedback relating to the application 
of the knowledge, skills, and abilities of its graduates. All of these benefits contribute to the 
reduction of our Nation's fire problem. 
- 149 -
- 150 -
Appendix E 
Patient Information Sheet 
Dear Patient, 
My name is Joe Lynch and I serve as Fire Chief in the City of Irondale. I am involved in an 
exciting research project that will hopefully prevent some of the tragic fire deaths in our 
community. Each and every year, a number of our neighbors experience fires during the night. 
Most of them are awakened by the sound of smoke detectors going off and are able to escape. 
Unfortunately, there are others that for some reason or another, perish in the fire. Although 
national statistics suggests a strong connection between having a smoke detector and being able to 
survive a night fire, many of our neighbors have failed to protect themselves with an inexpensive 
detector. 
Why is smoke detector compliance a problem? It is my belief that many of our neighbors 
rely on their sense of smell alone to awaken them in the event of a night fire. This is why I am 
asking your permission and cooperation to take part in a simple procedure to determine if the smell 
of smoke will arouse an adult while they are sleeping. I need help to solve this simple question of 
great importance-Will the smell of smoke cause an adult to wake up from sleep? 
What procedure will be used in the test? If you agree, you will be exposed to two 
different scents to determine if they will arouse you from sleep. This process will not interfere with 
your scheduled sleep study and the scents used are either actual air fresheners or their equivalent in 
strength. The scents do not represent a health threat to the participants of the study. The duration 
of the scent test will be approximately one minute and you will be constantly monitored for 
reaction. The scents will be lightly sprayed into the air of the room in which you are sleeping in 
and then allowed to dissipate. To make sure that you do not have a condition that would prevent 
you from detecting the scents, a base line testing process will occur either before or after your 
sleep test. This base line process is identical to the sleep test. 
Health Risks: No health risks have been identified that are associated with these scents. 
The scents are natural products that smell like smoke and citrus fruit. Medical histories that would 
prevent you from participating in this program include asthma, pulmonary disease, heart disease, 
history of smoking, smelling disorders, or similar conditions that make you hypersensitive to 
common scents or odors. 
When Will the Program Take Place? The sleep study shall take place during the months 
of March and April, 1997. 
Release of personal information will not occur.  Each patient will be classified as to 
gender, age, race, and known smelling disorders. Names, addresses, phone numbers and other 
specific patient information will not be requested or obtained for this study. 
Copies of this report will be made available to the patients.  A copy of my report will be 
presented to Dr. Pegram at the completion of the research project. Patients may obtain a copy of 
the report by indicating their request on the "Permission to Participate" form. 
How can I help? By signing the "Permission to Participate" form you are indicating that 
you will participate and allow us to answer this question about the smell of smoke and sleep. The 
findings of this study will be the basis for the creation of a free public fire education program that 
I will market in the greater Birmingham area. 
- 151 -
- 152 -
Appendix F 
Permission to Participate Form 
This form acknowledges my agreement to participate in a sleep study designed to 
determine if the smell of smoke will awake a sleeping adult and that I know of no health problem 
or sensitivity that would prevent me from participating. I understand that for purposes of 
describing the resulting data, my race, gender, and age will be documented and that the results of 
the study will be sent to me at the completion of the study utilizing the address listed at the 
bottom of this form. 
Patient's signature: 
Date: 
Witnesses's signature: 
Patient Code 
(please print) 
Patient's Name: 
Patient's Address: 
Patient's Gender: Male: 
Female: 
Patient's Age: 
Please list any known health problems or smelling disorders: 
- 153 -
- 154 -
Appendix G 
Record of Observations 
PATIENT CODE: 
DATE OF TESTS: 
AWAKE:
 SLEEP: 
LOCATION OF TESTS: 
TIME OF TESTS: AWAKE:
 SLEEP: 
WITNESS OF TESTS: 
-OBSERVATIONS-
Reported Smelling Water 
Detected Smoke Smell 
Detected Citrus Smell 
Water Smell Awakening 
Smoke Smell Awakening 
Citrus Smell Awakening 
AWAKE 
_______ 
_______ 
_______ 
SLEEP 
_______ 
_______ 
_______ 
- 155 -
- 156 -
Appendix H 
Photographs of Sleep Study 
- 157 -
- 158 -
Appendix I 
Diagram of Sleep Room 
- 159 -
- 160 -
Appendix J 
Photographs of Odor Delivery Systems 
- 161 -
 Appendix J 
Photographs of Odor Delivery Systems 
J1 - a picture of the setup. 
Figure J2 - a picture of the nebulizer 
Figure J3 - a picture of the hose passing 
Figure J4 - a picture of the delivery hose 
through the ceiling membrane. 
terminating in the sleep room. 
- 162 -
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Appendix K 
Results of Odor Tests 
Patient Code 
Race 
Gender 
Age 
Awake reactions 
(S) smells odor (NR) no reaction 
Water 
Smoke 
Citrus 
Sleep reactions 
(A) Awakening 
(E) EEG arousal 
(NR) no reaction (M) EMG arousal 
Water 
Smoke 
Citrus 
C 
M 
48 
NR 
S 
S 
NR 
A 
NR 
C 
F 
41 
NR 
S 
S 
NR 
E 
E 
C 
F 
52 
NR 
S 
S 
NR 
E,M 
NR 
C 
M 
26 
NR 
S 
S 
NR 
NR 
NR 
C 
F 
52 
NR 
S 
S 
NR 
E,M 
NR 
C 
M 
40 
NR 
S 
S 
NR 
NR 
NR 
AA 
M 
41 
NR 
S 
S 
NR 
NR 
NR 
C 
F 
54 
NR 
S 
S 
NR 
E 
E 
C 
F 
41 
NR 
S 
S 
NR 
A 
M 
C 
M 
61 
NR 
S 
S 
NR 
NR 
NR 
Note: Responses or variables were a minimum of .00 and a maximum of 1.00. N=10. 
Proportional results were established by reporting the number of variables occurring to each 
condition over the total number of subjects participating. Overall test response proportions (with 
standard deviations in parentheses) were Water 0 (.00), Smoke 6/10 (.51640), and Citrus 3/10 
(.48305). 
- 163 -
- 164 -
