Principles of a Sound Drug 
Formulary System
October 2000
These principles have been endorsed by the following
organizations:
•  Academy of Managed Care Pharmacy
•  Alliance of Community Health Plans
•  American Medical Association
•  American Society of Health-System Pharmacists
•  Department of Veterans Affairs, 
Pharmacy Benefits Management 
Strategic Healthcare Group
•  National Business Coalition on Health
•  U. S. Pharmacopeia
1
Principles of a Sound Drug Formulary System
A coalition of national organizations representing health care professionals,
government, and business leaders formed a working group (See Appendix III) to
develop a set of principles specifying the essential components that contribute to a
sound drug formulary system. The Coalition was formed in September 1999 in
response to the widespread use of drug formularies in both inpatient and outpatient
settings and the lack of understanding about formularies among the public. Also,
proposed federal legislation that would provide a prescription drug benefit for
Medicare beneficiaries has brought increased attention to the appropriate role and
management of drug formulary systems within drug benefit programs. 
The formulary system, when properly designed and implemented, can promote
rational, clinically appropriate, safe, and cost-effective drug therapy.  The Coalition
has enumerated these principles, however, because it recognizes that patient care
may be compromised if a formulary system is not optimally developed, organized
and administered.  This document contains “Guiding Principles” that the Coalition
believes must be present for a drug formulary system to appropriately serve the
patients it covers.  The absence of one or more of these “Guiding Principles” should
be cause for careful scrutiny of a formulary system.  A glossary (See Appendix I)
and bibliography (See Appendix II) are included with the “Guiding Principles” to
clarify terminology and to provide additional resources, respectively.
The Coalition believes that the presence of consensus-based Formulary System
Principles can assist decision-makers who must balance the health care quality and
cost equation.  Further, the Guiding Principles will be a valuable educational tool
for national, state and local public policy makers, health care system administrators,
purchasers and third party payers, practitioners, and consumers and patient
advocates.  These parties all have an interest in designing formulary systems that
ensure patients have access to rational, clinically appropriate, safe, and cost-effective
therapy and which supports an affordable and sustainable drug benefit program.
Drug Formulary System - an ongoing process whereby a health care organization,
through its physicians, pharmacists, and other health care professionals, establishes
policies on the use of drug products and therapies, and identifies drug products and
therapies that are the most medically appropriate and cost-effective to best serve the
health interests of a given patient population.
Drug Formulary - a continually updated list of medications and related information,
representing the clinical judgement of physicians, pharmacists and other experts in the
diagnosis and/or treatment of disease and promotion of health. 
Principles of a Sound Drug 
Formulary System
PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
Principles of a Sound Drug Formulary System
2
❖  Clinical decisions are based on the strength of scientific evidence and standards
of practice that include, but are not limited, to the following:
N Assessing peer-reviewed medical literature, including: randomized
clinical trials (especially drug comparison studies), pharmacoeconomic
studies, and outcomes research data.
N Employing published practice guidelines, developed by an acceptable
evidence-based process.
N Comparing the efficacy as well as the type and frequency of side effects
and potential drug interactions among alternative drug products.
N Assessing the likely impact of a drug product on patient compliance
when compared to alternative products.
N Basing formulary system decisions on a thorough evaluation of the
benefits, risks and potential outcomes for patients; risks encompass
adverse drug events (adverse drug reactions and medication errors, such
as those caused by confusing product names or labels).
❖  Economic considerations include, but are not limited, to the following:
N Basing formulary system decisions on cost factors only after the safety,
efficacy and therapeutic need have been established.
N Evaluating drug products and therapies in terms of their impact on total
health care costs.
N Permitting financial incentives only when they promote cost
management as part of the delivery of quality medical care. Financial
incentives or pressures on practitioners that may interfere with the
delivery of medically necessary care are unacceptable. 
❖  The formulary system:
N Provides drug product selection and formulary maintenance (see above).
N Provides drug use evaluation (also called drug utilization review) to
enhance quality of care for patients by assuring appropriate drug therapy.
N Provides for the periodic evaluation and analysis of treatment protocols
and procedures to ensure that they are up-to-date and are consistent with
optimum therapeutics. 
N Provides for the monitoring, reporting, and analysis of adverse results of
drug therapy (e.g., adverse drug reactions, medication errors) to
continuously improve the quality of care. 
Formulary system decisions are
based on scientific and economic
considerations that achieve
appropriate, safe and cost effective
drug therapy. 
The formulary system encompasses
drug selection, drug utilization
review, and other tools to foster
best practices in prescribing,
dispensing, administration, and
monitoring of outcomes.
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
3
Principles of a Sound Drug Formulary System
❖  The Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee:
N Objectively appraises, evaluates, and selects drugs for the formulary. 
N Meets as frequently as is necessary to review and update the
appropriateness of the formulary system in light of new drugs and new
indications, uses, or warnings affecting existing drugs. 
N Establishes policies and procedures to educate and inform health care
providers about drug products, usage, and committee decisions. 
N Oversees quality improvement programs that employ drug use
evaluation.
N Implements generic substitution and therapeutic interchange programs
that authorize exchange of therapeutic alternatives based upon written
guidelines or protocols within a formulary system. (Note: Therapeutic
substitution, the dispensing of therapeutic alternates without the
prescriber’s approval, is illegal and should not be allowed-See Glossary.)
N Develops protocols and procedures for the use of and access to non-
formulary drug products.
N Health care organization policies should ensure appropriate oversight of
the P&T Committee and its decisions by the medical staff or equivalent
body.
❖  Formulary system policies should:
N Require P&T committee members to reveal, by signing a conflict of
interest statement, economic and other relationships with pharmaceutical
entities that could influence Committee decisions.
N Exclude product sponsor representatives from P&T committee
membership and from attending P & T committee meetings. 
N Require P&T committee members to adhere to the formulary system’s
policy on disclosure and participation in discussion as it relates to
conflict of interest.
The Pharmacy and Therapeutics
(P&T) Committee, or equivalent
body, comprised of actively
practicing physicians, pharmacists
and other health care
professionals, is the mechanism for
administering the formulary
system, which includes developing
and maintaining the formulary
and establishing and
implementing policies on the use
of drug products. 
Physicians, pharmacists, and other
health care professionals provide
oversight of the formulary system. 
The formulary system must have
its own policies, or adhere to other
organizational policies, that
address conflicts of interest and
disclosure by P&T committee
members. 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
4
Principles of a Sound Drug Formulary System
❖  The formulary system should:
N Inform physicians, pharmacists, other health care professionals, patients,
and payers about the factors that affect formulary system decisions,
including: cost containment measures; the procedures for obtaining non-
formulary drugs; and the importance of formulary compliance to
improving quality of care and restraining health care costs.
N Proactively inform practitioners about changes to the formulary or to
other pharmaceutical management procedures.
N Provide patient education programs that explain how formulary decisions
are made and the roles and responsibilities of the patient, especially the
importance of patient compliance with drug therapy to assure the success
of that therapy.
N Disclose the existence of formularies and have copies of the formulary
readily available and accessible.
N Provide rationale for specific formulary decisions when requested.
❖  The formulary system should:
N Enable individual patient needs to be met with non-formulary drug
products when demonstrated to be clinically justified by the physician or
other prescriber.
N Institute an efficient process for the timely procurement of 
non-formulary drug products and impose minimal administrative
burdens.
N Provide access to a formal appeal process if a request for a 
non-formulary drug is denied.
N Include policies that state that practitioners should not be penalized for
prescribing non-formulary drug products that are medically necessary.
The formulary system should include
a well-defined process for the
physician or other prescriber to use a
non-formulary drug when medically
indicated. 
The formulary system should include
educational programs for payers,
practitioners, and patients
concerning their roles and
responsibilities. 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES
5
Principles of a Sound Drug Formulary System
Drug Formulary System - an ongoing process whereby a health care organization,
through its physicians, pharmacists and other health care professionals, establishes
policies on the use of drug products and therapies, and identifies drug products and
therapies that are the most medically appropriate and cost effective to best serve the
health interests of a given patient population.
Drug Formulary - a continually updated list of medications and related
information, representing the clinical judgement of physicians, pharmacists, and
other experts in the diagnosis and/or treatment of disease and promotion of health.
Pharmacy & Therapeutics (P&T) Committee - an advisory committee that is
responsible for developing, managing, updating, and administering the drug
formulary system.
Generic Substitution - the substitution of drug products that contain the same
active ingredient(s) and are chemically identical in strength, concentration, dosage
form, and route of administration to the drug product prescribed.
Therapeutic Alternates - drug products with different chemical structures but
which are of the same pharmacological and/or therapeutic class, and usually can be
expected to have similar therapeutic effects and adverse reaction profiles when
administered to patients in therapeutically equivalent doses.
Therapeutic Interchange - authorized exchange of therapeutic alternates in
accordance with previously established and approved written guidelines or
protocols within a formulary system.
Therapeutic Substitution - the act of dispensing a therapeutic alternate for the
drug product prescribed without prior authorization of the prescriber. This is an
illegal act because only the prescriber may authorize an exchange of therapeutic
alternates.
Drug Utilization Review (Drug Use Review, DUR, and Drug Use Evaluation) -
process used to assess the appropriateness of drug therapy by engaging in the
evaluation of data on drug use in a given health care environment against
predetermined criteria and standards.
GLOSSARY
APPENDIX I
Principles of a Sound Drug Formulary System
6
1. Academy of Managed Care Pharmacy, Concepts in Managed Care Pharmacy Series -
Formulary Management (Alexandria, VA: 1998).
2. American Medical Association. Board of Trustees Report PPP, Principles of Drug Utilization
Review. In, American Medical Association House of Delegates Proceedings, 140th Annual
Meeting. Chicago: American Medical Association; June 1991; 225-227.
3. American Medical Association. Board of Trustees Report 45, Drug Formularies and
Therapeutic Interchange. In, American Medical Association House of Delegates Proceedings,
47th Interim Meeting. New Orleans: American Medical Association; December 1993; 155-158.
4. American Medical Association. Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs Report 2, Managed
Care Cost Containment Involving Prescription Drugs. In, American Medical Association
House of Delegates Proceedings, 144th Annual Meeting. Chicago:
American Medical
Association; June 1995; 207-213.
5. American Medical Association. Board of Trustees Report 9, Pharmaceutical Benefits
Management Companies. In, American Medical Association House of Delegates Proceedings,
51st Interim Meeting. Dallas: American Medical Association; December 1997; 33-44.
6. American Society of Consultant Pharmacists. Guidelines for the Development of Formulary
Systems in Nursing Facilities; July 1996.
7. American Society of Hospital Pharmacists. ASHP Statement on the Formulary System. Am J
Hosp Pharm. 1983; 40:1384-5.
8. American Society of Hospital Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on Formulary System
Management. Am J Hosp Pharm. 1992; 49:648-52.
9. American Society of Hospital Pharmacists. ASHP Statement on the Pharmacy and
Therapeutics Committee. Am J Hosp Pharm. 1992; 49:2008-9.
10. American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. ASHP Guidelines on Medication-Use
Evaluation. Am J Health-Syst Pharm. 1996; 53:1953-5.
11. American Society of Hospital Pharmacists. ASHP Technical Assistance Bulletin on Drug
Formularies. Am J Hosp Pharm. 1991; 48:791-3.
12. American Society of Hospital Pharmacists. ASHP Technical Assistance Bulletin on the
Evaluation of Drugs for Formularies. Am J Hosp Pharm. 1988; 45:386-7.
13. Covington TR and Thornton JL. The formulary system: A cornerstone of drug benefit
management, in A Pharmacist’s Guide to Principles and Practices of Managed Care Pharmacy.
Ito S and Blackburn S. eds. Foundation for Managed Care Pharmacy, Alexandria VA. 1995:
35-49. 
14. Dillon MJ. Drug Formulary Management, in Managed Care Pharmacy Practice. Navarro RP
ed. Aspen Publishers, Inc., Gaithersburg, MD. 1999: 145-165.
15. Hejna CS and Shepherd MD. Pharmacy and therapeutics committee and formulary
development, in A Pharmacist’s Guide to Principles and Practices of Managed Care Pharmacy.
Ito S and Blackburn S. eds. Foundation for Managed Care Pharmacy, Alexandria VA. 1995:
27-34.
16. National Committee for Quality Assurance. UM 10 procedures for pharmaceutical
management. 2000 Standards for Accreditation of MCOs. 1999: 58-60.
17. National Committee for Quality Assurance. UM 10 procedures for pharmaceutical
management. 2000 Surveyor Guidelines for the Accreditation of MCOs. 1999: 173-182.
18. PCMA Response to American Medical Association Report, I-97, “Pharmaceutical Benefits
Management Companies.” September 1998.
19. Rucker TD and Schiff GD, Drug formularies: myths-in-formation. Medical Care 1990;
28:928-942. Reprinted in Hospital Pharmacy 1991; 26:507-514.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
APPENDIX II
7
Principles of a Sound Drug Formulary System
APPENDIX III
Academy of Managed 
Care Pharmacy
Judith A. Cahill, C.E.B.S.
Executive Director
Richard Fry
Senior Director, Pharmacy Affairs
American Medical Association
Joseph W. Cranston, Ph.D.
Director-Science, Research and
Technology
American Society of Health-System
Pharmacists
William A. Zellmer, M.P.H.
Deputy Executive Vice President
Department of Veterans Affairs
John E. Ogden
Director, Pharmacy Services
Michael A. Valentino
Associate Chief Consultant
for Pharmacy Benefits Management
National Business Coalition 
on Health
Catherine Kunkle
Vice President
U.S. Pharmacopeia
Jacqueline L. Eng
Senior Vice President, Program
Development
Keith W. Johnson
Vice President and Director
New and Off-Label Uses
Thomas R. Fulda
Program Director, Drug Utilization
Review Programs
Nancy B. Mabie
Assistant Director, Pharmacy Affairs
Observer
AARP
David Gross
Senior Policy Advisor
Public Policy Institute
COALITION 
WORKING GROUP
Public Comment Requested
To ensure that knowledgeable and interested parties beyond the Coalition Working
Group had an opportunity to contribute to the Principles development process, a
preliminary set of principles was distributed for public comment to 50-plus
organizations in February 2000.  Comments received were thoroughly reviewed and
considered by the Coalition Working Group.
PSP002M
