361 
Standardizing Medication Error Event 
Reporting in the U.S. Department of Defense 
Ronald A. Nosek, Jr., Judy McMeekin, Geoffrey W. Rake 
Abstract 
Soon after the 1999 Institute of Medicine report, To Err Is Human, was released, 
the Department of Defense (DoD) began an aggressive examination of medical 
errors and the strategies for minimizing them. A primary goal was the creation of 
a standardized medication event reporting system, including a central registry for 
the compilation of reported data. This paper describes important experiences 
gleaned from the DoD’s transition to a standardized medication error reporting 
system. MEDMARXSM, an Internet-based commercial reporting application, was 
selected by the DoD leadership as the standard tool for medication event 
reporting. MEDMARX was implemented initially at five military hospitals in fall 
2000 as part of a patient safety pilot project, and was later made available to all 
143 military treatment facilities worldwide. Medication errors represent 
approximately 50 percent of all patient safety events reported by military health 
care facilities. Although the challenges associated with the implementation of a 
standardized error reporting system were considerable in number and scope, the 
long-term benefits to the DoD are significant. 
Introduction 
In fall 1999, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) released its groundbreaking 
report, To Err Is Human, which estimated that the annual number of deaths in the 
United States due to medical errors is between 44,000 and 98,000. This number 
far exceeds the annual number of deaths resulting from AIDS, breast cancer, or 
motor vehicle accidents and elevates medical errors to one of the Nation’s most 
urgent, widespread public health problems.1 As a result, many health care 
organizations, including the Department of Defense (DoD) Military Health 
System (MHS), began an aggressive examination of medical errors and the 
strategies to minimize or eliminate them. 
Errors involving prescribed medications account for a significant percentage 
of the total patient safety events reported by civilian health care facilities and 
represent approximately half of all errors reported in DoD. While the vast 
majority of medication errors do not result in adverse patient outcomes, various 
studies have determined that a significant number of such events do have the 
potential to cause serious patient harm or loss of life. One study estimates that 
7,000 deaths per year are attributable to preventable medication errors, while 
another study found that nearly 10 percent of all hospital admissions are related to 
problematic use of pharmaceuticals.1–3 Health care professionals are encouraged 
to report medication errors and adverse drug reactions through several established 
Advances in Patient Safety: Vol. 4 
362 
programs. The MedWatch program coordinated by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) and the Medication Error Reporting (MER) program 
coordinated by United States Pharmacopeia (USP) and the Institute for Safe 
Medication Practices (ISMP) are two such programs.4, 5 The detection and 
subsequent reporting of medication errors ideally should involve several 
strategies, including observational methods, computerized triggers, retrospective 
chart reviews, and spontaneous reporting. However, the systems used to report 
such events often are organized around spontaneous reporting and are limited by 
the small percentage of total errors that are actually reported. Error detection 
methods such as the passive surveillance of electronic pharmacy and medical 
record data may offer advantages over spontaneous reporting systems, because of 
their ability to detect possible events that would otherwise go unnoticed or 
unreported. These methods should be used in tandem to provide a better 
understanding of error causation and patterns of occurrence.6 Another limitation 
to many types of reporting systems is the inability of an individual reporting an 
event to retrieve or review the report, once it has been submitted. 
The timely and accurate reporting of medical errors should be an essential part 
of a health care organization’s overall risk-reduction strategy.1 Medical error 
reporting has focused historically on the individuals involved, rather than the 
systems and processes that allowed the error to occur. Although physicians, 
nurses, and other caregivers believe the safety and well-being of the patient is 
their number-one priority, the fear of malpractice lawsuits, public embarrassment, 
disciplinary action, and loss of credibility has made these same professionals 
reluctant to report or discuss error-related incidents with others.6, 7 One possible 
approach to improving medical error reporting in health care facilities involves 
the use of anonymous, standardized reporting systems. These systems may help to 
foster the kind of nonpunitive environment where caregivers can report and share 
their experiences involving medication errors freely, without fear of reprisals. 
Additionally, standardized reporting would ensure consistency throughout a 
health care organization and would enable internal tracking, trending, and 
comparative analyses. To that end, Federal legislation has been introduced to 
facilitate the creation of a voluntary system for reporting medical errors and near-
miss incidents as a means of further emphasizing the national significance of this 
issue.8 The proposed plan also would establish a national patient safety database 
for the purpose of analyzing error reports and recommending optimal patient care 
practices.  
The Department of Defense response 
Soon after the IOM report was released, former President Clinton directed all 
Federal agencies involved with health care to develop action plans for reducing 
medical errors. In response to the President’s mandate, the Quality Interagency 
Coordination Task Force (QuIC) released a report in February 2000 titled Doing 
What Counts for Patient Safety: Federal Actions to Reduce Medical Errors and 
Their Impact.9 The DoD then assembled a multidisciplinary health care team 
comprised of Army, Navy, and Air Force representatives to address patient safety 
Standardizing Medication Error Reporting in the DoD 
363 
issues within the MHS. Among the team’s primary goals was the creation of a 
system to standardize medical error event reporting among the three services, with 
all collected data flowing into a centralized data registry. To that end, the DoD 
initiated a patient safety pilot program in December 2000 at five military hospitals 
that included the use of the MEDMARXSM reporting software system (United 
States Pharmacopeia, Rockville, MD) for standardized medication error data 
collection.  
MEDMARX, an anonymous and Internet-based database application, was 
designed to report, track, and detect trends in medication errors within health care 
organizations. This sophisticated instrument uses standardized drop-down boxes, 
selection lists, and robust reporting capabilities to streamline data entry, 
compilation, and retrieval tasks. MEDMARX also permits users to draw 
comparisons between their hospital or clinic and others like it, using a national 
facilities database. Moreover, it allows users to perform proactive reviews of error 
information from other MEDMARX subscribers, in an effort to learn from 
strategies and mistakes that occurred previously in other health care facilities 
throughout the Nation.10  
MEDMARX incorporates a standardized taxonomy and definitions 
established by the National Coordinating Council for Medication Error Reporting 
and Prevention (NCC MERP). A severity index scale based on patient outcomes 
allows users to break down actual and potential errors occurring in their facility, 
according to the threat level to the patient. This index scale ranges in event 
severity from Category A (a potential error), through Category I (a medication 
error that may have resulted in a patient death).11 There are 13 required data 
elements in the MEDMARX system, including medication use process node, type 
of error, cause of error, and contributing factors. MEDMARX further includes 30 
additional data fields that permit users to track details such as “actions taken to 
avoid similar errors,” “level of staff involved in the error,” “error result on patient 
care,” and “medical devices involved in the error.” All the data elements are 
searchable by means of the powerful report functions within the MEDMARX 
system, and users can use the numerous predefined reports, graphs, and charts to 
produce aggregate reviews and analyses of the data from their facility. Custom 
and ad hoc reporting features are also included. MEDMARX further includes a 
unique “drill down” feature that permits users to convert an on-screen display of 
graphed or charted errors to a data spreadsheet. The user then can select a single 
error from the spreadsheet and view all the pertinent details from the incident in 
report form.10  
Centralized reporting 
The DoD Patient Safety Center (PSC), located within the Armed Forces 
Institute of Pathology in Washington, DC, was created under the 2001 National 
Defense Authorization Act to provide the DoD with centralized patient care error 
reporting and management services. A centralized medical event data registry 
incorporating the use of MEDMARX was established at the DoD PSC in 
Advances in Patient Safety: Vol. 4 
364 
November 2002, and use of the software has increased at DoD health care 
facilities throughout the past 2 years. Additionally, USP has created a self-paced 
online tutorial for MEDMARX and was contracted to train various DoD patient 
safety managers in the program’s use. In addition to collecting medication-related 
events, the DoD PSC also receives monthly summary reports from each facility 
on all other health care-related patient safety events, as well as root-cause 
analyses. 
With the DoD’s decision to adopt MEDMARX as the standardized reporting 
system for medication errors came the need for additional system functionality to 
permit data sharing and evaluation between military treatment facilities (MTFs). 
USP was contracted to develop the MEDMARX Multi-Facility Module, which 
enables health care networks to track medication errors and identify trends at 
facilities within their systems. This module was introduced in December 2002, 
and since that time, all military hospitals and clinics have been linked in a 
sophisticated electronic network that provides the Army, Navy, and Air Force 
with improved access to medication error information from their individual 
facilities. The MEDMARX Multi-Facility Module also contains a health 
management tier that provides the DoD PSC with access to all military 
medication errors reports, and enables numerous health care systems to be 
organized under a single management structure. The MEDMARX reporting 
system and Multi-Facility Module implementations are expected to enhance 
reporting compliance and accuracy, while facilitating the development of better 
care practices and policies designed to reduce errors and improve the safe delivery 
of care in the MHS. 
Results 
It is important to understand that the data presented in this article are 
preliminary and have been included primarily for illustrative purposes. Advanced 
MEDMARX system training for DoD personnel commenced in December 2003, 
and many MTFs are currently in the program implementation phase.  
Reporting volume  
The MEDMARX Multi-Facility Module is used to aggregate and analyze data 
from medication error events that occurred at DoD health care facilities. Several 
MTFs began using the MEDMARX reporting system early in 2001; since that 
time, the number of medication errors reported through the MEDMARX system 
has increased dramatically (Figure 1). Medication-related error events accounted 
for approximately 50 percent of all DoD patient safety events included in this 
sample.  
MEDMARX system data have indicated a total of 29,662 medication events 
were reported by staff at DoD facilities between October 2002 and September 
2003. This figure includes actual medication error events (defined by the DoD as 
errors that reach the patient) and near misses (defined by the DoD as events that 
are corrected through some type of intervention before they reach the patient).  
Standardizing Medication Error Reporting in the DoD 
365 
Figure 1. Total number of medication events reported to the Department of Defense 
Patient Safety Center Registry by quarter from October 2001 through September 2003 
 
Of all medication-related incidents reported, 69 percent were categorized as near 
misses and 31 percent were categorized as actual events. Of the actual events, 26 
percent involved female patients, 22 percent involved male patients, and 52 
percent involved patients whose gender was not indicated by the individual who 
made the report. The last statistic is not surprising, because patient gender is not a 
required reporting field. Events also were stratified by age. Of the reported events 
that reached the patient, 18 percent occurred in patients ages 5 years or younger, 6 
percent occurred in patients between the ages of 6 and 17 years, and 24 percent 
occurred in patients between 18 and 45 years of age. Another 24 percent of the 
medication errors occurred in patients between the ages of 46 and 64 years, while 
28 percent occurred in patients 65 years of age and older. Of the reports in which 
possible patient harm may have occurred, 21 percent of the events occurred in 
patients 5 years of age or younger, 6 percent of the errors occurred in patients 
between 6 and 17 years, and 29 percent occurred in patients between 18 and 45 
years. Another 20 percent of the medication errors occurred in patients between 
46 and 64 years, while 24 percent occurred in patients 65 years of age and older.  
Available 2002 MEDMARX national data indicate that approximately 35.5 
percent of actual events occurred in patients 65 years of age and older. Of the total 
events that indicated possible patient harm, 36.4 percent occurred in this 
population.12 A more thorough analysis of the DoD and national data, with 
comparisons to at-risk populations such as pediatrics and geriatrics, was not 
practical and was beyond the scope of this article. However, this will certainly be 
a key area for future research. 
Advances in Patient Safety: Vol. 4 
366 
As of this writing, a total of 143 DoD facilities have the capability of entering 
data into the MEDMARX reporting system. The number of facilities that used 
MEDMARX to report at least one medication error in any given month ranged 
from 84 MTFs to 119 MTFs. Monthly reporting volumes also varied 
considerably. Some MTFs routinely reported five or fewer medication events per 
month, while others consistently reported more than 100 monthly events. This 
variability also was observed between facilities of similar type and bed count. 
Because all reports to the DoD PSC are made anonymously, no distinguishing 
facility characteristics other than bed count and facility type are available. This 
lack of characteristics serves to limit further analysis.  
Harm stratification 
The MEDMARX reporting system allows users to categorize the error by 
setting (i.e., inpatient or outpatient). This variable is termed the “source of 
record.” Medication errors submitted to the DoD PSC were stratified by source of 
record and were further categorized according to patient outcome (i.e., near miss; 
error, no harm; and error, harm) before being compared with the national 
MEDMARX system data submitted during calendar year (CY) 2002. The 
majority of reported errors in the DoD and national datasets for outpatient events 
were classified as near misses. The majority of reported DoD inpatient errors 
were classified as no-harm events, while the majority of nationally reported 
events were classified as near misses. The percentage of inpatient errors that 
caused harm in DoD was very similar to the national data. The percentage of 
outpatient errors in DoD that resulted in patient harm was 0.3 percent, compared 
with 1.4 percent in the national data (Table 1). Additionally, there was an upward 
trend in the monthly volume of actual and near-miss events reported to the PSC 
during the same time frame. 
The medication use process 
The medication use process is divided into five phases or nodes: prescribing, 
documenting/transcribing, dispensing, administering, and monitoring. All actual 
medication events (Categories B–I errors, according to the NCC MERP) originate 
in one of these five nodes. Medication events were stratified by the source of 
record (inpatient or outpatient). DoD data from the period of October 2002 to 
September 2003 was compared to the national data submitted to the MEDMARX 
system during CY 2002 (Table 2). The data reported to the DoD PSC showed the 
largest percentage of inpatient events had occurred in the administering node (41 
percent), followed by those errors that occurred in the dispensing node (26 
percent), and those from the documenting/transcribing node (19 percent). The 
national dataset indicated that the largest percentage of inpatient errors had 
occurred in the administering node (35 percent), followed by those errors that 
occurred in the documenting/transcribing node (24 percent), and those from the 
prescribing node (21 percent). 
Standardizing Medication Error Reporting in the DoD 
367 
Table 1. Percentage of inpatient and outpatient events, stratified by harm and reported 
to the DoD Patient Safety Center Registry, October 2002 to September 2003, with 
comparison to the 2002 MEDMARXSM national database  
 
Inpatient 
Outpatient  
Harm stratification* 
DoD 
National† 
DoD 
National 
Near miss‡ 
40.3% 
50.5% 
74.7% 
60.7% 
Error, no harm§ 
57.9% 
47.8% 
25.0% 
37.9% 
Error, harm** 
1.8% 
1.7% 
0.3% 
1.4% 
* Based on National Coordinating Council for Medication Error Reporting and Prevention error 
categories. A near miss includes Categories A and B events; error, no harm includes Categories 
C and D events; and error, harm includes Categories E–I events. 
† 2002 national MEDMARX data provided by U.S. Pharmacopeia, Center for Advancement in 
Patient Safety. 
‡ Near miss definition: Any process variation or error that could have resulted in harm to a patient, 
visitor, or staff, but through chance or timely intervention did not reach the individual. 
§ No harm definition: An event that reached the patient but did not result in harm. 
** Harm definition: Impairment of the physical, emotional, or psychological function or the structure 
of the body and/or pain resulting therefrom. 
Table 2. Number and percentage of inpatient and outpatient events, stratified by 
medication use process node and reported to the DoD Patient Safety Center Registry, 
October 2002 to September 2003, with comparison to the 2002 MEDMARXSM national 
database 
* Process node categories defined by the National Coordinating Council for Medication Error 
Reporting and Prevention (NCC MERP). 
† 2002 national MEDMARX data provided by U.S. Pharmacopeia, Center for Advancement in 
Patient Safety. 
The data reported to the DoD PSC showed that the largest percentage of 
outpatient events had occurred in the dispensing node (61 percent), followed by 
those errors that occurred in the prescribing node (28 percent), and those from the 
documenting/transcribing node (8 percent). The national data showed that the 
largest percentage of outpatient errors had occurred in the dispensing node (51 
percent), followed by errors that occurred in the prescribing mode (27 percent), 
and those from the administering node (13 percent). Although the national and 
DoD datasets do contain differences, the error distributions compare closely.  
  
Inpatient 
Outpatient 
Process Node* 
DoD 
National† 
DoD 
National 
Administering 
1,710 (41%) 
43,488 (35%) 
381 (3%) 
1,832 (13%) 
Dispensing 
1,058 (26%) 
23,574 (19%) 
8,942 (61%) 
6,962 (51%) 
Documenting/ 
transcribing 
793 (19%) 
30,124 (24%) 
1,226 (8%) 
1,124 (8%) 
Monitoring 
40 (1%) 
1,399 (1%) 
48 ( < 1%) 
113 (1%) 
Prescribing 
525 (13%) 
26,703 (21%) 
4,136 (28%) 
3,683 (27%) 
Advances in Patient Safety: Vol. 4 
368 
Drug products involved in medication errors 
An analysis of drug products involved in inpatient medication error reports 
was conducted and compared to the national data submitted to the MEDMARX 
system during CY 2002. Six of the top 10 drug products involved in errors that 
reached the patient were common to the DoD and national datasets. Moreover, 5 
of the top 10 drug products included in both the DoD and national datasets are 
considered “high-risk/alert” drugs. Of the top 10 products involved in errors that 
resulted in patient harm, 7 were common to the DoD and national datasets. 
Additionally, 9 of the 10 leading “harm” drugs in the DoD data and 8 of the 10 
leading “harm” drugs in the national data are considered “high-risk/alert” drugs 
(Table 3). 
Types of error 
The October 2002–September 2003 DoD medication events were compared to 
the CY 2002 national data from the MEDMARX system, after being categorized 
by type of error and stratified by the source of record (inpatient or outpatient) 
(Table 4). The most commonly reported type of inpatient error in the DoD data 
was “improper dose/quantity,” followed by “omission error.” The most 
commonly reported inpatient error in the national dataset was “omission,” 
followed “improper dose/quantity.” For both the DoD and national datasets, the 
most commonly reported outpatient error type was “prescribing error,” followed 
by “improper dose/quantity.” The inpatient and outpatient data from the DoD 
compare closely with the national data, despite differences in the collection 
procedures. 
Table 3. Ranked top 10 inpatient products involved in errors that reached the patient, 
stratified by level of harm and reported to the DoD Patient Safety Center, October 2002 
to September 2003, with comparison to the 2002 MEDMARXSM national database 
Products that reached the patient 
Products that caused harm 
(Categories C–I) 
(Categories E–I) 
DoD 
National* 
DoD 
National* 
Cefazolin 
Albuterol 
Morphine Sulfate 
Insulin 
Insulin† 
Insulin 
Fentanyl 
Morphine Sulfate 
Morphine Sulfate 
Heparin 
Insulin 
Heparin 
Oxycodone 
Morphine Sulfate 
Meperidine 
Potassium Chloride 
Vancomycin 
Vancomycin 
Methadone 
Hydromorphone 
Heparin 
Warfarin 
Potassium Chloride 
Warfarin 
Enoxaparin 
Cefazolin 
Warfarin 
Enoxaparin 
Potassium Chloride 
Furosemide 
Diazepam 
Fentanyl 
Ketorolac 
Potassium Chloride 
Furosemide 
Meperidine 
Metoprolol 
Ipatropium 
Hydromorphone 
Vancomycin 
* 2002 national MEDMARX data provided by U.S. Pharmacopeia, Center for Advancement in 
Patient Safety. 
Note: Items in bold indicate high-risk/high alert medications. 
Standardizing Medication Error Reporting in the DoD 
369 
Table 4. Percentage of inpatient and outpatient events, stratified by error type and 
reported to the DoD Patient Safety Center October 2002 to September 2003, with 
comparison to the 2002 MEDMARXSM national database 
  
Inpatient 
Outpatient 
Error type* 
DoD 
National† 
DoD 
National† 
Deteriorated product 
0.4% 
0.04% 
0.1% 
0.04% 
Expired product 
0.6% 
0.02% 
0.2% 
0.02% 
Extra dose 
7.0% 
5.1% 
1.3% 
2.1% 
Improper dose/quantity 
23.0% 
25.9% 
30.9% 
29.7% 
Omission error 
22.2% 
27.1% 
2.1% 
6.9% 
Prescribing error 
8.3% 
17.4% 
33.3% 
31.3% 
Type not determined 
10.8% 
0.1% 
9.2% 
0.02% 
Unauthorized drug 
8.6% 
10.7% 
7.3% 
12.6% 
Wrong administration technique 
1.8% 
1.3% 
0.6% 
1.2% 
Wrong dosage form 
2.8% 
1.5% 
8.1% 
7.1% 
Wrong drug preparation 
6.1% 
3.7% 
9.7% 
8.1% 
Wrong patient 
4.6% 
4.2% 
8.1% 
9.2% 
Wrong route 
1.2% 
1.6% 
0.5% 
0.8% 
Wrong time 
8.0% 
7.5% 
1.0% 
1.9% 
* Error types as categorized and defined in the 2004 MEDMARX system. 
† 2002 national MEDMARX data provided by U.S. Pharmacopeia, Center for Advancement in 
Patient Safety. 
Actions taken 
The MEDMARX reporting system includes an “actions taken” field in the 
medication error reporting form. Of the 29,662 error events reported by DoD 
facilities, 18,883 (64 percent) included at least one action taken related to the 
error. The most frequently reported action was “informed staff who made the 
initial error” (51.4 percent), followed by “education and training provided” 
(30.5 percent).  
Discussion 
Limitations 
Caution should be used in drawing conclusions from the reported medication 
error information, as there are numerous data limitations, specifically in the 
comparisons of the DoD and national MEDMARX data. All data are voluntary 
and self-reported and may not be an accurate reflection of what is occurring in the 
individual DoD facilities. In fact, the reported data most likely represent a small 
percentage of the events that are occurring in the military health care system. 
While MEDMARX is an error reporting tool that can be used to track medication-
related events and identify trends without regard for the means used to detect 
them, it should be noted that the DoD uses the system primarily as a spontaneous 
reporting network. Error detection and subsequent reporting should include 
Advances in Patient Safety: Vol. 4 
370 
multiple strategies (e.g., observational methods, computerized triggers, 
retrospective chart review, and spontaneous reporting), so the USP and DoD have 
incorporated this emphasis into the MEDMARX training curriculum. Users are 
instructed on the use of MEDMARX in nontraditional active and passive 
surveillance contexts such as root-cause analyses (RCA), failure mode and effect 
analyses (FMEA), and other performance and quality improvement initiatives. 
Additionally, data reported to the DoD Patient Safety Center Registry and 
MEDMARX are considered nominal-style variables, and therefore only 
descriptive measures were used to present the findings. No additional statistical 
methods were employed in the analysis. 
Another limitation concerns the MEDMARX program implementation and 
standardized data collection methods. During fiscal year (FY) 2003, many DoD 
health care facilities were implementing local patient safety programs, of which 
MEDMARX was a part. As such, challenges arose involving reporting accuracy, 
timeliness, and completeness of the data.12 Many of these concerns have been 
identified and are being addressed in training at the local, service, and DoD levels.  
The 2002 MEDMARX national data used in comparisons with the DoD data 
reported to the PSC is an additional area of concern. Ideally, data from identical 
time frames would have been used to compare the DoD data and the MEDMARX 
national data, but in this instance simultaneous data collection was not possible. 
Additionally, the 2002 DoD data could not be removed from the national dataset; 
and it is not known what, if any, impact this redundancy had on the overall 
analysis. It is important to note that neither DoD nor MEDMARX make any 
attempt to establish rate-based indicators or normative reporting ranges, and that 
the comparisons were included for illustrative purposes only. 
Application of the data  
It is necessary to emphasize again that the present DoD data are preliminary. 
However, the significance of this data should not be minimized. In fact, 
medication error data submitted to the DoD PSC have been used to identify, 
justify, and support several military-wide initiatives. For the first time, the DoD 
can aggregate medication error data at multiple levels and identify potential trends 
at the service and DoD levels that may not be apparent at the health care facility 
level. This analysis suggests that DoD facilities are faced with medication safety 
challenges similar to those of their civilian counterparts; the leadership should not 
wait for trends to emerge in their own data before taking action. Similarities in the 
DoD and national MEDMARX data on drug products that resulted in harm to 
patients appear to support this assessment. This type of information now is shared 
routinely with senior leadership at the headquarters and facility levels, via the 
PSC’s quarterly and annual data summary reports. More detailed analyses will be 
possible in the future, once the MTFs have completed the program 
implementation and the training initiatives, data quality, and integrity issues have 
improved. 
Standardizing Medication Error Reporting in the DoD 
371 
Safety publications 
In addition to locally collected event data, facilities and health systems should 
make a point of using information gathered from several other reliable sources, in 
an effort to better understand the global medication error trends in health care. 
Organizations such as the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare 
Organizations (JCAHO) and the ISMP have identified numerous medication error 
patterns and corresponding strategies for reducing errors that could benefit all 
clinical facilities.13 Two publications were developed using these nationally 
recognized safe practice recommendations and error report data submitted to the 
DoD PSC. The first of these publications, DoD Patient Safety Hot Topics, was 
created as a support tool for patient safety officers and is intended to address 
patient safety issues identified in event reports or derived from other reputable 
patient safety resources. The second publication, DoD Patient Safety Alert, serves 
as a rapid dissemination instrument for priority alerts directed at the MTFs and is 
used to distribute topical items identified from the services, nationally recognized 
patient safety organizations, and the Patient Safety Center Registry. In fall 2003, 
for example, the DoD PSC received a near-miss report regarding a potentially 
unsafe practice involving 30 ml multidose vials (MDV) of epinephrine. In 
response to the perceived safety threat, the PSC released its first DoD Patient 
Safety Alert in January 2004, detailing the hazard, as well as the nationally 
recognized “best practice” recommendations for the storage and use of 30 ml 
epinephrine vials. News in subsequent safety alerts and issues of Hot Topics 
addressed topics such as high-alert medications, dangerous abbreviations, look-
alike insulin and tuberculin syringe packaging, the paucity of patient allergy 
documentation, improper patient identification, and intravenous line and enteral 
feeding tube mix-ups. 
Reporting to external agencies 
The DoD PSC occasionally receives error event reports that relate directly to 
pharmaceutical manufacturer product packaging and labeling. Once all the 
relevant product and manufacturer information has been gathered, it is 
summarized in a report sent to the USP MER program and the FDA’s MedWatch 
program. The USP reviews each report for health hazards and forwards its 
findings to the FDA and the product manufacturer, in an effort to better maintain 
the reporter’s confidentiality.4, 5 To date, the PSC has submitted dozens of reports 
to these agencies as a means of improving the packaging and labeling of 
pharmaceutical industry products. 
Lessons learned 
Reporting systems such as MEDMARX can be valuable tools for collecting 
and managing data related to medication delivery. The usefulness of such tools, 
however, is dependant upon the quality of the data being collected. It is therefore 
essential that the entered information be as accurate, complete, and timely as 
possible. Like other reporting systems, MEDMARX is vulnerable to the 
Advances in Patient Safety: Vol. 4 
372 
“garbage-in, garbage-out” syndrome. Core elements including a thorough 
implementation plan, a robust training program, strategies for timely system 
changes, and sufficient program resources should be in place to improve the 
likelihood of program success at all levels. Weaknesses in any one of these areas 
may compromise data quality within the individual facility, the health system, and 
other users of the MEDMARX national database. 
Implementation 
Perhaps the most important lessons to come out of this program have involved 
the implementation of a standardized reporting program. Although the military 
health care system is similar in many respects to other large health systems, 
several important distinguishing characteristics of the MHS make implementation 
a complex and challenging task—factors such as the high active duty personnel 
turnover rate, worldwide military hospital locations, and staff mobilizations in 
times of war and other crises. Individual hospitals have limited resources and a 
variety of competing requirements, so it is important for the leadership at facilities 
to possess a clear understanding of new initiatives, as they unfold.  
The MEDMARX reporting system was introduced in DoD facilities as an 
optional tool in early 2002; however it was not until March 2004 that use of 
MEDMARX became mandatory in all the services. As a result, patient safety 
managers and pharmacists at various hospitals and clinics decided how best to 
utilize the MEDMARX system. And while some facilities embraced it, others 
chose to use it only within the pharmacy, or not at all. Since policy letters were 
issued mandating the use of MEDMARX, there has been a positive trend in the 
use of the system.  
Education and training  
Another valuable-but-difficult lesson for the DoD involved staff education 
and training in the use of the MEDMARX reporting system. Generally speaking, 
a well-defined and detailed training program can have a positive effect on any 
new program. The MEDMARX training staff at USP and the DoD recognized this 
early on; however funding and other resources to support such activities were not 
immediately available. A training budget was included in the DoD MEDMARX 
central contract that went into effect in October 2003. Moreover, USP developed 
and launched an online tutorial designed for new MEDMARX users in March 
2003, and a team of USP and DoD instructors currently offers advanced 
MEDMARX training at various U.S. military bases throughout the country and at 
USP headquarters in Rockville, Maryland. Response to the training sessions and 
its inherent value has been very positive. Future training sites may include 
military bases in Europe and the Far East.  
System improvements 
The impetus to standardize the collection and analysis of patient safety 
information is a relatively recent occurrence. Although most agree that these 
collection efforts are important, no nationally recognized standard encompassing 
Standardizing Medication Error Reporting in the DoD 
373 
the critical elements and taxonomy has yet been established. Furthermore, data 
elements and collection methodologies have matured and evolved significantly 
since the release of To Err Is Human in 1999. As a result, developers of medical 
event reporting systems should be flexible in their inclusion of new information 
technology, reflect advances in patient safety research, and be responsive to user 
feedback. The USP has incorporated numerous changes to the MEDMARX 
system since it was launched in 1998. More than 70 system improvements have 
occurred just since 2002, including the graphical user interface redesign, 
significant enhancements to improve search functionality, the development of an 
online training tutorial, and expanded categories and fields. Many of these 
changes were a direct result of the user feedback received at USP. 
Conclusions 
Medication errors account for a large percentage of total error events reported 
at military health care facilities. The implementation of the MEDMARX 
electronic reporting system has enhanced the DoD’s ability to collect and analyze 
these events. Although the challenges associated with the implementation of a 
standardized error reporting system were considerable in number and scope, the 
long-term benefits to the DoD are significant.  
Acknowledgments 
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the official views of the Armed Forces Institute of 
Pathology, the military services, the Department of Defense, or United States 
Pharmacopeia. 
Author affiliations 
U.S. Department of Defense Patient Safety Center, Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Silver 
Spring, MD (RAN, GWR). United States Pharmacopeia, Rockville, MD (JM). 
Address correspondence to: CDR Ronald A. Nosek, Jr., Deputy Directory; Department of Defense 
Patient Safety Center, 1335 East West Highway, Suite 6-100, Silver Spring, MD 20910; phone: 301-295-
7238; e-mail: nosekr@afip.osd.mil. 
References 
1. 
Kohn LT, Corrigan JM, Donaldson MS, editors. To err 
is human: building a safer health system. A report of 
the Committee on Quality of Health Care in America, 
Institute of Medicine. Washington, DC: National 
Academy Press; 2000. 
2. 
Leape LL, Bates DW, Cullen DJ, et al. Systems 
analysis of adverse drug events. ADE Prevention 
Study Group. JAMA 1995;274(1):35–43. 
3. 
Bates DW, Cullen DJ, Laird N, et al. Incidence of 
adverse drug events and potential adverse drug events. 
Implications for prevention. ADE Prevention Study 
Group. JAMA 1995;274(1):29–34. 
4. 
MedWatch, the FDA safety information and adverse 
reporting program. Available at: http://www.fda.gov/ 
medwatch. Accessed February 20, 2004. 
Advances in Patient Safety: Vol. 4 
374 
5. 
USP Medication Error Reporting (MER) program. 
Available at: http://www.usp.org/patientsafety/ 
reporting/mer.html. Accessed February 20, 2004. 
6. 
Pietro DA, Shyavitz LJ, Smith RA, et al. Detecting 
and reporting medical errors: why the dilemma? BMJ 
2000;320(7237):794–6. 
7. 
Cohen MR, editor. Medication errors. Causes 
prevention, and risk management. Sudbury,MA: Jones 
and Bartlett Inc.; 2000. 
8. 
Carter J. House passes bill to track medical errors. The 
Washington Post; Mar 12, 2003. Available at: 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/ 
A16911-2003Mar12.html. Accessed March 12, 2003. 
9. 
Quality Interagency Coordination Task Force (QuIC). 
Doing what counts for patient safety: Federal actions 
to reduce medical errors and their impact. Report to 
the President. Washington, DC: Quality Interagency 
Coordination Task Force; February 2000. Available 
at: http://www.quic.gov/report/. Accessed February 
20, 2004. 
10. Institute for Safe Medication Practices. USP launches 
MEDMARX as the third major national reporting 
program for adverse drug events; 1998. Available at: 
http://www.ismp.org/MSAarticles/MedMARx.html. 
11. National Coordinating Council for Medication Error 
Reporting and Prevention. Taxonomy of medication 
errors. Rockville (MD): National Coordinating 
Council for Medication Error Reporting and 
Prevention; 2001. Available at: http://www.nccmerp 
.org/pdf/taxo2001-07-31.pdf2001. Accessed February 
20, 2004. 
12. Hicks RW, Cousins DD, Williams RL. Summary of 
information submitted to MEDMARX in the year 
2002. The quest for quality. Rockville (MD): USP 
Center for the Advancement of Patient Safety; 2003. 
p. 56. 
13. Smetzer JL, Vaida AJ, Cohen MR, et al. Findings 
from the ISMP medication safety self-assessment for 
hospitals. Jt Comm J Qual Saf 2003;29(11):586–97. 
