Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 1 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consolidated Health Care Informatics 
 
Standards Adoption Recommendation 
 
Medications 
Subdomain: Active Ingredients 
 
 
 
Index 
 
1. Part I – Sub-team & Domain Scope Identification – basic information defining 
the team and the scope of its investigation. 
2. Part II – Standards Adoption Recommendation – team-based advice on 
standard(s) to adopt. 
3. Part III – Adoption & Deployment Information – supporting information 
gathered to assist with deployment of the standard (may be partial). 
 
 
 
 
 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 2 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
Summary 
 
Domain:  Medications 
 
Sub-Domain:  Active Ingredients 
 
Standards Adoption Recommendation:   
FDA Established Name for active ingredient &  
FDA Unique Ingredient Identifier (UNII) codes. 
 
SCOPE 
The purpose of this standard is to enable the federal health care sector to share 
information regarding medication active ingredients. An active ingredient is a substance 
responsible for the effects of a medication. Frequently, an active ingredient is a known 
chemical substance. Known chemical substances may be called by the base substance 
(e.g. propanolol), or by a base substance – salt combination (e.g. propanolol 
hydrocloride). In certain instances the structure of the ingredient is not known precisely. 
For example, beef gelatin is a complex molecular mixture defined by the process used to 
create it. 
 
RECOMMENDATION 
FDA Established Name for active ingredient & FDA Unique Ingredient Identifier (UNII) 
codes. 
 
OWNERSHIP 
The recommended standards are in the public domain, and are administered by the FDA, 
supported by AHRQ and maintained by NCI. 
 
APPROVALS AND ACCREDITATIONS 
FDA 
 
ACQUISITION AND COST 
FDA Established Names and the UNII codes are free from FDA and will also be 
available from the NLM. 
 
REVISION HISTORY 
 
DATE 
VERSION 
COMMENT 
2/13/2004 
Public Document 
Final Recommendation 
2/24/2006 
1.1 
AHRQ reference added 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 3 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
Part I – Team & Domain Scope Identification
 
Target Vocabulary Domain 
 
Common name used to describe the clinical/medical domain or messaging standard 
requirement that has been examined. 
 
Medication Active Ingredients, a subdomain of Medications 
 
Describe the specific purpose/primary use of this standard in the federal health care 
sector (100 words or less) 
 
An active ingredient is a substance responsible for the effects of a medication. 
Frequently, an active ingredient is a known chemical substance. Known chemical 
substances may be called by the base substance (e.g. propanolol), or by a base substance 
– salt combination (e.g. propanolol hydrocloride). In certain instances the structure of the 
ingredient is not known precisely. For example, beef gelatin is a complex molecular 
mixture defined by the process used to create it. 
 
The purpose of this standard is to enable the federal health care sector to share 
information regarding medication active ingredients. 
 
 
Sub-domains  Identify/dissect the domain into sub-domains, if any.  For each, indicate if 
standards recommendations are or are not included in the scope of this recommendation. 
 
Medication active ingredients is itself a sub-domain of the Medications Domain. 
Please see the overarching domain analysis for more information. 
 
Domain/Sub-domain 
In-Scope (Y/N) 
This template is included as part of the medications 
domain
 
 
Information Exchange Requirements (IERs)  Using the table at appendix A, list the 
IERs involved when using this vocabulary. 
 
Customer Health Care Information 
Care Management Information 
Customer Risk Factors 
Referral Information 
Body of Health Services Knowledge 
Tailored Education Materials 
Beneficiary Tracking Information 
Patient Satisfaction Information 
Case Management Information 
Cost Accounting Information 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 4 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
Population Member Health Data 
Population Risk Reduction Plan 
Provider Metrics 
Improvement Strategy 
Resource Availability 
Beneficiary Inquiry Information 
Clinical Guidelines 
Customer Approved Care Plan 
 
 
 
Team Members  Team members’ names and agency names with phone numbers. 
 
 
Name 
Agency/Department 
Steven Brown (Team Lead) 
VA 
Randy Levin 
FDA 
Kathy Hollinger 
FDA 
Bill Hess 
FDA 
Stuart Nelson 
NLM 
Nancy Orvis 
DoD 
William Trick 
CDC 
Dan Budnitz 
CDC 
Carlene McIntyre 
InHs 
 
Work Period  Dates work began/ended. 
 
Start 
End 
Feburary 2003 
June 2003 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 5 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
Part II – Standards Adoption Recommendation 
 
Recommendation Identify the solution recommended. 
 
The CHI Medications subgroup recommends the following standards for medication 
active ingredients in order of priority 
 
1. Primary Standard: FDA Established Name for active ingredient & FDA Unique 
Ingredient Identifier (UNII) codes. This selection was made because of the 
widespread use and free availability to the public of these names and the 
impending free availability of authoritative UNII codes that are in the public 
domain from the FDA through NLM. Until UNII Codes are available, the 
subgroup declines to recommend a code number scheme for active ingredients. 
 
2. Secondary Standards in order of precedence 
a. USP-NF name& UNII codes 
b. USAN name and UNII code 
c. INN names & UNII codes  
d. IUPAC chemical names and UNII codes  
e. Common name and UNII codes  
 
Ownership Structure Describe who “owns” the standard, how it is managed and 
controlled. 
 
FDA Established Names 
 
FDA Established Names are in the public domain, and are administered by the FDA with 
input from the manufacturer, the USAN council, and the USP. 
 
USP Names 
 
The United States Pharmacopeia (USP) is a non-government organization that establishes 
standards via a process of public involvement to ensure the quality of medicines and 
other health care technologies. Currently, USP provides standards (including names) for 
more than 3,400 prescription and non-prescription drugs, nutritional and dietary 
supplements, veterinary drug standards, and health care products. These standards are 
published in the United States Pharmacopeia and the National Formulary (USP-NF), 
which are officially recognized in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
§ 321 et seq.) About 650 elected scientists and practitioners comprise USP’s scientific 
decision-making body by serving as members of the Council of Experts (COE) or on 
expert committees. About 400 members represent state associations and colleges of 
medicine and pharmacy; the federal government; national and international professional, 
scientific, and trade organizations; the pharmaceutical industry; and consumer 
organizations.  
 
United States Adopted Names (USAN) 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 6 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
 
Every medication introduced to market since 1961 in the United States has been given a 
non-proprietary United States Adopted Name (USAN) by the USAN Council, a body 
composed of representatives from the United States Pharmacopoeia, the American 
Medical Association, the Food and Drug Administration, the American Pharmacists 
Association and an “at large” member.  These names are known to virtually all health 
care providers and even lay citizens as “generic names”, but are more properly referred to 
as “non-proprietary” names.  USAN are in the public domain 
 
 
UNII Codes 
 
The FDA developing an electronic repository listing all medication ingredients used in 
the United States. Each will have a unique ingredient identifier (UNII) code based on 
molecular structure, manufacturing process, and/or other characteristics.  The FDA and 
the NLM are collaborating to make the ingredient information repository, including all 
publicly available medication ingredients, structures, Molfiles, and names, available to 
the public at no cost. The NLM will also maintain mechanisms that will permit third 
parties to submit for potential inclusion information about ingredients used in products 
that are marketed or investigated outside the United States 
 
 
 
Summary Basis for Recommendation Summarize the team’s basis for making the 
recommendation (300 words or less). 
 
FDA Established Names 
 
Every active ingredient marketed in the US is given an  “established” name by the FDA, 
with input from the manufacturer, the USAN council, and the USP.  The established 
name may consist of up to 3 fields: active ingredient, dosage form, and route of 
administration. In practice, active ingredients named by the FDA Established Name, the 
USP Name, and the USAN name are, at the time of writing, identical for the same 
substances. It is theoretically possible however, that irreconcilable differences could arise 
between FDA, USP, and USAN. In this case, the medications group recommends that 
government standards respect legal authority in Sec 502(e)(3) FD&C Act. In other cases, 
a substance might have only 1 of these names in which case secondary recommendations 
should be followed. 
 
USP-NF 
 
The United States Pharmacopeia (USP) is a non-government organization that establishes 
standards via a process of public involvement to ensure the quality of medicines and 
other health care technologies. Currently, USP provides standards (including names) for 
more than 3,400 prescription and non-prescription drugs, nutritional and dietary 
supplements, veterinary drug standards, and health care products. These standards are 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 7 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
published in the United States Pharmacopeia and the National Formulary (USP-NF), 
which are officially recognized in the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. 
§ 321 et seq.) The new annual edition is USP 26–NF 21 
 
Of the 9,503 substances listed in the USP dictionary, some 3822 have USAN names. The 
USP Dictionary can be considered to be “complete” for medications marketed in the US 
regardless of when they were introduced. As mentioned in the USAN analysis, the 
coverage of USAN names does not necessarily include medications not marketed the 
United States. In addition, there are a number of marketed medication ingredients that 
were given non-USAN names prior to 1961  
 
According to sources at USP, the non USP names can be used without restrictions. 
 
United States Adopted Names (USAN) 
 
Every medication introduced to market since 1961 in the United States has been given a 
non-proprietary United States Adopted Name (USAN) by the USAN Council, a body 
composed of representatives from the United States Pharmacopoeia, the American 
Medical Association, the Food and Drug Administration, the American Pharmacists 
Association and an “at large” member.  These names are known to virtually all health 
care providers and even lay citizens as “generic names”, but are more properly referred to 
as “non-proprietary” names.  These “non proprietary” names are shorter and more easily 
remembered than the more precise chemical name For example Imatinib mesylate is the 
USAN name for the chemical 4-[(4-Methyl-1-piperazinyl) methyl]-N-[4-methyl-3-[[4-(3-
pyridinyl)-2-pyrimidinyl]amino]-phenyl]benzamide methanesulfonate. Unlike trade 
names, generic USAN names are not “reused” (e.g. Salagen (Pilocarpine) name reissued 
in 1994 as Salagen (Aspirin, Buffered) name retired in 1993.  
 
USAN non-proprietary names are a core component of RxNorm names, and are included 
in the offerings of each of the major US drug information vendors’ products. NLM uses 
USAN non-proprietary names to index the world’s medical literature and VA uses USAN 
non-proprietary names in its National Drug File. There is no competitor in the US for 
USAN non-proprietary names of marketed medications - USAN is the only official 
process, by legal mandate. USAN criteria are updated as comments are received, and 
have been in use for over 40 years. 
 
USAN names have excellent content coverage for medications brought to market in the 
US since 1961 and are publicly available without intellectual property restrictions. Of the 
9,503 substances listed in the USP dictionary, some 3822 have USAN names. The 
coverage of USAN names does not necessarily include medications not marketed the 
United States. In addition, there are a number of marketed medication ingredients that 
were given non-USAN names prior to 1961 (when USAN commenced) that have not 
ever been given a USAN. Examples include bubalbarbital sodium, cholorquine 
hydrochloride, and chlorphenaramine maleate.  USAN names are organized in a uncoded, 
simple listing and thus fail to meet certain published criteria for good terminology 
practices.  
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 8 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
 
 
UNII Codes 
 
The FDA developing an electronic repository listing all medication ingredients used in 
the United States. Each will have a unique ingredient identifier (UNII) code based on 
molecular structure, manufacturing process, and/or other characteristics.  When 
molecular structures are known, the ingredient’s UNII code is based on the freely 
available and widely used Molecular Design Limited (MDL®) Molfile A Molfile is a 
unique electronic representation of molecular structure. When specific molecular 
structures of complex substances are not known, business rules established by an expert 
oversight committee will be applied; for example, beef gelatin, a complex molecular 
mixture, will be defined by the process used to create it.  
 
The FDA and the NLM are collaborating to make the ingredient information repository, 
including all publicly available medication ingredients, structures, Molfiles, and names, 
available to the public at no cost. The NLM will also maintain mechanisms that will 
permit third parties to submit for potential inclusion information about ingredients used in 
products that are marketed or investigated outside the United States 
 
The UNII code project is ongoing. As of early 2003, the FDA has acquired the Molfile 
software and is constructing electronic structural representations for all U.S. medication 
product ingredients. FDA and NLM will UNII codes and associated structural 
representations available to the public 2003. 
 
Analysis for secondary recommendations is included below 
 
 
Conditional Recommendation If this is a conditional recommendation, describe 
conditions upon which the recommendation is predicated. 
 
Until UNII Codes are available, the subgroup declines to recommend a code number 
scheme for active ingredients. The group expects UNII codes to be available in 2004 via 
a joint effort of NLM and FDA 
 
 
Approvals & Accrediations 
 
Indicate the status of various accreditations and approvals: 
 
Approvals 
& 
 Accreditations 
 
 
Yes/Approved 
 
 
Applied 
 
Not 
Approved 
Full SDO Ballot 
 
 
 
ANSI 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 9 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
 
 
 
 
 
Options Considered  Inventory solution options considered and summarize the basis for 
not recommending the alternative(s). 
 
Options 
 
1. FDA Established Names 
2. United States Adopted Names (USAN) 
3. United States Pharmacopoeia National Formulary of drug substances and 
pharmaceutical ingredients (USP-NF).  
4. Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) number 
5. MolFile chemical structure representation and code 
6. International Union of Pure and Applied Chemists (IUPAC) chemical name.  
7. Other approved names including British Approved Names (BAN), Japanese Approved 
Names (JAN) and International Nonproprietary Names (INN) 
 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 10 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
Option Analysis 
 
FDA Established Names 
 
Every active ingredient marketed in the US is given an  “established” name by the FDA, with 
input from the manufacturer, the USAN council, and the USP.  The established name may 
consist of up to 3 fields: active ingredient, dosage form, and route of administration. In 
practice, active ingredients named by the FDA Established Name, the USP Name, and the 
USAN name are, at the time of writing, identical for the same substances. It is theoretically 
possible however, that irreconcilable differences could arise between FDA, USP, and USAN. 
In this case, the medications group recommends that government standards respect legal 
authority in Sec 502(e)(3) FD&C Act. In other cases, a substance might have only 1 of these 
names in which case secondary recommendations should be followed. 
 
 
United States Adopted Names (USAN) 
 
Every medication introduced to market since 1961 in the United States has been given a non-
proprietary United States Adopted Name (USAN) by the USAN Council, a body composed of 
representatives from the United States Pharmacopoeia, the American Medical Association, the 
Food and Drug Administration, the American Pharmacists Association and an “at large” 
member.  These names are known to virtually all health care providers and even lay citizens as 
“generic names”, but are more properly referred to as “non-proprietary” names.  These “non 
proprietary” names are shorter and more easily remembered than the more precise chemical 
name For example Imatinib mesylate is the USAN name for the chemical 4-[(4-Methyl-1-
piperazinyl) methyl]-N-[4-methyl-3-[[4-(3-pyridinyl)-2-pyrimidinyl]amino]-
phenyl]benzamide methanesulfonate. Unlike trade names, generic USAN names are not 
“reused” (e.g. Salagen (Pilocarpine) name reissued in 1994 as Salagen (Aspirin, Buffered) 
name retired in 1993.  
 
USAN non-proprietary names are a core component of RxNorm names, and are included in 
the offerings of each of the major US drug information vendors’ products. NLM uses USAN 
non-proprietary names to index the world’s medical literature and VA uses USAN non-
proprietary names in its National Drug File. There is no competitor in the US for USAN non-
proprietary names of marketed medications - USAN is the only official process, by legal 
mandate. USAN criteria are updated as comments are received, and have been in use for over 
40 years. 
 
USAN names have excellent content coverage for medications brought to market in the US 
since 1961 and are publicly available without intellectual property restrictions. Of the 9,503 
substances listed in the USP dictionary, some 3822 have USAN names. The coverage of 
USAN names does not necessarily include medications not marketed the United States. In 
addition, there are a number of marketed medication ingredients that were given non-USAN 
names prior to 1961 (when USAN commenced) that have not ever been given a USAN. 
Examples include bubalbarbital sodium, cholorquine hydrochloride, and chlorphenaramine 
maleate.  USAN names are organized in a uncoded, simple listing and thus fail to meet certain 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 11 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
published criteria for good terminology practices.  
 
 
USP-NF 
 
The United States Pharmacopeia (USP) is a non-government organization that establishes 
standards via a process of public involvement to ensure the quality of medicines and other 
health care technologies. Currently, USP provides standards (including names) for more than 
3,400 prescription and non-prescription drugs, nutritional and dietary supplements, veterinary 
drug standards, and health care products. These standards are published in the United States 
Pharmacopeia and the National Formulary (USP-NF), which are officially recognized in the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. § 321 et seq.) The new annual edition is 
USP 26–NF 21 
 
 
About 650 elected scientists and practitioners comprise USP’s scientific decision-making body 
by serving as members of the Council of Experts (COE) or on expert committees. About 400 
members represent state associations and colleges of medicine and pharmacy; the federal 
government; national and international professional, scientific, and trade organizations; the 
pharmaceutical industry; and consumer organizations.  
 
Of the 9,503 substances listed in the USP dictionary, some 3822 have USAN names. The USP 
Dictionary can be considered to be “complete” for medications marketed in the US regardless 
of when they were introduced. As mentioned in the USAN analysis, the coverage of USAN 
names does not necessarily include medications not marketed the United States. In addition, 
there are a number of marketed medication ingredients that were given non-USAN names 
prior to 1961  
 
According to sources at USP, the non USP names can be used without restrictions. 
 
 
UNII Codes 
 
The FDA developing an electronic repository listing all medication ingredients used in the 
United States. Each will have a unique ingredient identifier (UNII) code based on molecular 
structure, manufacturing process, and/or other characteristics.  When molecular structures are 
known, the ingredient’s UNII code is based on the freely available and widely used Molecular 
Design Limited (MDL®) Molfile identifier (MolID) assigned to the substance. A Molfile is a 
unique electronic representation of molecular structure. When specific molecular structures of 
complex substances are not known, business rules established by an expert oversight 
committee will be applied; for example, beef gelatin, a complex molecular mixture, will be 
defined by the process used to create it.  
 
The FDA and the NLM are collaborating to make the ingredient information repository, 
including all publicly available medication ingredients, structures, Molfiles, and names, 
available to the public at no cost. The NLM will also maintain mechanisms that will permit 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 12 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
third parties to submit for potential inclusion information about ingredients used in products 
that are marketed or investigated outside the United States 
 
The UNII code project is ongoing. As of early 2003, the FDA has acquired the Molfile 
software and is constructing electronic structural representations for all U.S. medication 
product ingredients. . FDA and NLM will make UNII codes and associated structural 
representations freely available to the public in 2004. 
 
 
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemists (IUPAC) Name 
 
Chemists internationally use the IUPAC names, and naming algorithms. The IUPAC does not 
provide a unique name, although it does provide an unambiguous name.  IUPAC names are 
scientifically descriptive, and the naming algorithms are flexible and capable of representing 
virtually all chemicals known to be used in medications. IUPAC names cannot be generated 
for medication ingredients whose precise structures are not known. Furthermore, IUPAC 
names can be lengthy, and not easily understood by the uninitiated.  
 
 
International Nonproprietary Names 
 
http://www.who.int/medicines/organization/qsm/activities/qualityassurance/inn/innguide.shtml 
 
International Nonproprietary Names (INN) identify pharmaceutical substances or active 
pharmaceutical ingredients. Each INN is a unique name that is globally recognized and is 
public property. A nonproprietary name is also known as a generic name. To make INN 
universally available they are formally placed by WHO in the public domain, hence their 
designation as "nonproprietary". They can be used without any restriction whatsoever to 
identify pharmaceutical substances. 
 
The INN system as it exists today was initiated in 1950 by a World Health Assembly 
resolution WHA3.11 and began operating in 1953, when the first list of International 
Nonproprietary Names for pharmaceutical substances was published. The cumulative list of 
INN now stands at some 7000 names designated since that time, and this number is growing 
every year by some 120-150 new INN. 
 
British Approved Name, Japanese Approved Name, and other International Naming Schemes 
 
Much like the US Adopted Names, other countries have developed naming schemes that allow 
laypersons within their countries to discuss active medication ingredients with complex 
chemical names. As a result of ongoing collaboration, national names such as British 
Approved Names (BAN), Dénominations Communes Françaises (DCF), Japanese Adopted 
Names (JAN) and United States Accepted Names (USAN) are nowadays, with rare 
exceptions, identical to the INN. These national naming schemes can be country specific. That 
is, they refer ingredients used in the particular country with names intended to meaningful to 
its citizens. As a result, there is significant overlap and yet some differences between various 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 13 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
national schemes. For example, differences exist between BAN and USAN names for the 
same substance (e.g. acetaminophen = paracetamol). In addition to having different names for 
the same substances, different countries permit the use of different medicinal ingredients.  It is 
assured that all US medications do not have approved names under other countries’ naming 
schemes. Likewise, these international naming schemes cover medications not currently 
employed in the US. Quantitative analysis of overlap and dissonance is beyond the scope of 
the current analysis. Given those caveats, the CHI group may wish to develop, or encourage 
the development of mappings to other international systems. 
 
 
Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) Registry Number 
 
The Chemical Abstracts Service, established by the American Chemical Society, maintains an 
extensive listing of chemical substances and code numbers. CAS registry numbers are linked 
to chemical names expressed in several formats (e.g. USAN, IUPAC). CAS registry numbers 
used to index the chemical literature. The content coverage of CAS extends beyond 
medication active ingredients, although medications are an advertised use. CAS registry 
information is copyright protected and must be licensed. In addition, multiple “salt” forms of 
medications may share a single CAS registry number 
 
Investigational “Lab” Names 
 
When drug companies submit Investigational New Drug (IND) applications to the FDA for 
new molecular entities, they may not have yet decided upon a proprietary name, and the USP 
has not yet had an opportunity to create an adopted name (USAN) for the substance. 
Commonly, companies will refer to medications with a name composed of letters 
(representing the company) and numbers (representing the compound). An example of an 
investigational lab name is “RU 486” for the compound that was eventually given the USAN 
name “mifeprestone”.   Investigational lab names are used by the pharmaceutical industry, the 
FDA, and by centers conducting studies of the compounds. Investigational lab names are not 
necessarily restricted to compounds that have known chemical structures. 
 
 
 
 
Current Deployment 
 
 
Summarize the degree of market penetration today; i.e., where is this solution installed 
today? 
 
FDA Established Name/USP Name/USAN Name – Too numerous to count 
UNII Code - none 
 
 
What number of or percentage of relevant vendors have adopted the standard? 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 14 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
FDA Established Name/USP Name/USAN Name – Too numerous to count 
UNII Code - none 
 
What number or percentage of healthcare institutions have adopted the standard? 
FDA Established Name/USP Name/USAN Name – Too numerous to count 
UNII Code - none 
 
What number or percentage of federal agencies have adopted the standard? 
FDA Established Name/USP Name/USAN Name – Too numerous to count 
UNII Code - none 
 
Is the standard used in other countries? 
 
FDA Established Name/USP Name/USAN Name – probably some, there is overlap 
resulting from harmonization efforts with INN and others 
 
Are there other relevant indicators of market acceptance? 
 
 
 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 15 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
Part III – Adoption & Deployment Information 
 
Provide all information gathered in the course of making the recommendation that may 
assist with adoption of the standard in the federal health care sector.  This information 
will support the work of an implementation team. 
 
 
Existing Need & Use Environment
 
Measure the need for this standard and the extent of existing exchange among federal 
users.  Provide information regarding federal departments and agencies use or non-use 
of this health information in paper or electronic form, summarize their primary reason 
for using the information, and indicate if they exchange the information internally or 
externally with other federal or non-federal entities. 
 
FDA ESTABLISHED 
 
Column A: 
Agency or Department Identity (name) 
Column B: 
Use data in this domain today? (Y or N) 
Column C: 
Is use of data a core mission requirement? (Y or N) 
Column D: 
Exchange with others in federal sector now? (Y or N) 
Column E: 
Currently exchange paper or electronic (P, E, B (both), N/Ap) 
Column F: 
Name of paper/electronic vocabulary, if any (name) 
Column G:  
Basis/purposes for data use (research, patient care, benefits) 
 
Department/Agency 
B C D
E
F 
G 
Department of 
Veterans Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of 
Defense 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HHS Office of the 
Secretary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Administration for 
Children and 
Families (ACF) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Administration on 
Aging (AOA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agency for 
Healthcare Research 
and Quality (AHRQ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Agency for Toxic 
Substances and 
Disease Registry 
(ATSDR) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Centers for Disease 
Control and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 16 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
Prevention (CDC) 
Centers for Medicare 
and Medicaid 
Services (CMS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Food and Drug 
Administration 
(FDA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Health Resources and 
Services 
Administration 
(HRSA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indian Health Service 
(IHS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Institutes of 
Health (NIH) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health 
Services 
Administration 
(SAMHSA) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social Security 
Administration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of 
Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
State Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
US Agency for 
International 
Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Justice Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Treasury Department 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of 
Education 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Services 
Administration 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Environmental 
Protection Agency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of 
Housing & Urban 
Development 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of 
Transportation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Homeland Security 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number of Terms 
 
Quantify the number of vocabulary terms, range of terms or other order of magnitude. 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 17 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
Of the 9,503 substances listed in the USP dictionary, some 3822 have USAN namesAll 
active ingredients in the US have an FDA established name 
 
How often are terms updated? 
 
FDA publishes the Orange Book quarterly 
USAN adoptions are scheduled for the last Wednesday of each month 
UNII codes – will be published via NLM as part of the DailyMed 
 
 
Range of Coverage   
 
Within the recommended vocabulary, what portions of the standard are complete and can 
be implemented now? (300 words or less) 
 
All active ingredients marketed in the US have an FDA established name. FDA 
established names and the USP Dictionary can be considered to be “complete” for 
medications marketed in the US regardless of when they were introduced. Of the 9,503 
substances listed in the USP dictionary, some 3822 have USAN names. As mentioned in 
the USAN analysis, the coverage of USAN names does not necessarily include 
medications not marketed the United States. In addition, there are a number of marketed 
medication ingredients that were given non-USAN names prior to 1961  
 
UNII Codes – content will include all chemical substances marketed as medications in 
the US 
 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 18 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
Acquisition:  How are the data sets/codes acquired and use licensed? 
 
FDA Established Names are in the public domain.  Most active ingredient names are 
freely available in the Orange Book (Approved Drug Products with Therapeutic 
Equivalence Evaluations) or in the NDC Directory.  These active ingredient names 
should contain the active ingredient(s) as they appear on the latest approved labeling, 
both for RX and OTC drugs.  The Orange Book is available in paper, and on-line at 
http://www.fda.gov/cder/ob/default.htm.  The NDC Directory is only available on-line at 
http://www.fda.gov/cder/ndc/database/default.htm.  The FDA may also be able to provide 
a separate list of active ingredient names.  Lastly, the active ingredient names will be 
freely available through the DailyMed initiative through the NLM. 
 
USP standards are published in the United States Pharmacopoeia and the National 
Formulary (USP-NF), which are officially recognized in the Federal Food, Drug, and 
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. § 321 et seq.). In 1906, with the enactment of the Pure Foods 
and Drug Act, the USP-NF achieved official status. It establishes legal standards for 
drugs manufactured in the U.S. The USP covers active ingredients and the NF covers 
inactive ingredients. The new annual edition is USP 26–NF 21 
 
According to sources at USP, USAN are in the public domain; the non USAN USP 
names can be used without restrictions. 
 
UNII Codes – free distribution via NLM 
 
Cost 
 
What is the direct cost to obtain permission to use the data sets/codes? (licensure, 
acquisition, other external data sets required, training and education, updates and 
maintenance, etc.) 
 
FDA Established Names – free from FDA and eventually via NLM along with UNII 
codes 
 
According to the USP website 
http://www.usp.org/cgi-bin/catalog/SoftCart.exe/catalog/frameset.htm?E+uspstore 
 
2003 USP Dictionary 
Online & Print Combination (Special Offer) 
(2003 online license expires 3/31/04*) 
Item Number: 3934322 
Price: $ 319.00  
 
 
UNII Codes – free distribution via NLM 
 
 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 19 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
Systems Requirements 
 
Is the standard associated with or limited to a specific hardware or software technology 
or other protocol? 
 
none 
 
Guidance:  
 
See USP Website 
UNII codes – under development 
 
Maintenance:  
 
FDA Established Names  
Updates are issued quarterly to the FDA Orange Book. 
 
USAN  
 See: 
http://www.ama-assn.org/ama1/pub/upload/mm/365/timeprocessrqrd_0902.doc 
 
 
What is the average time between versions? 
USAN adoptions are scheduled for the last Wednesday of each month 
 
 
What methods or tools are used to expedite the standards development cycle? 
http://www.ama-assn.org/ama1/pub/upload/mm/365/timeprocessrqrd_0902.doc 
 
How are local extensions, beyond the scope of the standard, supported if at all? 
http://www.ama-assn.org/ama1/pub/upload/mm/365/timeprocessrqrd_0902.doc 
 
 
UNII codes – processes under development 
 
 
Customization: Describe known implementations that have been achieved without user 
customization, if any.   
 
If user customization is needed or desirable, how is this achieved? (e.g, optional fields, 
interface engines, etc.) 
 
 
Mapping Requirements   
 
Describe the extent to which user agencies will likely need to perform mapping from 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 20 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
internal codes to this standard. 
Little to none for FDA Established Name/USP Name/USAN Name  
 
UNII codes will be mapped to USAN and USP names by FDA 
 
Identify the tools available to user agencies to automate or otherwise simplify mapping 
from existing codes to this standard. 
 
N/A 
 
 
Compatibility 
 
Identify the extent of off-the-shelf comformity with other standards and requirements: 
 
Conformity with other Standards 
Yes 
(100%) 
No  
(0%) 
Yes with 
exception 
NEDSS requirements 
 
 
 
HIPAA standards 
 
 
 
HL7 2.x 
 
 
 
 
Implementation Timeframe
 
Estimate the number of months required to deploy this standard; identify unique 
considerations that will impact deployment schedules. 
 
If some data sets/code sets are under development, what are the projected dates of 
completion/deployment? 
 
FDA Established Name/USP Name/USAN Name – deployment is effectively done 
 
UNII – FDA  expects deployment 2004 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Gaps 
 
Identify the gaps in data, vocabulary or interoperability. 
 
Need to be cautious referring to salt forms or base forms explicitly 
 
 
 
Created on 2/16/2006 6:44:00 PM 
- 21 - 
med_ingred_full_publicv1.1.doc  
 
 
 
Obstacles 
 
What obstacles, if any, have slowed penetration of this standard? (technical, financial, 
and/or cultural)  
 
None for FDA established names, USP Names or USAN,  
UNII – under development 
 
 
 
  
