1
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
[As Amended Through P.L. 107–377, Dec. 19, 2002]
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.001
December 19, 2002 
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.001
December 19, 2002 
3
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
CHAPTER I—SHORT TITLE
SECTION 1. ø21 U.S.C. 301¿ This Act may be cited as the Fed-
eral Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.001
December 19, 2002 
4
1 The following additional definitions applicable to this Act are provided for in other Acts:
Butter. The Act of March 4, 1923 (21 U.S.C. 321a), defines butter as ‘‘the food product usually
known as butter, and which is made exclusively from milk or cream, or both, with or without
common salt, and with or without additional coloring matter, and containing not less than 80
per centum by weight of milk fat, all tolerances having been allowed for.’’
Package. The Act of July 24, 1919 (21 U.S.C. 321b), states ‘‘The word ‘package’ shall include
and shall be construed to include wrapped meats inclosed in papers or other materials as pre-
pared by the manufacturers thereof for sale.’’
Nonfat Dry Milk, Milk. The Act of July 2, 1956 (21 U.S.C. 321c), defines nonfat dry milk as
‘‘the product resulting from the removal of fat and water from milk, and contains the lactose,
milk proteins, and milk minerals in the same relative proportions as in the fresh milk from
which made. It contains not over 5 per centum by weight of moisture. The fat content is not
over 11⁄2 per centum by weight unless otherwise indicated.’’, and defines milk to mean sweet
milk of cows.
CHAPTER II—DEFINITIONS 1
SEC. 201. ø21 U.S.C. 321¿ For the purposes of this Act—
(a)(1) The term ‘‘State’’, except as used in the last sentence of
section 702(a), means any State or Territory of the United States,
the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
(2) The term ‘‘Territory’’ means any Territory or possession of
the United States, including the District of Columbia, and exclud-
ing the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the Canal Zone.
(b) The term ‘‘interstate commerce’’ means (1) commerce be-
tween any State or Territory and any place outside thereof, and (2)
commerce within the District of Columbia or within any other Ter-
ritory not organized with a legislative body.
(c) The term ‘‘Department’’ means the Department of Health
and Human Services.
(d) The term ‘‘Secretary’’ means the Secretary of Health and
Human Services.
(e) The term ‘‘person’’ includes individual, partnership, corpora-
tion, and association.
(f) 1 The term ‘‘food’’ means (1) articles used for food or drink
for man or other animals, (2) chewing gum, and (3) articles used
for components of any such article.
(g)(1) The term ‘‘drug’’ means (A) articles recognized in the offi-
cial United States Pharmacopeia, official Homeopathic Pharma-
copeia of the United States, or official National Formulary, or any
supplement to any of them; and (B) articles intended for use in the
diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in
man or other animals; and (C) articles (other than food) intended
to affect the structure or any function of the body of man or other
animals; and (D) articles intended for use as a component of any
articles specified in clause (A), (B), or (C). A food or dietary supple-
ment for which a claim, subject to sections 403(r)(1)(B) and
403(r)(3) or sections 403(r)(1)(B) and 403(r)(5)(D), is made in ac-
cordance with the requirements of section 403(r) is not a drug sole-
ly because the label or the labeling contains such a claim. A food,
dietary ingredient, or dietary supplement for which a truthful and
not misleading statement is made in accordance with section
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.002
December 19, 2002 
5
Sec. 201
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
403(r)(6) is not a drug under clause (C) solely because the label or
the labeling contains such a statement.
(2) The term ‘‘counterfeit drug’’ means a drug which, or the
container or labeling of which, without authorization, bears the
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark, imprint, or de-
vice, or any likeness thereof, of a drug manufacturer, processor,
packer, or distributor other than the person or persons who in fact
manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed such drug and
which thereby falsely purports or is represented to be the product
of, or to have been packed or distributed by, such other drug manu-
facturer, processor, packer, or distributor.
(h) The term ‘‘device’’ (except when used in paragraph (n) of
this section and in sections 301(i), 403(f), 502(c), and 602(c)) means
an instrument, apparatus, implement, machine, contrivance, im-
plant, in vitro reagent, or other similar or related article, including
any component, part, or accessory, which is—
(1) recognized in the official National Formulary, or the
United States Pharmacopeia, or any supplement to them,
(2) intended for use in the diagnosis of disease or other
conditions, or in the cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention
of disease, in man or other animals, or
(3) intended to affect the structure or any function of the
body of man or other animals, and
which does not achieve its primary intended purposes through
chemical action within or on the body of man or other animals and
which is not dependent upon being metabolized for the achieve-
ment of its primary intended purposes.
(i) The term ‘‘cosmetic’’ means (1) articles intended to be
rubbed, poured, sprinkled, or sprayed on, introduced into, or other-
wise applied to the human body or any part thereof for cleansing,
beautifying, promoting attractiveness, or altering the appearance,
and (2) articles intended for use as a component of any such arti-
cles; except that such term shall not include soap.
(j) The term ‘‘official compendium’’ means the official United
States Pharmacopeia, official Homeopathic Pharmacopeia of the
United States, official National Formulary, or any supplement to
any of them.
(k) The term ‘‘label’’ means a display of written, printed, or
graphic matter upon the immediate container of any article; and a
requirement made by or under authority of this Act that any word,
statement, or other information appear on the label shall not be
considered to be complied with unless such word, statement, or
other information also appears on the outside container or wrapper,
if any there be, of the retail package of such article, or is easily leg-
ible through the outside container or wrapper.
(l) The term ‘‘immediate container’’ does not include package
liners.
(m) The term ‘‘labeling’’ means all labels and other written,
printed, or graphic matter (1) upon any article or any of its con-
tainers or wrappers, or (2) accompanying such article.
(n) If an article is alleged to be misbranded because the label-
ing or advertising is misleading, then in determining whether the
labeling or advertising is misleading there shall be taken into ac-
count (among other things) not only representations made or sug-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.002
December 19, 2002 
6
Sec. 201
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
gested by statement, word, design, device, or any combination
thereof, but also the extent to which the labeling or advertising
fails to reveal facts material in the light of such representations or
material with respect to consequences which may result from the
use of the article to which the labeling or advertising relates under
the conditions of use prescribed in the labeling or advertising
thereof or under such conditions of use as are customary or usual.
(o) The representation of a drug, in its labeling, as an anti-
septic shall be considered to be a representation that it is a germi-
cide, except in the case of a drug purporting to be, or represented
as, an antiseptic for inhibitory use as a wet dressing, ointment,
dusting powder, or such other use as involves prolonged contact
with the body.
(p) The term ‘‘new drug’’ means—
(1) Any drug (except a new animal drug or an animal feed
bearing or containing a new animal drug) the composition of
which is such that such drug is not generally recognized,
among experts qualified by scientific training and experience to
evaluate the safety and effectiveness of drugs, as safe and ef-
fective for use under the conditions prescribed, recommended,
or suggested in the labeling thereof, except that such a drug
not so recognized shall not be deemed to be a ‘‘new drug’’ if at
any time prior to the enactment of this Act it was subject to
the Food and Drugs Act of June 30, 1906, as amended, and if
at such time its labeling contained the same representations
concerning the conditions of its use; or
(2) Any drug (except a new animal drug or an animal feed
bearing or containing a new animal drug) the composition of
which is such that such drug, as a result of investigations to
determine its safety and effectiveness for use under such condi-
tions, has become so recognized, but which has not, otherwise
than in such investigations, been used to a material extent or
for a material time under such conditions.
(q)(1)(A) Except as provided in clause (B), the term ‘‘pesticide
chemical’’ means any substance that is a pesticide within the
meaning of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act,
including all active and inert ingredients of such pesticide. Not-
withstanding any other provision of law, the term ‘pesticide’ within
such meaning includes ethylene oxide and propylene oxide when
such substances are applied on food.
(B) In the case of the use, with respect to food, of a substance
described in clause (A) to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate micro-
organisms (including bacteria, viruses, fungi, protozoa, algae, and
slime), the following applies for purposes of clause (A):
(i) The definition in such clause for the term ‘‘pesticide
chemical’’ does not include the substance if the substance is ap-
plied for such use on food, or the substance is included for such
use in water that comes into contact with the food, in the pre-
paring, packing, or holding of the food for commercial pur-
poses. The substance is not excluded under this subclause from
such definition if the substance is ethylene oxide or propylene
oxide, and is applied for such use on food. The substance is not
so excluded if the substance is applied for such use on a raw
agricultural commodity, or the substance is included for such
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.002
December 19, 2002 
7
Sec. 201
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
use in water that comes into contact with the commodity, as
follows:
(I) The substance is applied in the field.
(II) The substance is applied at a treatment facility
where raw agricultural commodities are the only food
treated, and the treatment is in a manner that does not
change the status of the food as a raw agricultural com-
modity (including treatment through washing, waxing, fu-
migating, and packing such commodities in such manner).
(III) The substance is applied during the transpor-
tation of such commodity between the field and such a
treatment facility.
(ii) The definition in such clause for the term ‘‘pesticide
chemical’’ does not include the substance if the substance is a
food contact substance as defined in section 409(h)(6), and any
of the following circumstances exist: The substance is included
for such use in an object that has a food contact surface but
is not intended to have an ongoing effect on any portion of the
object; the substance is included for such use in an object that
has a food contact surface and is intended to have an ongoing
effect on a portion of the object but not on the food contact sur-
face; or the substance is included for such use in or is applied
for such use on food packaging (without regard to whether the
substance is intended to have an ongoing effect on any portion
of the packaging). The food contact substance is not excluded
under this subclause from such definition if any of the fol-
lowing circumstances exist: The substance is applied for such
use on a semipermanent or permanent food contact surface
(other than being applied on food packaging); or the substance
is included for such use in an object that has a semipermanent
or permanent food contact surface (other than being included
in food packaging) and the substance is intended to have an
ongoing effect on the food contact surface.
With respect to the definition of the term ‘‘pesticide’’ that is appli-
cable to the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act,
this clause does not exclude any substance from such definition.
(2) The term ‘‘pesticide chemical residue’’ means a residue in
or on raw agricultural commodity or processed food of—
(A) a pesticide chemical; or
(B) any other added substance that is present on or in the
commodity or food primarily as a result of the metabolism or
other degradation of a pesticide chemical.
(3) Notwithstanding subparagraphs (1) and (2), the Adminis-
trator may by regulation except a substance from the definition of
‘‘pesticide chemical’’ or ‘‘pesticide chemical residue’’ if—
(A) its occurrence as a residue on or in a raw agricultural
commodity or processed food is attributable primarily to nat-
ural causes or to human activities not involving the use of any
substances for a pesticidal purpose in the production, storage,
processing, or transportation of any raw agricultural com-
modity or processed food; and
(B) the Administrator, after consultation with the Sec-
retary, determines that the substance more appropriately
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.002
December 19, 2002 
8
Sec. 201
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘the enactment of this paragraph’’ and insert ‘‘September 6,
1958,’’.
should be regulated under one or more provisions of this Act
other than sections 402(a)(2)(B) and 408.
(r) The term ‘‘raw agricultural commodity’’ means any food in
its raw or natural state, including all fruits that are washed, col-
ored, or otherwise treated in their unpeeled natural form prior to
marketing.
(s) The term ‘‘food additive’’ means any substance the intended
use of which results or may reasonably be expected to result, di-
rectly or indirectly, in its becoming a component or otherwise af-
fecting the characteristics of any food (including any substance in-
tended for use in producing, manufacturing, packing, processing,
preparing, treating, packaging, transporting, or holding food; and
including any source of radiation intended for any such use), if
such substance is not generally recognized, among experts qualified
by scientific training and experience to evaluate its safety, as hav-
ing been adequately shown through scientific procedures (or, in the
case of a substance used in food prior to January 1, 1958, through
either scientific procedures or experience based on common use in
food) to be safe under the conditions of its intended use; except that
such term does not include—
(1) a pesticide chemical residue in or on a raw agricultural
commodity or processed food; or
(2) a pesticide chemical; or
(3) a color additive; or
(4) any substance used in accordance with a sanction or
approval granted prior to the enactment of this paragraph 1
pursuant to this Act, the Poultry Products Inspection Act (21
U.S.C. 451 and the following) or the Meat Inspection Act of
March 4, 1907 (34 Stat. 1260), as amended and extended (21
U.S.C. 71 and the following);
(5) a new animal drug; or
(6) an ingredient described in paragraph (ff) in, or in-
tended for use in, a dietary supplement.
(t)(1) The term ‘‘color additive’’ means a material which—
(A) is a dye, pigment, or other substance made by a proc-
ess of synthesis or similar artifice, or extracted, isolated, or
otherwise derived, with or without intermediate or final
change of identity, from a vegetable, animal, mineral, or other
source, and
(B) when added or applied to a food, drug, or cosmetic, or
to the human body or any part thereof, is capable (alone or
through reaction with other substance) of imparting color
thereto;
except that such term does not include any material which the Sec-
retary, by regulation, determines is used (or intended to be used)
solely for a purpose or purposes other than coloring.
(2) The term ‘‘color’’ includes black, white, and intermediate
grays.
(3) Nothing in subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall be con-
strued to apply to any pesticide chemical, soil or plant nutrient, or
other agricultural chemical solely because of its effect in aiding, re-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.002
December 19, 2002 
9
Sec. 201
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 So in original. Probably should be paragraph ‘‘(v)’’.
tarding, or otherwise affecting, directly or indirectly, the growth or
other natural physiological processes of produce of the soil and
thereby affecting its color, whether before or after harvest.
(u) The term ‘‘safe,’’ as used in paragraph (s) of this section
and in sections 409, 512, and 721, has reference to the health of
man or animal.
(v) The term ‘‘new animal drug’’ means any drug intended for
use for animals other than man, including any drug intended for
use in animal feed but not including such animal feed—
(1) the composition of which is such that such drug is not
generally recognized, among experts qualified by scientific
training and experience to evaluate the safety and effective-
ness of animal drugs, as safe and effective for use under the
conditions prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the label-
ing thereof; except that such a drug not so recognized shall not
be deemed to be a ‘‘new animal drug’’ if at any time prior to
June 25, 1938, it was subject to the Food and Drug Act of June
30, 1906, as amended, and if at such time its labeling con-
tained the same representations concerning the conditions of
its use; or
(2) the composition of which is such that such drug, as a
result of investigations to determine its safety and effective-
ness for use under such conditions, has become so recognized
but which has not, otherwise than in such investigations, been
used to a material extent or for a material time under such
conditions.
(w) The term ‘‘animal feed’’, as used in paragraph (w) 1 of this
section, in section 512, and in provisions of this Act referring to
such paragraph or section, means an article which is intended for
use for food for animals other than man and which is intended for
use as a substantial source of nutrients in the diet of the animal,
and is not limited to a mixture intended to be the sole ration of
the animal.
(x) The term ‘‘informal hearing’’ means a hearing which is not
subject to section 554, 556, or 557 of title 5 of the United States
Code and which provides for the following:
(1) The presiding officer in the hearing shall be designated
by the Secretary from officers and employees of the Depart-
ment who have not participated in any action of the Secretary
which is the subject of the hearing and who are not directly re-
sponsible to an officer or employee of the Department who has
participated in any such action.
(2) Each party to the hearing shall have the right at all
times to be advised and accompanied by an attorney.
(3) Before the hearing, each party to the hearing shall be
given reasonable notice of the matters to be considered at the
hearing, including a comprehensive statement of the basis for
the action taken or proposed by the Secretary which is the sub-
ject of the hearing and a general summary of the information
which will be presented by the Secretary at the hearing in sup-
port of such action.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.002
December 19, 2002 
10
Sec. 201
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(4) At the hearing the parties to the hearing shall have the
right to hear a full and complete statement of the action of the
Secretary which is the subject of the hearing together with the
information and reasons supporting such action, to conduct
reasonable questioning, and to present any oral or written in-
formation relevant to such action.
(5) The presiding officer in such hearing shall prepare a
written report of the hearing to which shall be attached all
written material presented at the hearing. The participants in
the hearing shall be given the opportunity to review and cor-
rect or supplement the presiding officer’s report of the hearing.
(6) The Secretary may require the hearing to be tran-
scribed. A party to the hearing shall have the right to have the
hearing transcribed at his expense. Any transcription of a
hearing shall be included in the presiding officer’s report of the
hearing.
(y) The term ‘‘saccharin’’ includes calcium saccharin, sodium
saccharin, and ammonium saccharin.
(z) The term ‘‘infant formula’’ means a food which purports to
be or is represented for special dietary use solely as a food for in-
fants by reason of its simulation of human milk or its suitability
as a complete or partial substitute for human milk.
(aa) The term ‘‘abbreviated drug application’’ means an appli-
cation submitted under section 505(j) for the approval of a drug
that relies on the approved application of another drug with the
same active ingredient to establish safety and efficacy, and—
(1) in the case of section 306, includes a supplement to
such an application for a different or additional use of the drug
but does not include a supplement to such an application for
other than a different or additional use of the drug, and
(2) in the case of sections 307 and 308, includes any sup-
plement to such an application.
(bb) The term ‘‘knowingly’’ or ‘‘knew’’ means that a person,
with respect to information—
(1) has actual knowledge of the information, or
(2) acts in deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard of the
truth or falsity of the information.
(cc) For purposes of section 306, the term ‘‘high managerial
agent’’—
(1) means—
(A) an officer or director of a corporation or an associa-
tion,
(B) a partner of a partnership, or
(C) any employee or other agent of a corporation, asso-
ciation, or partnership,
having duties such that the conduct of such officer, director,
partner, employee, or agent may fairly be assumed to represent
the policy of the corporation, association, or partnership, and
(2) includes persons having management responsibility
for—
(A) submissions to the Food and Drug Administration
regarding the development or approval of any drug prod-
uct,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.002
December 19, 2002 
11
Sec. 201
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(B) production, quality assurance, or quality control of
any drug product, or
(C) research and development of any drug product.
(dd) For purposes of sections 306 and 307, the term ‘‘drug prod-
uct’’ means a drug subject to regulation under section 505, 512, or
802 of this Act or under section 351 of the Public Health Service
Act.
(ee) The term ‘‘Commissioner’’ means the Commissioner of
Food and Drugs.
(ff) The term ‘‘dietary supplement’’—
(1) means a product (other than tobacco) intended to sup-
plement the diet that bears or contains one or more of the fol-
lowing dietary ingredients:
(A) a vitamin;
(B) a mineral;
(C) an herb or other botanical;
(D) an amino acid;
(E) a dietary substance for use by man to supplement
the diet by increasing the total dietary intake; or
(F) a concentrate, metabolite, constituent, extract, or
combination of any ingredient described in clause (A), (B),
(C), (D), or (E);
(2) means a product that—
(A)(i) is intended for ingestion in a form described in
section 411(c)(1)(B)(i); or
(ii) complies with section 411(c)(1)(B)(ii);
(B) is not represented for use as a conventional food
or as a sole item of a meal or the diet; and
(C) is labeled as a dietary supplement; and
(3) does—
(A) include an article that is approved as a new drug
under section 505 or licensed as a biologic under section
351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262) and
was, prior to such approval, certification, or license, mar-
keted as a dietary supplement or as a food unless the Sec-
retary has issued a regulation, after notice and comment,
finding that the article, when used as or in a dietary sup-
plement under the conditions of use and dosages set forth
in the labeling for such dietary supplement, is unlawful
under section 402(f); and
(B) not include—
(i) an article that is approved as a new drug under
section 505, certified as an antibiotic under section
507, or licensed as a biologic under section 351 of the
Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262), or
(ii) an article authorized for investigation as a
new drug, antibiotic, or biological for which substan-
tial clinical investigations have been instituted and for
which the existence of such investigations has been
made public,
which was not before such approval, certification, licensing, or
authorization marketed as a dietary supplement or as a food
unless the Secretary, in the Secretary’s discretion, has issued
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.002
December 19, 2002 
12
Sec. 201
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
a regulation, after notice and comment, finding that the article
would be lawful under this Act.
Except for purposes of section 201(g), a dietary supplement shall be
deemed to be a food within the meaning of this Act.
(gg) The term ‘‘processed food’’ means any food other than a
raw agricultural commodity and includes any raw agricultural com-
modity that has been subject to processing, such as canning, cook-
ing, freezing, dehydration, or milling.
(hh) The term ‘‘Administrator’’ means the Administrator of the
United States Environmental Protection Agency.
(ii) The term ‘‘compounded positron emission tomography
drug’’—
(1) means a drug that—
(A) exhibits spontaneous disintegration of unstable
nuclei by the emission of positrons and is used for the pur-
pose of providing dual photon positron emission tomo-
graphic diagnostic images; and
(B) has been compounded by or on the order of a prac-
titioner who is licensed by a State to compound or order
compounding for a drug described in subparagraph (A),
and is compounded in accordance with that State’s law, for
a patient or for research, teaching, or quality control; and
(2) includes any nonradioactive reagent, reagent kit, ingre-
dient, nuclide generator, accelerator, target material, electronic
synthesizer, or other apparatus or computer program to be
used in the preparation of such a drug.
(jj) The term ‘‘antibiotic drug’’ means any drug (except drugs
for use in animals other than humans) composed wholly or partly
of any kind of penicillin, streptomycin, chlortetracycline, chlor-
amphenicol, bacitracin, or any other drug intended for human use
containing any quantity of any chemical substance which is pro-
duced by a micro-organism and which has the capacity to inhibit
or destroy micro-organisms in dilute solution (including a chemi-
cally synthesized equivalent of any such substance) or any deriva-
tive thereof.
(kk) PRIORITY
SUPPLEMENT.—The term ‘‘priority supple-
ment’’ means a drug application referred to in section 101(4) of
the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997
(111 Stat. 2298).
(ll)(1) The term ‘‘single-use device’’ means a device that is in-
tended for one use, or on a single patient during a single procedure.
(2)(A) The term ‘‘reprocessed’’, with respect to a single-use de-
vice, means an original device that has previously been used on a
patient and has been subjected to additional processing and manu-
facturing for the purpose of an additional single use on a patient.
The subsequent processing and manufacture of a reprocessed sin-
gle-use device shall result in a device that is reprocessed within the
meaning of this definition.
(B) A single-use device that meets the definition under clause
(A) shall be considered a reprocessed device without regard to any
description of the device used by the manufacturer of the device or
other persons, including a description that uses the term ‘‘recycled’’
rather than the term ‘‘reprocessed’’.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.002
December 19, 2002 
13
Sec. 201
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(3) The term ‘‘original device’’ means a new, unused single-use
device.
(mm)(1) The term ‘‘critical reprocessed single-use device’’
means a reprocessed single-use device that is intended to contact
normally sterile tissue or body spaces during use.
(2) The term ‘‘semi-critical reprocessed single-use device’’
means a reprocessed single-use device that is intended to contact
intact mucous membranes and not penetrate normally sterile areas
of the body.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.002
December 19, 2002 
14
CHAPTER III—PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES
PROHIBITED ACTS
SEC. 301. ø21 U.S.C. 331¿ The following acts and the causing
thereof are hereby prohibited:
(a) The introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate
commerce of any food, drug, device, or cosmetic that is adulterated
or misbranded.
(b) The adulteration or misbranding of any food, drug, device,
or cosmetic in interstate commerce.
(c) The receipt in interstate commerce of any food, drug, device,
or cosmetic that is adulterated or misbranded, and the delivery or
proffered delivery thereof for pay or otherwise.
(d) The introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate
commerce of any article in violation of section 404 or 505.
(e) The refusal to permit access to or copying of any record as
required by section 412, 414, 504, 703, or 704(a); or the failure to
establish or maintain any record, or make any report, required
under section 412, 414(b), 504, 505 (i) or (k), 512(a)(4)(C), 512 (j),
(l) or (m), 515(f), or 519 or the refusal to permit access to or
verification or copying of any such required record.
(f) The refusal to permit entry or inspection as authorized by
section 704.
(g) The manufacture within any Territory of any food, drug, de-
vice, or cosmetic that is adulterated or misbranded.
(h) The giving of a guaranty or undertaking referred to in sec-
tion 303(c)(2), which guaranty or undertaking is false, except by a
person who relied upon a guaranty or undertaking to the same ef-
fect signed by, and containing the name and address of, the person
residing in the United States from whom he received in good faith
the food, drug, device, or cosmetic; or the giving of a guaranty or
undertaking referred to in section 303(c)(3), which guaranty or un-
dertaking is false.
(i)(1) Forging, counterfeiting, simulating, or falsely rep-
resenting, or without proper authority using any mark, stamp, tag,
label, or other identification device authorized or required by regu-
lations promulgated under the provisions of section 404 or 721.
(2) Making, selling, disposing of, or keeping in possession, con-
trol, or custody, or concealing any punch, die, plate, stone, or other
thing designed to print, imprint, or reproduce the trademark, trade
name, or other identifying mark, imprint, or device of another or
any likeness of any of the foregoing upon any drug or container or
labeling thereof so as to render such drugs a counterfeit drug.
(3) The doing of any act which causes a drug to be a counter-
feit drug, or the sale or dispensing, or the holding for sale or dis-
pensing, of a counterfeit drug.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
15
Sec. 301
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 So in original. See the amendment made by section 403 of Public Law 104–170 (110 Stat.
1514).
(j) The using by any person to his own advantage, or revealing,
other than to the Secretary or officers or employees of the Depart-
ment, or to the courts when relevant in any judicial proceeding
under this Act, any information acquired under authority of section
404, 409, 412, 414, 505, 510, 512, 513, 514, 515, 516, 518, 519, 520,
704, 708, or 721 concerning any method or process which as a trade
secret is entitled to protection; or the violating of section 408(i)(2)
or any regulation issued under that section.. 1 This paragraph does
not authorize the withholding of information from either House of
Congress or from, to the extent of matter within its jurisdiction,
any committee or subcommittee of such committee or any joint
committee of Congress or any subcommittee of such joint com-
mittee.
(k) The alteration, mutilation, destruction, obliteration, or re-
moval of the whole or any part of the labeling of, or the doing of
any other act with respect to, a food, drug, device, or cosmetic, if
such act is done while such article is held for sale (whether or not
the first sale) after shipment in interstate commerce and results in
such article being adulterated or misbranded.
ø(l) Repealed by Pub. L. 105-115, November 21, 1997.¿
(m) The sale or offering for sale of colored oleomargarine or col-
ored margarine, or the possession or serving of colored oleo-
margarine or colored margarine in violation of section 407(b) or
407(c).
(n) The using, in labeling, advertising or other sales promotion
of any reference to any report or analysis furnished in compliance
with section 704.
(o) In the case of a prescription drug distributed or offered for
sale in interstate commerce, the failure of the manufacturer, pack-
er, or distributor thereof to maintain for transmittal, or to trans-
mit, to any practitioner licensed by applicable State law to admin-
ister such drug who makes written request for information as to
such drug, true and correct copies of all printed matter which is re-
quired to be included in any package in which that drug is distrib-
uted or sold, or such other printed matter as is approved by the
Secretary. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to exempt
any person from any labeling requirement imposed by or under
other provisions of this Act.
(p) The failure to register in accordance with section 510, the
failure to provide any information required by section 510(j) or
510(k); or the failure to provide a notice required by section
510(j)(2).
(q)(1) The failure or refusal to (A) comply with any require-
ment prescribed under section 518 or 520(g), (B) furnish any notifi-
cation or other material or information required by or under sec-
tion 519 or 520(g), or (C) comply with a requirement under section
522.
(2) With respect to any device, the submission of any report
that is required by or under this Act that is false or misleading in
any material respect.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
16
Sec. 301
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 This subsection was added by section 2(b)(1)(B) of P.L. 103–396. Subsections (c) and (d) of
section 2 of that Act state the following:
(c) REGULATIONS.—Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Sec-
retary of Health and Human Services shall promulgate regulations to implement paragraphs
(4)(A) and (5) of section 512(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as amended by
subsection (a)).
(d) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments made by this section shall take effect upon the adop-
tion of the final regulations under subsection (c).
(r) The movement of a device in violation of an order under
section 304(g) or the removal or alteration of any mark or label re-
quired by the order to identify the device as detained.
(s) The failure to provide the notice required by section 412(c)
or 412(e), the failure to make the reports required by section
412(f)(1)(B), the failure to retain the records required by section
412(b)(4), or the failure to meet the requirements prescribed under
section 412(f)(3).
(t) The importation of a drug in violation of section 801(d)(1),
the sale, purchase, or trade of a drug or drug sample or the offer
to sell, purchase, or trade a drug or drug sample in violation of sec-
tion 503(c), the sale, purchase, or trade of a coupon, the offer to
sell, purchase, or trade such a coupon, or the counterfeiting of such
a coupon in violation of section 503(c)(2), the distribution of a drug
sample in violation of section 503(d) or the failure to otherwise
comply with the requirements of section 503(d), or the distribution
of drugs in violation of section 503(e) or the failure to otherwise
comply with the requirements of section 503(e).
(u) 1 The failure to comply with any requirements of the provi-
sions of, or any regulations or orders of the Secretary, under sec-
tion 512(a)(4)(A), 512(a)(4)(D), or 512(a)(5).
(v) The introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate
commerce of a dietary supplement that is unsafe under section 413.
(w) The making of a knowingly false statement in any state-
ment, certificate of analysis, record, or report required or requested
under section 801(d)(3); the failure to submit a certificate of anal-
ysis as required under such section; the failure to maintain records
or to submit records or reports as required by such section; the re-
lease into interstate commerce of any article or portion thereof im-
ported into the United States under such section or any finished
product made from such article or portion, except for export in ac-
cordance with section 801(e) or 802, or with section 351(h) of the
Public Health Service Act; or the failure to so export or to destroy
such an article or portions thereof, or such a finished product.
(x) The falsification of a declaration of conformity submitted
under section 514(c) or the failure or refusal to provide data or in-
formation requested by the Secretary under paragraph (3) of such
section.
(y) In the case of a drug, device, or food—
(1) the submission of a report or recommendation by a per-
son accredited under section 523 that is false or misleading in
any material respect;
(2) the disclosure by a person accredited under section 523
of confidential commercial information or any trade secret
without the express written consent of the person who sub-
mitted such information or secret to such person; or
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
17
Sec. 303
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 This subsection was added by section 401(b) of P.L. 105–115. Subsections (d) and (e) of such
section provides the following:
(d) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments made by this section shall take effect 1 year after the
date of enactment of this Act, or upon the Secretary’s issuance of final regulations pursuant to
subsection (c), whichever is sooner.
(e) SUNSET.—The amendments made by this section cease to be effective September 30, 2006,
or 7 years after the date on which the Secretary promulgates the regulations described in sub-
section (c), whichever is later.
(3) the receipt by a person accredited under section 523 of
a bribe in any form or the doing of any corrupt act by such per-
son associated with a responsibility delegated to such person
under this Act.
(z) 1 The dissemination of information in violation of section
551.
(aa) The importation of a covered product in violation of section
804, the falsification of any record required to be maintained or
provided to the Secretary under such section, or any other violation
of regulations under such section.
(bb) The transfer of an article of food in violation of an order
under section 304(h), or the removal or alteration of any mark or
label required by the order to identify the article as detained.
(cc) The importing or offering for import into the United States
of an article of food by, with the assistance of, or at the direction
of, a person debarred under section 306(b)(3).
(dd) The failure to register in accordance with section 415.
(ee) The importing or offering for import into the United States
of an article of food in violation of the requirements under section
801(m).
(ff) The importing or offering for import into the United States
of a drug or device with respect to which there is a failure to com-
ply with a request of the Secretary to submit to the Secretary a
statement under section 801(o).
(gg) The knowing failure of a person accredited under para-
graph (2) of section 704(g) to comply with paragraph (7)(E) of such
section; the knowing inclusion by such a person of false information
in an inspection report under paragraph (7)(A) of such section; or
the knowing failure of such a person to include material facts in
such a report.
INJUNCTION PROCEEDINGS
SEC. 302. ø21 U.S.C. 332¿ (a) The district courts of the United
States and the United States courts of the Territories shall have
jurisdiction, for cause shown to restrain violations of section 301,
except paragraphs (h), (i), and (j).
(b) In case of violation of an injunction or restraining order
issued under this section, which also constitutes a violation of this
Act, trial shall be by the court, or, upon demand of the accused, by
a jury.
PENALTIES
SEC. 303. ø21 U.S.C. 333¿ (a)(1) Any person who violates a pro-
vision of section 301 shall be imprisoned for not more than one
year or fined not more than $1,000, or both.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
18
Sec. 303
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
2 The words ‘‘of this section’’ should probably be stricken.
(2) Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this sec-
tion 2, if any person commits such a violation after a conviction of
him under this section has become final, or commits such a viola-
tion with the intent to defraud or mislead, such person shall be im-
prisoned for not more than three years or fined not more than
$10,000 or both.
(b)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (a), any person who violates
section 301(t) by—
(A) knowingly importing a drug in violation of section
801(d)(1),
(B) knowingly selling, purchasing, or trading a drug or
drug sample or knowingly offering to sell, purchase, or trade
a drug or drug sample, in violation of section 503(c)(1),
(C) knowingly selling, purchasing, or trading a coupon,
knowingly offering to sell, purchase, or trade such a coupon, or
knowingly counterfeiting such a coupon, in violation of section
503(c)(2), or
(D) knowingly distributing drugs in violation of section
503(e)(2)(A),
shall be imprisoned for not more than 10 years or fined not more
than $250,000, or both.
(2) Any manufacturer or distributor who distributes drug sam-
ples by means other than the mail or common carrier whose rep-
resentative, during the course of the representative’s employment
or association with that manufacturer or distributor, violated sec-
tion 301(t) because of a violation of section 503(c)(1) or violated any
State law prohibiting the sale, purchase, or trade of a drug sample
subject to section 503(b) or the offer to sell, purchase, or trade such
a drug sample shall, upon conviction of the representative for such
violation, be subject to the following civil penalties:
(A) A civil penalty of not more than $50,000 for each of the
first two such violations resulting in a conviction of any rep-
resentative of the manufacturer or distributor in any 10-year
period.
(B) A civil penalty of not more than $1,000,000 for each
violation resulting in a conviction of any representative after
the second conviction in any 10-year period.
For the purposes of this paragraph, multiple convictions of one or
more persons arising out of the same event or transaction, or a re-
lated series of events or transactions, shall be considered as one
violation.
(3) Any manufacturer or distributor who violates section 301(t)
because of a failure to make a report required by section
503(d)(3)(E) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than
$100,000.
(4)(A) If a manufacturer or distributor or any representative of
such manufacturer or distributor provides information leading to
the institution of a criminal proceeding against, and conviction of,
any representative of that manufacturer or distributor for a viola-
tion of section 301(t) because of a sale, purchase, or trade or offer
to purchase, sell, or trade a drug sample in violation of section
503(c)(1) or for a violation of State law prohibiting the sale, pur-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
19
Sec. 303
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
chase, or trade or offer to sell, purchase, or trade a drug sample,
the conviction of such representative shall not be considered as a
violation for purposes of paragraph (2).
(B) If, in an action brought under paragraph (2) against a man-
ufacturer or distributor relating to the conviction of a representa-
tive of such manufacturer or distributor for the sale, purchase, or
trade of a drug or the offer to sell, purchase, or trade a drug, it
is shown, by clear and convincing evidence—
(i) that the manufacturer or distributor conducted, before
the institution of a criminal proceeding against such represent-
ative for the violation which resulted in such conviction, an in-
vestigation of events or transactions which would have led to
the reporting of information leading to the institution of a
criminal proceeding against, and conviction of, such represent-
ative for such purchase, sale, or trade or offer to purchase, sell,
or trade, or
(ii) that, except in the case of the conviction of a represent-
ative employed in a supervisory function, despite diligent im-
plementation by the manufacturer or distributor of an inde-
pendent audit and security system designed to detect such a
violation, the manufacturer or distributor could not reasonably
have been expected to have detected such violation,
the conviction of such representative shall not be considered as a
conviction for purposes of paragraph (2).
(5) If a person provides information leading to the institution
of a criminal proceeding against, and conviction of, a person for a
violation of section 301(t) because of the sale, purchase, or trade of
a drug sample or the offer to sell, purchase, or trade a drug sample
in violation of section 503(c)(1), such person shall be entitled to
one-half of the criminal fine imposed and collected for such viola-
tion but not more than $125,000.
(6) Notwithstanding subsection (a), any person who is a manu-
facturer or importer of a covered product pursuant to section 804(a)
and knowingly fails to comply with a requirement of section 804(e)
that is applicable to such manufacturer or importer, respectively,
shall be imprisoned for not more than 10 years or fined not more
than $250,000, or both.
(c) No person shall be subject to the penalties of subsection
(a)(1) of this section, (1) for having received in interstate commerce
any article and delivered it or proffered delivery of it, if such deliv-
ery or proffer was made in good faith, unless he refuses to furnish
on request of an officer or employee duly designated by the Sec-
retary the name and address of the person from whom he pur-
chased or received such article and copies of all documents, if any
there be, pertaining to the delivery of the article to him; or (2) for
having violated section 301(a) or (d), if he establishes a guaranty
or undertaking signed by, and containing the name and address of,
the person residing in the United States from whom he received in
good faith the article, to the effect, in case of an alleged violation
of section 301(a), that such article is not adulterated or mis-
branded, within the meaning of this Act, designating this Act, or
to the effect, in case of an alleged violation of section 301(d), that
such article is not an article which may not, under the provisions
of section 404 or 505, be introduced into interstate commerce; or (3)
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
20
Sec. 303
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
for having violated section 301(a), where the violation exists be-
cause the article is adulterated by reason of containing a color ad-
ditive not from a batch certified in accordance with regulations pro-
mulgated by the Secretary under this Act, if such person estab-
lishes a guaranty or undertaking signed by, and containing the
name and address of, the manufacturer of the color additive, to the
effect that such color additive was from a batch certified in accord-
ance with the applicable regulations promulgated by the Secretary
under this Act; or (4) for having violated section 301 (b), (c), or (k)
by failure to comply with section 502(f) in respect to an article re-
ceived in interstate commerce to which neither section 503(a) nor
section 503(b)(1) is applicable, if the delivery or proffered delivery
was made in good faith and the labeling at the time thereof con-
tained the same directions for use and warning statements as were
contained in the labeling at the time of such receipt of such article;
or (5) for having violated section 301(i)(2) if such person acted in
good faith and had no reason to believe that use of the punch, die,
plate, stone, or other thing involved would result in a drug being
a counterfeit drug, or for having violated section 301(i)(3) if the
person doing the act or causing it to be done acted in good faith
and had no reason to believe that the drug was a counterfeit drug.
(d) No person shall be subject to the penalties of subsection
(a)(1) of this section for a violation of section 301 involving mis-
branded food if the violation exists solely because the food is mis-
branded under section 403(a)(2) because of its advertising.
(e)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), any person who dis-
tributes or possesses with the intent to distribute any anabolic
steriod for any use in humans other than the treatment of disease
pursuant to the order of a physician shall be imprisoned for not
more than three years or fined under title 18, United States Code,
or both.
(2) Any person who distributes or possesses with the intent to
distribute to an individual under 18 years of age, any anabolic ster-
oid for any use in humans other than the treatment of disease pur-
suant to the order of a physician shall be imprisoned for not more
than six years or fined under title 18, United States Code, or both.
(f)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), whoever knowingly
distributes, or possesses with intent to distribute, human growth
hormone for any use in humans other than the treatment of a dis-
ease or other recognized medical condition, where such use has
been authorized by the Secretary of Health and Human Services
under section 505 and pursuant to the order of a physician, is
guilty of an offense punishable by not more than 5 years in prison,
such fines as are authorized by title 18, United States Code, or
both.
(2) Whoever commits any offense set forth in paragraph (1) and
such offense involves an individual under 18 years of age is punish-
able by not more than 10 years imprisonment, such fines as are au-
thorized by title 18, United States Code, or both.
(3) Any conviction for a violation of paragraphs (1) and (2) of
this subsection shall be considered a felony violation of the Con-
trolled Substances Act for the purposes of forfeiture under section
413 of such Act.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
21
Sec. 303
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(4) As used in this subsection the term ‘‘human growth hor-
mone’’ means somatrem, somatropin, or an analogue of either of
them.
(5) The Drug Enforcement Administration is authorized to in-
vestigate offenses punishable by this subsection.
(g)(1)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), any person
who violates a requirement of this Act which relates to devices
shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty in an amount
not to exceed $15,000 for each such violation, and not to exceed
$1,000,000 for all such violations adjudicated in a single pro-
ceeding. For purposes of the preceding sentence, a person accred-
ited under paragraph (2) of section 704(g) who is substantially not
in compliance with the standards of accreditation under such sec-
tion, or who poses a threat to public health or fails to act in a man-
ner that is consistent with the purposes of such section, shall be
considered to have violated a requirement of this Act that relates
to devices.
(B) Subparagraph (A) shall not apply—
(i) to any person who violates the requirements of section
519(a) or 520(f) unless such violation constitutes (I) a signifi-
cant or knowing departure from such requirements, or (II) a
risk to public health,
(ii) to any person who commits minor violations of section
519(e) or 519(f) (only with respect to correction reports) if such
person demonstrates substantial compliance with such section,
or
(iii) to violations of section 501(a)(2)(A) which involve one
or more devices which are not defective.
(2)(A) Any person who introduces into interstate commerce or
delivers for introduction into interstate commerce an article of food
that is adulterated within the meaning of section 402(a)(2)(B) shall
be subject to a civil money penalty of not more than $50,000 in the
case of an individual and $250,000 in the case of any other person
for such introduction or delivery, not to exceed $500,000 for all
such violations adjudicated in a single proceeding.
(B) This paragraph shall not apply to any person who grew the
article of food that is adulterated. If the Secretary assesses a civil
penalty against any person under this paragraph, the Secretary
may not use the criminal authorities under this section to sanction
such person for the introduction or delivery for introduction into
interstate commerce of the article of food that is adulterated. If the
Secretary assesses a civil penalty against any person under this
paragraph, the Secretary may not use the seizure authorities of
section 304 or the injunction authorities of section 302 with respect
to the article of food that is adulterated.
(C) In a hearing to assess a civil penalty under this paragraph,
the presiding officer shall have the same authority with regard to
compelling testimony or production of documents as a presiding of-
ficer has under section 408(g)(2)(B). The third sentence of para-
graph (3)(A) shall not apply to any investigation under this para-
graph.
(3)(A) A civil penalty under paragraph (1) or (2) shall be as-
sessed by the Secretary by an order made on the record after op-
portunity for a hearing provided in accordance with this subpara-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
22
Sec. 304
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
graph and section 554 of title 5, United States Code. Before issuing
such an order, the Secretary shall give written notice to the person
to be assessed a civil penalty under such order of the Secretary’s
proposal to issue such order and provide such person an oppor-
tunity for a hearing on the order. In the course of any investiga-
tion, the Secretary may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance
and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence that re-
lates to the matter under investigation.
(B) In determining the amount of a civil penalty, the Secretary
shall take into account the nature, circumstances, extent, and grav-
ity of the violation or violations and, with respect to the violator,
ability to pay, effect on ability to continue to do business, any his-
tory of prior such violations, the degree of culpability, and such
other matters as justice may require.
(C) The Secretary may compromise, modify, or remit, with or
without conditions, any civil penalty which may be assessed under
paragraph (1) or (2). The amount of such penalty, when finally de-
termined, or the amount agreed upon in compromise, may be de-
ducted from any sums owing by the United States to the person
charged.
(4) Any person who requested, in accordance with paragraph
(3)(A), a hearing respecting the assessment of a civil penalty and
who is aggrieved by an order assessing a civil penalty may file a
petition for judicial review of such order with the United States
Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit or for any
other circuit in which such person resides or transacts business.
Such a petition may only be filed within the 60-day period begin-
ning on the date the order making such assessment was issued.
(5) If any person fails to pay an assessment of a civil penalty—
(A) after the order making the assessment becomes final,
and if such person does not file a petition for judicial review
of the order in accordance with paragraph (4), or
(B) after a court in an action brought under paragraph (4)
has entered a final judgment in favor of the Secretary,
the Attorney General shall recover the amount assessed (plus in-
terest at currently prevailing rates from the date of the expiration
of the 60-day period referred to in paragraph (4) or the date of such
final judgment, as the case may be) in an action brought in any ap-
propriate district court of the United States. In such an action, the
validity, amount, and appropriateness of such penalty shall not be
subject to review.
SEIZURE
SEC. 304. ø21 U.S.C. 334¿ (a)(1) Any article of food, drug, or
cosmetic that is adulterated or misbranded when introduced into or
while in interstate commerce or while held for sale (whether or not
the first sale) after shipment in interstate commerce, or which may
not, under the provisions of section 404 or 505, be introduced into
interstate commerce, shall be liable to be proceeded against while
in interstate commerce, or at any time thereafter, on libel of infor-
mation and condemned in any district court of the United States
or United States court of a Territory within the jurisdiction of
which the article is found. No libel for condemnation shall be insti-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
23
Sec. 304
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
tuted under this Act, for any alleged misbranding if there is pend-
ing in any court a libel for condemnation proceeding under this Act
based upon the same alleged misbranding, and not more than one
such proceeding shall be instituted if no such proceeding is so
pending, except that such limitations shall not apply (A) when such
misbranding has been the basis of a prior judgment in favor of the
United States, in a criminal, injunction, or libel for condemnation
proceeding under this Act, or (B) when the Secretary has probable
cause to believe from facts found, without hearing, by him or any
officer or employee of the Department that the misbranded article
is dangerous to health, or that the labeling of the misbranded arti-
cle is fraudulent, or would be in a material respect misleading to
the injury or damage of the purchaser or consumer. In any case
where the number of libel for condemnation proceedings is limited
as above provided the proceeding pending or instituted shall, on
application of the claimant, seasonably made, be removed for trial
to any district agreed upon by stipulation between the parties, or,
in case of failure to so stipulate within a reasonable time, the
claimant may apply to the court of the district in which the seizure
has been made, and such court (after giving the United States at-
torney for such district reasonable notice and opportunity to be
heard) shall by order, unless good cause to the contrary is shown,
specify a district of reasonable proximity to the claimant’s principal
place of business to which the case shall be removed for trial.
(2) The following shall be liable to be proceeded against at any
time on libel of information and condemned in any district court of
the United States or United States court of a Territory within the
jurisdiction of which they are found: (A) Any drug that is a coun-
terfeit drug, (B) Any container of a counterfeit drug, (C) Any
punch, die, plate, stone, labeling, container, or other thing used or
designed for use in making a counterfeit drug or drugs, and (D)
Any adulterated or misbranded device.
(3)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), no libel for con-
demnation may be instituted under paragraph (1) or (2) against
any food which—
(i) is misbranded under section 403(a)(2) because of its ad-
vertising, and
(ii) is being held for sale to the ultimate consumer in an
establishment other than an establishment owned or operated
by a manufacturer, packer, or distributor of the food.
(B) A libel for condemnation may be instituted under para-
graph (1) or (2) against a food described in subparagraph (A) if—
(i)(I) the food’s advertising which resulted in the food being
misbranded under section 403(a)(2) was disseminated in the
establishment in which the food is being held for sale to the
ultimate consumer,
(II) such advertising was disseminated by, or under the di-
rection of, the owner or operator of such establishment, or
(III) all or part of the cost of such advertising was paid by
such owner or operator; and
(ii) the owner or operator of such establishment used such
advertising in the establishment to promote the sale of the
food.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
24
Sec. 304
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(b) The article, equipment, or other thing proceeded against
shall be liable to seizure by process pursuant to the libel, and the
procedure in cases under this section shall conform, as nearly as
may be, to the procedure in admiralty; except that on demand of
either party any issue of fact joined in any such case shall be tried
by jury. When libel for condemnation proceedings under this sec-
tion, involving the same claimant and the same issues of adultera-
tion or misbranding, are pending in two or more jurisdictions, such
pending proceedings, upon application of the claimant seasonably
made to the court of one such jurisdiction, shall be consolidated for
trial by order of such court, and tried in (1) any district selected
by the claimant where one of such proceedings is pending; or (2)
a district agreed upon by stipulation between the parties. If no
order for consolidation is so made within a reasonable time, the
claimant may apply to the court of one such jurisdiction, and such
court (after giving the United States attorney for such district rea-
sonable notice and opportunity to be heard) shall by order, unless
good cause to the contrary is shown, specify a district of reasonable
proximity to the claimant’s principal place of business, in which all
such pending proceedings shall be consolidated for trial and tried.
Such order of consolidation shall not apply so as to require the re-
moval of any case the date for trial of which has been fixed. The
court granting such order shall give prompt notification thereof to
the other courts having jurisdiction of the cases covered thereby.
(c) The court at any time after seizure up to a reasonable time
before trial shall by order allow any party to a condemnation pro-
ceeding, his attorney or agent, to obtain a representative sample of
the article seized and a true copy of the analysis, if any, on which
the proceeding is based and the identifying marks or numbers, if
any, of the packages from which the samples analyzed were ob-
tained.
(d)(1) Any food, drug, device, or cosmetic condemned under this
section shall, after entry of the decree, be disposed of by destruc-
tion or sale as the court may, in accordance with the provisions of
this section, direct and the proceeds thereof, if sold, less the legal
costs and charges, shall be paid into the Treasury of the United
States; but such article shall not be sold under such decree con-
trary to the provisions of this Act or the laws of the jurisdiction in
which sold. After entry of the decree and upon the payment of the
costs of such proceedings and the execution of a good and sufficient
bond conditioned that such article shall not be sold or disposed of
contrary to the provisions of this Act or the laws of any State or
Territory in which sold, the court may by order direct that such ar-
ticle be delivered to the owner thereof to be destroyed or brought
into compliance with the provisions of this Act under the super-
vision of an officer or employee duly designated by the Secretary,
and the expenses of such supervision shall be paid by the person
obtaining release of the article under bond. If the article was im-
ported into the United States and the person seeking its release es-
tablishes (A) that the adulteration, misbranding, or violation did
not occur after the article was imported, and (B) that he had no
cause for believing that it was adulterated, misbranded, or in viola-
tion before it was released from customs custody, the court may
permit the article to be delivered to the owner for exportation in
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
25
Sec. 304
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
lieu of destruction upon a showing by the owner that all of the con-
ditions of section 801(e) can and will be met. The provisions of this
sentence shall not apply where condemnation is based upon viola-
tion of section 402(a) (1), (2), or (6), section 501(a)(3), section 502(j),
or section 601 (a) or (d). Where such exportation is made to the
original foreign supplier, then subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section
801(e)(1) and the preceding sentence shall not be applicable; and in
all cases of exportation the bond shall be conditioned that the arti-
cle shall not be sold or disposed of until the applicable conditions
of section 801(e) have been met. Any person seeking to export an
imported article pursuant to any of the provisions of this sub-
section shall establish that the article was intended for export at
the time the article entered commerce. Any article condemned by
reason of its being an article which may not, under section 404 or
505, be introduced into interstate commerce, shall be disposed of by
destruction.
(2) The provisions of paragraph (1) of this subsection shall, to
the extent deemed appropriate by the court, apply to any equip-
ment or other thing which is not otherwise within the scope of such
paragraph and which is referred to in paragraph (2) of subsection
(a).
(3) Whenever in any proceeding under this section, involving
paragraph (2) of subsection (a), the condemnation of any equipment
or thing (other than a drug) is decreed, the court shall allow the
claim of any claimant, to the extent of such claimant’s interest, for
remission or mitigation of such forfeiture if such claimant proves
to the satisfaction of the court (i) that he has not committed or
caused to be committed any prohibited act referred to in such para-
graph (2) and has no interest in any drug referred to therein, (ii)
that he has an interest in such equipment or other thing as owner
or lienor or otherwise, acquired by him in good faith, and (iii) that
he at no time had any knowledge or reason to believe that such
equipment or other thing was being or would be used in, or to fa-
cilitate, the violation of laws of the United States relating to coun-
terfeit drugs.
(e) When a decree of condemnation is entered against the arti-
cle, court costs and fees, and storage and other proper expenses,
shall be awarded against the person, if any, intervening as claim-
ant of the article.
(f) In the case of removal for trial of any case as provided by
subsection (a) or (b)—
(1) The clerk of the court from which removal is made
shall promptly transmit to the court in which the case is to be
tried all records in the case necessary in order that such court
may exercise jurisdiction.
(2) The court to which such case was removed shall have
the powers and be subject to the duties for purposes of such
case, which the court from which removal was made would
have had, or to which such court would have been subject, if
such case had not been removed.
(g)(1) If during an inspection conducted under section 704 of a
facility or a vehicle, a device which the officer or employee making
the inspection has reason to believe is adulterated or misbranded
is found in such facility or vehicle, such officer or employee may
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
26
Sec. 304
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
order the device detained (in accordance with regulations pre-
scribed by the Secretary) for a reasonable period which may not ex-
ceed twenty days unless the Secretary determines that a period of
detention greater than twenty days is required to institute an ac-
tion under subsection (a) or section 302, in which case he may au-
thorize a detention period of not to exceed thirty days. Regulations
of the Secretary prescribed under this paragraph shall require that
before a device may be ordered detained under this paragraph the
Secretary or an officer or employee designated by the Secretary ap-
prove such order. A detention order under this paragraph may re-
quire the labeling or marking of a device during the period of its
detention for the purpose of identifying the device as detained. Any
person who would be entitled to claim a device if it were seized
under subsection (a) may appeal to the Secretary a detention of
such device under this paragraph. Within five days of the date an
appeal of a detention is filed with the Secretary, the Secretary
shall after affording opportunity for an informal hearing by order
confirm the detention or revoke it.
(2)(A) Except as authorized by subparagraph (B), a device sub-
ject to a detention order issued under paragraph (1) shall not be
moved by any person from the place at which it is ordered detained
until—
(i) released by the Secretary, or
(ii) the expiration of the detention period applicable to
such order,
whichever occurs first.
(B) A device subject to a detention order under paragraph (1)
may be moved—
(i) in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Sec-
retary, and
(ii) if not in final form for shipment, at the discretion of
the manufacturer of the device for the purpose of completing
the work required to put it in such form.
(h) ADMINISTRATIVE DETENTION OF FOODS.—
(1) DETENTION AUTHORITY.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—An officer or qualified employee of
the Food and Drug Administration may order the deten-
tion, in accordance with this subsection, of any article of
food that is found during an inspection, examination, or in-
vestigation under this Act conducted by such officer or
qualified employee, if the officer or qualified employee has
credible evidence or information indicating that such arti-
cle presents a threat of serious adverse health con-
sequences or death to humans or animals.
(B) SECRETARY’S APPROVAL.—An article of food may be
ordered detained under subparagraph (A) only if the Sec-
retary or an official designated by the Secretary approves
the order. An official may not be so designated unless the
official is the director of the district under this Act in
which the article involved is located, or is an official senior
to such director.
(2) PERIOD OF DETENTION.—An article of food may be de-
tained under paragraph (1) for a reasonable period, not to ex-
ceed 20 days, unless a greater period, not to exceed 30 days,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
27
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
is necessary, to enable the Secretary to institute an action
under subsection (a) or section 302. The Secretary shall by reg-
ulation provide for procedures for instituting such action on an
expedited basis with respect to perishable foods.
(3) SECURITY OF DETAINED ARTICLE.—An order under para-
graph (1) with respect to an article of food may require that
such article be labeled or marked as detained, and shall re-
quire that the article be removed to a secure facility, as appro-
priate. An article subject to such an order shall not be trans-
ferred by any person from the place at which the article is or-
dered detained, or from the place to which the article is so re-
moved, as the case may be, until released by the Secretary or
until the expiration of the detention period applicable under
such order, whichever occurs first. This subsection may not be
construed as authorizing the delivery of the article pursuant to
the execution of a bond while the article is subject to the order,
and section 801(b) does not authorize the delivery of the article
pursuant to the execution of a bond while the article is subject
to the order.
(4) APPEAL OF DETENTION ORDER.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—With respect to an article of food or-
dered detained under paragraph (1), any person who
would be entitled to be a claimant for such article if the
article were seized under subsection (a) may appeal the
order to the Secretary. Within five days after such an ap-
peal is filed, the Secretary, after providing opportunity for
an informal hearing, shall confirm or terminate the order
involved, and such confirmation by the Secretary shall be
considered a final agency action for purposes of section 702
of title 5, United States Code. If during such five-day pe-
riod the Secretary fails to provide such an opportunity, or
to confirm or terminate such order, the order is deemed to
be terminated.
(B) EFFECT OF INSTITUTING COURT ACTION.—The proc-
ess under subparagraph (A) for the appeal of an order
under paragraph (1) terminates if the Secretary institutes
an action under subsection (a) or section 302 regarding the
article of food involved.
HEARING BEFORE REPORT OF CRIMINAL VIOLATION
SEC. 305. ø21 U.S.C. 335¿ Before any violation of this Act is
reported by the Secretary to any United States attorney for institu-
tion of a criminal proceeding, the person against whom such pro-
ceeding is contemplated shall be given appropriate notice and an
opportunity to present his views, either orally or in writing, with
regard to such contemplated proceeding.
DEBARMENT, TEMPORARY DENIAL OF APPROVAL, AND SUSPENSION
SEC. 306. ø21 U.S.C. 335a¿ (a) MANDATORY DEBARMENT; CER-
TAIN DRUG APPLICATIONS.—
(1) CORPORATIONS, PARTNERSHIPS, AND ASSOCIATIONS.—If
the Secretary finds that a person other than an individual has
been convicted, after the date of the enactment of this section,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
28
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
of a felony under Federal law for conduct relating to the devel-
opment or approval, including the process for development or
approval, of any abbreviated drug application, the Secretary
shall debar such person from submitting, or assisting in the
submission of, any such application.
(2) INDIVIDUALS.—If the Secretary finds that an individual
has been convicted of a felony under Federal law for conduct—
(A) relating to the development or approval, including
the process for development or approval, of any drug prod-
uct, or
(B) otherwise relating to the regulation of any drug
product under this Act,
the Secretary shall debar such individual from providing serv-
ices in any capacity to a person that has an approved or pend-
ing drug product application.
(b) PERMISSIVE DEBARMENT; CERTAIN DRUG APPLICATIONS;
FOOD IMPORTS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary, on the Secretary’s own
initiative or in response to a petition, may, in accordance with
paragraph (2), debar—
(A) a person other than an individual from submitting
or assisting in the submission of any abbreviated drug ap-
plication,
(B) an individual from providing services in any capac-
ity to a person that has an approved or pending drug prod-
uct application, or
(C) a person from importing an article of food or offer-
ing such an article for import into the United States.
(2) PERSONS SUBJECT TO PERMISSIVE DEBARMENT; CERTAIN
DRUG APPLICATIONS.—The following persons are subject to de-
barment under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1):
(A) 
CORPORATIONS, 
PARTNERSHIPS, 
AND
ASSOCIA-
TIONS.—Any person other than an individual that the Sec-
retary finds has been convicted—
(i) for conduct that—
(I) relates to the development or approval, in-
cluding the process for the development or ap-
proval, of any abbreviated drug application; and
(II) is a felony under Federal law (if the per-
son was convicted before the date of the enact-
ment of this section), a misdemeanor under Fed-
eral law, or a felony under State law, or
(ii) of a conspiracy to commit, or aiding or abet-
ting, a criminal offense described in clause (i) or a fel-
ony described in subsection (a)(1),
if the Secretary finds that the type of conduct which
served as the basis for such conviction undermines the
process for the regulation of drugs.
(B) INDIVIDUALS.—
(i) Any individual whom the Secretary finds has
been convicted of—
(I) a misdemeanor under Federal law or a fel-
ony under State law for conduct relating to the
development or approval, including the process for
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
29
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
development or approval, of any drug product or
otherwise relating to the regulation of drug prod-
ucts under this Act, or
(II) a conspiracy to commit, or aiding or abet-
ting, such criminal offense or a felony described in
subsection (a)(2),
if the Secretary finds that the type of conduct which
served as the basis for such conviction undermines the
process for the regulation of drugs.
(ii) Any individual whom the Secretary finds has
been convicted of—
(I) a felony which is not described in sub-
section (a)(2) or clause (i) of this subparagraph
and which involves bribery, payment of illegal
gratuities, fraud, perjury, false statement, racket-
eering, blackmail, extortion, falsification or de-
struction of records, or interference with, obstruc-
tion of an investigation into, or prosecution of, any
criminal offense, or
(II) a conspiracy to commit, or aiding or abet-
ting, such felony,
if the Secretary finds, on the basis of the conviction of
such individual and other information, that such indi-
vidual has demonstrated a pattern of conduct suffi-
cient to find that there is reason to believe that such
individual may violate requirements under this Act re-
lating to drug products.
(iii) Any individual whom the Secretary finds ma-
terially participated in acts that were the basis for a
conviction for an offense described in subsection (a) or
in clause (i) or (ii) for which a conviction was obtained,
if the Secretary finds, on the basis of such participa-
tion and other information, that such individual has
demonstrated a pattern of conduct sufficient to find
that there is reason to believe that such individual
may violate requirements under this Act relating to
drug products.
(iv) Any high managerial agent whom the Sec-
retary finds—
(I) worked for, or worked as a consultant for,
the same person as another individual during the
period in which such other individual took actions
for which a felony conviction was obtained and
which resulted in the debarment under subsection
(a)(2), or clause (i), of such other individual,
(II) had actual knowledge of the actions de-
scribed in subclause (I) of such other individual, or
took action to avoid such actual knowledge, or
failed to take action for the purpose of avoiding
such actual knowledge,
(III) knew that the actions described in sub-
clause (I) were violative of law, and
(IV) did not report such actions, or did not
cause such actions to be reported, to an officer,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
30
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
employee, or agent of the Department or to an ap-
propriate law enforcement officer, or failed to take
other appropriate action that would have ensured
that the process for the regulation of drugs was
not undermined, within a reasonable time after
such agent first knew of such actions,
if the Secretary finds that the type of conduct which
served as the basis for such other individual’s convic-
tion undermines the process for the regulation of
drugs.
(3) PERSONS SUBJECT TO PERMISSIVE DEBARMENT; FOOD IM-
PORTATION.—A person is subject to debarment under para-
graph (1)(C) if—
(A) the person has been convicted of a felony for con-
duct relating to the importation into the United States of
any food; or
(B) the person has engaged in a pattern of importing
or offering for import adulterated food that presents a
threat of serious adverse health consequences or death to
humans or animals.
(4) STAY OF CERTAIN ORDERS.—An order of the Secretary
under clause (iii) or (iv) of paragraph (2)(B) shall not take ef-
fect until 30 days after the order has been issued.
(c) DEBARMENT PERIOD AND CONSIDERATIONS.—
(1) EFFECT OF DEBARMENT.—The Secretary—
(A) shall not accept or review (other than in connec-
tion with an audit under this section) any abbreviated
drug application submitted by or with the assistance of a
person debarred under subsection (a)(1) or (b)(2)(A) during
the period such person is debarred,
(B) shall, during the period of a debarment under sub-
section (a)(2) or (b)(2)(B), debar an individual from pro-
viding services in any capacity to a person that has an ap-
proved or pending drug product application and shall not
accept or review (other than in connection with an audit
under this section) an abbreviated drug application from
such individual, and
(C) shall, if the Secretary makes the finding described
in paragraph (6) or (7) of section 307(a), assess a civil pen-
alty in accordance with section 307.
(2) DEBARMENT PERIODS.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall debar a person
under subsection (a) or (b) for the following periods:
(i) The period of debarment of a person (other
than an individual) under subsection (a)(1) shall not
be less than 1 year or more than 10 years, but if an
act leading to a subsequent debarment under sub-
section (a) occurs within 10 years after such person
has been debarred under subsection (a)(1), the period
of debarment shall be permanent.
(ii) The debarment of an individual under sub-
section (a)(2) shall be permanent.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
31
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(iii) The period of debarment of any person under
paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (b) shall not be more
than 5 years.
The Secretary may determine whether debarment periods
shall run concurrently or consecutively in the case of a
person debarred for multiple offenses.
(B) NOTIFICATION.—Upon a conviction for an offense
described in subsection (a) or (b) or upon execution of an
agreement with the United States to plead guilty to such
an offense, the person involved may notify the Secretary
that the person acquiesces to debarment and such person’s
debarment shall commence upon such notification.
(3) CONSIDERATIONS.—In determining the appropriateness
and the period of a debarment of a person under subsection (b)
and any period of debarment beyond the minimum specified in
subparagraph (A)(i) of paragraph (2), the Secretary shall con-
sider where applicable—
(A) the nature and seriousness of any offense involved,
(B) the nature and extent of management participa-
tion in any offense involved, whether corporate policies
and practices encouraged the offense, including whether
inadequate institutional controls contributed to the of-
fense,
(C) the nature and extent of voluntary steps to miti-
gate the impact on the public of any offense involved, in-
cluding the recall or the discontinuation of the distribution
of suspect drugs, full cooperation with any investigations
(including the extent of disclosure to appropriate authori-
ties of all wrongdoing), the relinquishing of profits on drug
approvals fraudulently obtained, and any other actions
taken to substantially limit potential or actual adverse ef-
fects on the public health,
(D) whether the extent to which changes in ownership,
management, or operations have corrected the causes of
any offense involved and provide reasonable assurances
that the offense will not occur in the future,
(E) whether the person to be debarred is able to
present adequate evidence that current production of
drugs subject to abbreviated drug applications and all
pending abbreviated drug applications are free of fraud or
material false statements, and
(F) prior convictions under this Act or under other
Acts involving matters within the jurisdiction of the Food
and Drug Administration.
(d) TERMINATION OF DEBARMENT.—
(1) APPLICATION.—Any person that is debarred under sub-
section (a) (other than a person permanently debarred) or any
person that is debarred under subsection (b) may apply to the
Secretary for termination of the debarment under this sub-
section. Any information submitted to the Secretary under this
paragraph does not constitute an amendment or supplement to
pending or approved abbreviated drug applications.
(2) DEADLINE.—The Secretary shall grant or deny any ap-
plication respecting a debarment which is submitted under
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
32
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
paragraph (1) within 180 days of the date the application is
submitted.
(3) ACTION BY THE SECRETARY.—
(A) CORPORATIONS.—
(i) CONVICTION REVERSAL.—If the conviction which
served as the basis for the debarment of a person
under subsection (a)(1) or paragraph (2)(A) or (3) of
subsection (b) is reversed, the Secretary shall with-
draw the order of debarment.
(ii) APPLICATION.—Upon application submitted
under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall terminate the
debarment of a person if the Secretary finds that—
(I) changes in ownership, management, or op-
erations have fully corrected the causes of the of-
fense involved and provide reasonable assurances
that the offense will not occur in the future, and
(II) in applicable cases, sufficient audits, con-
ducted by the Food and Drug Administration or
by independent experts acceptable to the Food and
Drug Administration, demonstrate that pending
applications and the development of drugs being
tested before the submission of an application are
free of fraud or material false statements.
In the case of persons debarred under subsection
(a)(1), such termination shall take effect no earlier
than the expiration of one year from the date of the
debarment.
(B) INDIVIDUALS.—
(i) CONVICTION REVERSAL.—If the conviction which
served as the basis for the debarment of an individual
under subsection (a)(2) or clause (i), (ii), (iii), or (iv) of
subsection (b)(2)(B) or subsection (b)(3) is reversed, the
Secretary shall withdraw the order of debarment.
(ii) APPLICATION.—Upon application submitted
under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall terminate the
debarment of an individual who has been debarred
under subsection (b)(2)(B) or subsection (b)(3) if such
termination serves the interests of justice and ade-
quately protects the integrity of the drug approval
process or the food importation process, as the case
may be.
(4) SPECIAL TERMINATION.—
(A) APPLICATION.—Any person that is debarred under
subsection (a)(1) (other than a person permanently
debarred under subsection (c)(2)(A)(i)) or any individual
who is debarred under subsection (a)(2) may apply to the
Secretary for special termination of debarment under this
subsection. Any information submitted to the Secretary
under this subparagraph does not constitute an amend-
ment or supplement to pending or approved abbreviated
drug applications.
(B) CORPORATIONS.—Upon an application submitted
under subparagraph (A), the Secretary may take the ac-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
33
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
tion described in subparagraph (D) if the Secretary, after
an informal hearing, finds that—
(i) the person making the application under sub-
paragraph (A) has demonstrated that the felony con-
viction which was the basis for such person’s debar-
ment involved the commission of an offense which was
not authorized, requested, commanded, performed, or
recklessly tolerated by the board of directors or by a
high managerial agent acting on behalf of the person
within the scope of the board’s or agent’s office or em-
ployment,
(ii) all individuals who were involved in the com-
mission of the offense or who knew or should have
known of the offense have been removed from employ-
ment involving the development or approval of any
drug subject to section 505,
(iii) the person fully cooperated with all investiga-
tions and promptly disclosed all wrongdoing to the ap-
propriate authorities, and
(iv) the person acted to mitigate any impact on the
public of any offense involved, including the recall, or
the discontinuation of the distribution, of any drug
with respect to which the Secretary requested a recall
or discontinuation of distribution due to concerns
about the safety or efficacy of the drug.
(C) INDIVIDUALS.—Upon an application submitted
under subparagraph (A), the Secretary may take the ac-
tion described in subparagraph (D) if the Secretary, after
an informal hearing, finds that such individual has pro-
vided substantial assistance in the investigations or pros-
ecutions of offenses which are described in subsection (a)
or (b) or which relate to any matter under the jurisdiction
of the Food and Drug Administration.
(D) SECRETARIAL ACTION.—The action referred to in
subparagraphs (B) and (C) is—
(i) in the case of a person other than an
individual—
(I) terminating the debarment immediately, or
(II) limiting the period of debarment to less
than one year, and
(ii) in the case of an individual, limiting the period
of debarment to less than permanent but to no less
than 1 year,
whichever best serves the interest of justice and protects
the integrity of the drug approval process.
(e) PUBLICATION AND LIST OF DEBARRED PERSONS.—The Sec-
retary shall publish in the Federal Register the name of any person
debarred under subsection (a) or (b), the effective date of the debar-
ment, and the period of the debarment. The Secretary shall also
maintain and make available to the public a list, updated no less
often than quarterly, of such persons, of the effective dates and
minimum periods of such debarments, and of the termination of
debarments.
(f) TEMPORARY DENIAL OF APPROVAL.—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
34
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary, on the Secretary’s own
initiative or in response to a petition, may, in accordance with
paragraph (3), refuse by order, for the period prescribed by
paragraph (2), to approve any abbreviated drug application
submitted by any person—
(A) if such person is under an active Federal criminal
investigation in connection with an action described in
subparagraph (B),
(B) if the Secretary finds that such person—
(i) has bribed or attempted to bribe, has paid or
attempted to pay an illegal gratuity, or has induced or
attempted to induce another person to bribe or pay an
illegal gratuity to any officer, employee, or agent of the
Department of Health and Human Services or to any
other Federal, State, or local official in connection with
any abbreviated drug application, or has conspired to
commit, or aided or abetted, such actions, or
(ii) has knowingly made or caused to be made a
pattern or practice of false statements or misrepresen-
tations with respect to material facts relating to any
abbreviated drug application, or the production of any
drug subject to an abbreviated drug application, to any
officer, employee, or agent of the Department of
Health and Human Services, or has conspired to com-
mit, or aided or abetted, such actions, and
(C) 
if 
a 
significant 
question 
has 
been 
raised
regarding—
(i) the integrity of the approval process with re-
spect to such abbreviated drug application, or
(ii) the reliability of data in or concerning such
person’s abbreviated drug application.
Such an order may be modified or terminated at any time.
(2) APPLICABLE PERIOD.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in subparagraph
(B), a denial of approval of an application of a person
under paragraph (1) shall be in effect for a period deter-
mined by the Secretary but not to exceed 18 months begin-
ning on the date the Secretary finds that the conditions
described in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of paragraph
(1) exist. The Secretary shall terminate such denial—
(i) if the investigation with respect to which the
finding was made does not result in a criminal charge
against such person, if criminal charges have been
brought and the charges have been dismissed, or if a
judgment of acquittal has been entered, or
(ii) if the Secretary determines that such finding
was in error.
(B) EXTENSION.—If, at the end of the period described
in subparagraph (A), the Secretary determines that a per-
son has been criminally charged for an action described in
subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1), the Secretary may ex-
tend the period of denial of approval of an application for
a period not to exceed 18 months. The Secretary shall ter-
minate such extension if the charges have been dismissed,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
35
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
if a judgment of acquittal has been entered, or if the Sec-
retary determines that the finding described in subpara-
graph (A) was in error.
(3) INFORMAL HEARING.—Within 10 days of the date an
order is issued under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall pro-
vide such person with an opportunity for an informal hearing,
to be held within such 10 days, on the decision of the Secretary
to refuse approval of an abbreviated drug application. Within
60 days of the date on which such hearing is held, the Sec-
retary shall notify the person given such hearing whether the
Secretary’s refusal of approval will be continued, terminated,
or otherwise modified. Such notification shall be final agency
action.
(g) SUSPENSION AUTHORITY.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—If—
(A) the Secretary finds—
(i) that a person has engaged in conduct described
in subparagraph (B) of subsection (f)(1) in connection
with 2 or more drugs under abbreviated drug applica-
tions, or
(ii) that a person has engaged in flagrant and re-
peated, material violations of good manufacturing
practice or good laboratory practice in connection with
the development, manufacturing, or distribution of one
or more drugs approved under an abbreviated drug
application during a 2-year period, and—
(I) such violations may undermine the safety
and efficacy of such drugs, and
(II) the causes of such violations have not
been corrected within a reasonable period of time
following notice of such violations by the Sec-
retary, and
(B) such person is under an active investigation by a
Federal authority in connection with a civil or criminal ac-
tion involving conduct described in subparagraph (A),
the Secretary shall issue an order suspending the distribution
of all drugs the development or approval of which was related
to such conduct described in subparagraph (A) or suspending
the distribution of all drugs approved under abbreviated drug
applications of such person if the Secretary finds that such
conduct may have affected the development or approval of a
significant number of drugs which the Secretary is unable to
identify. The Secretary shall exclude a drug from such order if
the Secretary determines that such conduct was not likely to
have influenced the safety or efficacy of such drug.
(2) PUBLIC HEALTH WAIVER.—The Secretary shall, on the
Secretary’s own initiative or in response to a petition, waive
the suspension under paragraph (1) (involving an action de-
scribed in paragraph (1)(A)(i)) with respect to any drug if the
Secretary finds that such waiver is necessary to protect the
public health because sufficient quantities of the drug would
not otherwise be available. The Secretary shall act on any peti-
tion seeking action under this paragraph within 180 days of
the date the petition is submitted to the Secretary.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
36
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(h) TERMINATION OF SUSPENSION.—The Secretary shall with-
draw an order of suspension of the distribution of a drug under
subsection (g) if the person with respect to whom the order was
issued demonstrates in a petition to the Secretary—
(1)(A) on the basis of an audit by the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration or by experts acceptable to the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration, or on the basis of other information, that the de-
velopment, approval, manufacturing, and distribution of such
drug is in substantial compliance with the applicable require-
ments of this Act, and
(B) changes in ownership, management, or operations—
(i) fully remedy the patterns or practices with respect
to which the order was issued, and
(ii) provide reasonable assurances that such actions
will not occur in the future, or
(2) the initial determination was in error.
The Secretary shall act on a submission of a petition under this
subsection within 180 days of the date of its submission and the
Secretary may consider the petition concurrently with the suspen-
sion proceeding. Any information submitted to the Secretary under
this subsection does not constitute an amendment or supplement to
a pending or approved abbreviated drug application.
(i) PROCEDURE.—The Secretary may not take any action under
subsection (a), (b), (c), (d)(3), (g), or (h) with respect to any person
unless the Secretary has issued an order for such action made on
the record after opportunity for an agency hearing on disputed
issues of material fact. In the course of any investigation or hear-
ing under this subsection, the Secretary may administer oaths and
affirmations, examine witnesses, receive evidence, and issue sub-
poenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and
the production of evidence that relates to the matter under inves-
tigation.
(j) JUDICIAL REVIEW.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in paragraph (2), any
person that is the subject of an adverse decision under sub-
section (a), (b), (c), (d), (f), (g), or (h) may obtain a review of
such decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the
District of Columbia or for the circuit in which the person re-
sides, by filing in such court (within 60 days following the date
the person is notified of the Secretary’s decision) a petition re-
questing that the decision be modified or set aside.
(2) EXCEPTION.—Any person that is the subject of an ad-
verse decision under clause (iii) or (iv) of subsection (b)(2)(B)
may obtain a review of such decision by the United States Dis-
trict Court for the District of Columbia or a district court of the
United States for the district in which the person resides, by
filing in such court (within 30 days following the date the per-
son is notified of the Secretary’s decision) a complaint request-
ing that the decision be modified or set aside. In such an ac-
tion, the court shall determine the matter de novo.
(k) CERTIFICATION.—Any application for approval of a drug
product shall include—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
37
Sec. 306
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(1) a certification that the applicant did not and will not
use in any capacity the services of any person debarred under
subsection (a) or (b), in connection with such application, and
(2) if such application is an abbreviated drug application,
a list of all convictions, described in subsections (a) and (b)
which occurred within the previous 5 years, of the applicant
and affiliated persons responsible for the development or sub-
mission of such application.
(l) APPLICABILITY.—
(1) CONVICTION.—For purposes of this section, a person is
considered to have been convicted of a criminal offense—
(A) when a judgment of conviction has been entered
against the person by a Federal or State court, regardless
of whether there is an appeal pending,
(B) when a plea of guilty or nolo contendere by the
person has been accepted by a Federal or State court, or
(C) when the person has entered into participation in
a first offender, deferred adjudication, or other similar ar-
rangement or program where judgment of conviction has
been withheld.
(2) EFFECTIVE DATES.—Subsection (a), subparagraph (A) of
subsection (b)(2), clauses (i) and (ii) of subsection (b)(2)(B), and
subsection (b)(3)(A) shall not apply to a conviction which oc-
curred more than 5 years before the initiation of an agency ac-
tion proposed to be taken under subsection (a) or (b). Clauses
(iii) and (iv) of subsection (b)(2)(B), subsection (b)(3)(B), and
subsections (f) and (g) shall not apply to an act or action which
occurred more than 5 years before the initiation of an agency
action proposed to be taken under subsection (b), (f), or (g).
Clause (iv) of subsection (b)(2)(B) shall not apply to an action
which occurred before June 1, 1992. Subsection (k) shall not
apply to applications submitted to the Secretary before June 1,
1992.
(m) DEVICES; MANDATORY
DEBARMENT
REGARDING
THIRD-
PARTY INSPECTIONS AND REVIEWS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—If the Secretary finds that a person has
been convicted of a felony under section 301(gg), the Secretary
shall debar such person from being accredited under section
523(b) or 704(g)(2) and from carrying out activities under an
agreement described in section 803(b).
(2) DEBARMENT PERIOD.—The Secretary shall debar a per-
son under paragraph (1) for the following periods:
(A) The period of debarment of a person (other than
an individual) shall not be less than 1 year or more than
10 years, but if an act leading to a subsequent debarment
under such paragraph occurs within 10 years after such
person has been debarred under such paragraph, the pe-
riod of debarment shall be permanent.
(B) The debarment of an individual shall be perma-
nent.
(3) TERMINATION OF DEBARMENT; JUDICIAL REVIEW; OTHER
MATTERS.—Subsections (c)(3), (d), (e), (i), (j), and (l)(1) apply
with respect to a person (other than an individual) or an indi-
vidual who is debarred under paragraph (1) to the same extent
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
38
Sec. 307
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
and in the same manner as such subsections apply with re-
spect to a person who is debarred under subsection (a)(1), or
an individual who is debarred under subsection (a)(2), respec-
tively.
CIVIL PENALTIES
SEC. 307. ø21 U.S.C. 335b¿ (a) IN GENERAL.—Any person that
the Secretary finds—
(1) knowingly made or caused to be made, to any officer,
employee, or agent of the Department of Health and Human
Services, a false statement or misrepresentation of a material
fact in connection with an abbreviated drug application,
(2) bribed or attempted to bribe or paid or attempted to
pay an illegal gratuity to any officer, employee, or agent of the
Department of Health and Human Services in connection with
an abbreviated drug application,
(3) destroyed, altered, removed, or secreted, or procured
the destruction, alteration, removal, or secretion of, any mate-
rial document or other material evidence which was the prop-
erty of or in the possession of the Department of Health and
Human Services for the purpose of interfering with that De-
partment’s discharge of its responsibilities in connection with
an abbreviated drug application,
(4) knowingly failed to disclose, to an officer or employee
of the Department of Health and Human Services, a material
fact which such person had an obligation to disclose relating to
any drug subject to an abbreviated drug application,
(5) knowingly obstructed an investigation of the Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services into any drug subject to
an abbreviated drug application,
(6) is a person that has an approved or pending drug prod-
uct application and has knowingly—
(A) employed or retained as a consultant or contractor,
or
(B) otherwise used in any capacity the services of,
a person who was debarred under section 306, or
(7) is an individual debarred under section 306 and, during
the period of debarment, provided services in any capacity to
a person that had an approved or pending drug product appli-
cation,
shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty for each such
violation in an amount not to exceed $250,000 in the case of an in-
dividual and $1,000,000 in the case of any other person.
(b) PROCEDURE.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—
(A) ACTION BY THE SECRETARY.—A civil penalty under
subsection (a) shall be assessed by the Secretary on a per-
son by an order made on the record after an opportunity
for an agency hearing on disputed issues of material fact
and the amount of the penalty. In the course of any inves-
tigation or hearing under this subparagraph, the Secretary
may administer oaths and affirmations, examine wit-
nesses, receive evidence, and issue subpoenas requiring
the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the produc-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
39
Sec. 307
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
tion of evidence that relates to the matter under investiga-
tion.
(B) ACTION BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.—In lieu of a
proceeding under subparagraph (A), the Attorney General
may, upon request of the Secretary, institute a civil action
to recover a civil money penalty in the amount and for any
of the acts set forth in subsection (a). Such an action may
be instituted separately from or in connection with any
other claim, civil or criminal, initiated by the Attorney
General under this Act.
(2) AMOUNT.—In determining the amount of a civil penalty
under paragraph (1), the Secretary or the court shall take into
account the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the
act subject to penalty, the person’s ability to pay, the effect on
the person’s ability to continue to do business, any history of
prior, similar acts, and such other matters as justice may re-
quire.
(3) LIMITATION ON ACTIONS.—No action may be initiated
under this section—
(A) with respect to any act described in subsection (a)
that occurred before the date of the enactment of this sec-
tion, or
(B) more than 6 years after the date when facts mate-
rial to the act are known or reasonably should have been
known by the Secretary but in no event more than 10
years after the date the act took place.
(c) JUDICIAL REVIEW.—Any person that is the subject of an ad-
verse decision under subsection (b)(1)(A) may obtain a review of
such decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia or for the circuit in which the person resides, by filing
in such court (within 60 days following the date the person is noti-
fied of the Secretary’s decision) a petition requesting that the deci-
sion be modified or set aside.
(d) RECOVERY OF PENALTIES.—The Attorney General may re-
cover any civil penalty (plus interest at the currently prevailing
rates from the date the penalty became final) assessed under sub-
section (b)(1)(A) in an action brought in the name of the United
States. The amount of such penalty may be deducted, when the
penalty has become final, from any sums then or later owing by the
United States to the person against whom the penalty has been as-
sessed. In an action brought under this subsection, the validity,
amount, and appropriateness of the penalty shall not be subject to
judicial review.
(e) INFORMANTS.—The Secretary may award to any individual
(other than an officer or employee of the Federal Government or a
person who materially participated in any conduct described in
subsection (a)) who provides information leading to the imposition
of a civil penalty under this section an amount not to exceed—
(1) $250,000, or
(2) one-half of the penalty so imposed and collected,
whichever is less. The decision of the Secretary on such award
shall not be reviewable.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
40
Sec. 308
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
AUTHORITY TO WITHDRAW APPROVAL OF ABBREVIATED DRUG
APPLICATIONS
SEC. 308. ø21 U.S.C. 335c¿ (a) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary—
(1) shall withdraw approval of an abbreviated drug appli-
cation if the Secretary finds that the approval was obtained,
expedited, or otherwise facilitated through bribery, payment of
an illegal gratuity, or fraud or material false statement, and
(2) may withdraw approval of an abbreviated drug applica-
tion if the Secretary finds that the applicant has repeatedly
demonstrated a lack of ability to produce the drug for which
the application was submitted in accordance with the formula-
tions or manufacturing practice set forth in the abbreviated
drug application and has introduced, or attempted to intro-
duce, such adulterated or misbranded drug into commerce.
(b) PROCEDURE.—The Secretary may not take any action under
subsection (a) with respect to any person unless the Secretary has
issued an order for such action made on the record after oppor-
tunity for an agency hearing on disputed issues of material fact. In
the course of any investigation or hearing under this subsection,
the Secretary may administer oaths and affirmations, examine wit-
nesses, receive evidence, and issue subpoenas requiring the attend-
ance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
that relates to the matter under investigation.
(c) APPLICABILITY.—Subsection (a) shall apply with respect to
offenses or acts regardless of when such offenses or acts occurred.
(d) JUDICIAL REVIEW.—Any person that is the subject of an ad-
verse decision under subsection (a) may obtain a review of such de-
cision by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Co-
lumbia or for the circuit in which the person resides, by filing in
such court (within 60 days following the date the person is notified
of the Secretary’s decision) a petition requesting that the decision
be modified or set aside.
REPORT OF MINOR VIOLATIONS
SEC. 309. ø21 U.S.C. 336¿ Nothing in this Act shall be con-
strued as requiring the Secretary to report for prosecution, or for
the institution of libel or injunction proceedings, minor violations
of this Act whenever he believes that the public interest will be
adequately served by a suitable written notice or warning.
PROCEEDINGS IN NAME OF UNITED STATES; PROVISION AS TO
SUBPOENAS
SEC. 310. ø21 U.S.C. 337¿ (a) Except as provided in subsection
(b), all such proceedings for the enforcement, or to restrain viola-
tions, of this Act shall be by and in the name of the United States.
Subpoenas for witnesses who are required to attend a court of the
United States, in any district, may run into any other district in
any proceeding under this section.
(b)(1) A State may bring in its own name and within its juris-
diction proceedings for the civil enforcement, or to restrain viola-
tions, of section 401, 403(b), 403(c), 403(d), 403(e), 403(f), 403(g),
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
41
Sec. 310
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
403(h), 403(i), 403(k), 403(q), or 403(r) if the food that is the subject
of the proceedings is located in the State.
(2) No proceeding may be commenced by a State under para-
graph (1)—
(A) before 30 days after the State has given notice to the
Secretary that the State intends to bring such proceeding,
(B) before 90 days after the State has given notice to the
Secretary of such intent if the Secretary has, within such 30
days, commenced an informal or formal enforcement action
pertaining to the food which would be the subject of such pro-
ceeding, or
(C) if the Secretary is diligently prosecuting a proceeding
in court pertaining to such food, has settled such proceeding,
or has settled the informal or formal enforcement action per-
taining to such food.
In any court proceeding described in subparagraph (C), a State
may intervene as a matter of right.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.003
December 19, 2002 
42
1 The amendments made by section 3(i) of the ‘‘Nutrition Labeling and Education Act Amend-
ments of 1993’’ (P.L. 103–80) were based on incorrect form and consequently are not reflected.
CHAPTER IV—FOOD
DEFINITIONS AND STANDARDS FOR FOOD
SEC. 401. ø21 U.S.C. 341¿ Whenever in the judgment of the
Secretary such action will promote honesty and fair dealing in the
interest of consumers, he shall promulgate regulations fixing and
establishing for any food, under its common or usual name so far
as practicable, a reasonable definition and standard of identity, a
reasonable standard of quality, or reasonable standards of fill of
container. No definition and standard of identity and no standard
of quality shall be established for fresh or dried fruits, fresh or
dried vegetables, or butter, except that definitions and standards of
identity may be established for avocados, cantaloupes, citrus fruits,
and melons. In prescribing any standard of fill of container, the
Secretary shall give due consideration to the natural shrinkage in
storage and in transit of fresh natural food and to need for the nec-
essary packing and protective material. In the prescribing of any
standard of quality for any canned fruit or canned vegetable, con-
sideration shall be given and due allowance made for the differing
characteristics of the several varieties of such fruit or vegetable. In
prescribing a definition and standard of identity for any food or
class of food in which optional ingredients are permitted, the Sec-
retary shall, for the purpose of promoting honesty and fair dealing
in the interest of consumers, designate the optional ingredients
which shall be named on the label. Any definition and standard of
identity prescribed by the Secretary for avocados, cantaloupes, cit-
rus fruits, or melons shall relate only to maturity and to the effects
of freezing.
ADULTERATED FOOD
SEC. 402. ø21 U.S.C. 342¿ A food shall be deemed to be
adulterated—
(a) 1(1) If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious sub-
stance which may render it injurious to health; but in case the sub-
stance is not an added substance such food shall not be considered
adulterated under this clause if the quantity of such substance in
such food does not ordinarily render it injurious to health; or (2)(A)
if it bears or contains any added poisonous or added deleterious
substance (other than a substance that is a pesticide chemical res-
idue in or on a raw agricultural commodity or processed food, a
food additive, a color additive, or a new animal drug) that is unsafe
within the meaning of section 406; or (B) if it bears or contains a
pesticide chemical residue that is unsafe within the meaning of sec-
tion 408(a); or (C) if it is or if it bears or contains (i) any food addi-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
43
Sec. 402
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
tive that is unsafe within the meaning of section 409; or (ii) a new
animal drug (or conversion product thereof) that is unsafe within
the meaning of section 512; or (3) if it consists in whole or in part
of any filthy, putrid, or decomposed substance, or if it is otherwise
unfit for food; or (4) if it has been prepared, packed, or held under
insanitary conditions whereby it may have become contaminated
with filth, or whereby it may have been rendered injurious to
health; or (5) if it is, in whole or in part, the product of a diseased
animal or of an animal which has died otherwise than by slaugh-
ter; or (6) if its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any
poisonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents
injurious to health; or (7) if it has been intentionally subjected to
radiation, unless the use of the radiation was in conformity with
a regulation or exemption in effect pursuant to section 409.
(b)(1) If any valuable constituent has been in whole or in part
omitted or abstracted therefrom; or (2) if any substance has been
substituted wholly or in part therefor; or (3) if damage or inferi-
ority has been concealed in any manner; or (4) if any substance has
been added thereto or mixed or packed therewith so as to increase
its bulk or weight, or reduce its quality or strength, or make it ap-
pear better or of greater value than it is.
(c) If it is, or it bears or contains, a color additive which is un-
safe within the meaning of section 721(a).
(d) If it is confectionery, and—
(1) has partially or completely imbedded therein any non-
nutritive object, except that this subparagraph shall not apply
in the case of any nonnutritive object if, in the judgment of the
Secretary as provided by regulations, such object is of practical
functional value to the confectionery product and would not
render the product injurious or hazardous to health;
(2) bears or contains any alcohol other than alcohol not in
excess of one-half of 1 per centum by volume derived solely
from the use of flavoring extracts, except that this clause shall
not apply to confectionery which is introduced or delivered for
introduction into, or received or held for sale in, interstate
commerce if the sale of such confectionery is permitted under
the laws of the State in which such confectionery is intended
to be offered for sale; or
(3) bears or contains any nonnutritive substance, except
that this subparagraph shall not apply to a safe nonnutritive
substance which is in or on confectionery by reason of its use
for some practical functional purpose in the manufacture, pack-
aging, or storage of such confectionery if the use of the sub-
stance does not promote deception of the consumer or other-
wise result in adulteration or misbranding in violation of any
provision of this Act, except that the Secretary may, for the
purpose of avoiding or resolving uncertainty as to the applica-
tion of this subparagraph, issue regulations allowing or prohib-
iting the use of particular nonnutritive substances.
(e) If it is oleomargarine or margarine or butter and any of the
raw material used therein consisted in whole or in part of any
filthy, putrid, or decomposed substance, or such oleomargarine or
margarine or butter is otherwise unfit for food.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
44
Sec. 402
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(f)(1) If it is a dietary supplement or contains a dietary ingre-
dient that—
(A) presents a significant or unreasonable risk of illness or
injury under—
(i) conditions of use recommended or suggested in la-
beling, or
(ii) if no conditions of use are suggested or rec-
ommended in the labeling, under ordinary conditions of
use;
(B) is a new dietary ingredient for which there is inad-
equate information to provide reasonable assurance that such
ingredient does not present a significant or unreasonable risk
of illness or injury;
(C) the Secretary declares to pose an imminent hazard to
public health or safety, except that the authority to make such
declaration shall not be delegated and the Secretary shall
promptly after such a declaration initiate a proceeding in ac-
cordance with sections 554 and 556 of title 5, United States
Code, to affirm or withdraw the declaration; or
(D) is or contains a dietary ingredient that renders it adul-
terated under paragraph (a)(1) under the conditions of use rec-
ommended or suggested in the labeling of such dietary supple-
ment.
In any proceeding under this subparagraph, the United States
shall bear the burden of proof on each element to show that a die-
tary supplement is adulterated. The court shall decide any issue
under this paragraph on a de novo basis.
(2) Before the Secretary may report to a United States attorney
a violation of paragraph (1)(A) for a civil proceeding, the person
against whom such proceeding would be initiated shall be given ap-
propriate notice and the opportunity to present views, orally and
in writing, at least 10 days before such notice, with regard to such
proceeding.
(g)(1) If it is a dietary supplement and it has been prepared,
packed, or held under conditions that do not meet current good
manufacturing practice regulations, including regulations requir-
ing, when necessary, expiration date labeling, issued by the Sec-
retary under subparagraph (2).
(2) The Secretary may by regulation prescribe good manufac-
turing practices for dietary supplements. Such regulations shall be
modeled after current good manufacturing practice regulations for
food and may not impose standards for which there is no current
and generally available analytical methodology. No standard of cur-
rent good manufacturing practice may be imposed unless such
standard is included in a regulation promulgated after notice and
opportunity for comment in accordance with chapter 5 of title 5,
United States Code.
(h) If it is an article of food imported or offered for import into
the United States and the article of food has previously been re-
fused admission under section 801(a), unless the person reoffering
the article affirmatively establishes, at the expense of the owner or
consignee of the article, that the article complies with the applica-
ble requirements of this Act, as determined by the Secretary.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
45
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
MISBRANDED FOOD
SEC. 403. ø21 U.S.C. 343¿ A food shall be deemed to be
misbranded—
(a) If (1) its labeling is false or misleading in any particular,
or (2) in the case of a food to which section 411 applies, its adver-
tising is false or misleading in a material respect or its labeling is
in violation of section 411(b)(2).
(b) If it is offered for sale under the name of another food.
(c) If it is an imitation of another food, unless its label bears,
in type of uniform size and prominence, the word ‘‘imitation’’ and,
immediately thereafter, the name of the food imitated.
(d) If its container is so made, formed, or filled as to be mis-
leading.
(e) If in package form unless it bears a label containing (1) the
name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or dis-
tributor; and (2) an accurate statement of the quantity of the con-
tents in terms of weight, measure, or numerical count, except that
under clause (2) of this paragraph reasonable variations shall be
permitted, and exemptions as to small packages shall be estab-
lished, by regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
(f) If any word, statement, or other information required by or
under authority of this Act to appear on the label or labeling is not
prominently placed thereon with such conspicuousness (as com-
pared with other words, statements, designs, or devices, in the la-
beling) and in such terms as to render it likely to be read and un-
derstood by the ordinary individual under customary conditions of
purchase and use.
(g) If it purports to be or is represented as a food for which a
definition and standard of identity has been prescribed by regula-
tions as provided by section 401, unless (1) it conforms to such defi-
nition and standard, and (2) its label bears the name of the food
specified in the definition and standard, and, insofar as may be re-
quired by such regulations, the common names of optional ingredi-
ents (other than spices, flavoring, and coloring) present in such
food.
(h) If it purports to be or is represented as—
(1) a food for which a standard of quality has been pre-
scribed by regulations as provided by section 401, and its qual-
ity falls below such standard, unless its label bears, in such
manner and form as such regulations specify, a statement that
it falls below such standard;
(2) a food for which a standard or standards of fill of con-
tainer have been prescribed by regulations as provided by sec-
tion 401, and it falls below the standard of fill of container ap-
plicable thereto, unless its label bears, in such manner and
form as such regulations specify, a statement that it falls
below such standard; or
(3) a food that is pasteurized unless—
(A) such food has been subjected to a safe process or
treatment that is prescribed as pasteurization for such
food in a regulation promulgated under this Act; or
(B)(i) such food has been subjected to a safe process or
treatment that—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
46
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(I) is reasonably certain to achieve destruction or
elimination in the food of the most resistant micro-
organisms of public health significance that are likely
to occur in the food;
(II) is at least as protective of the public health as
a process or treatment described in subparagraph (A);
(III) is effective for a period that is at least as long
as the shelf life of the food when stored under normal
and moderate abuse conditions; and
(IV) is the subject of a notification to the Sec-
retary, including effectiveness data regarding the proc-
ess or treatment; and
(ii) at least 120 days have passed after the date of re-
ceipt of such notification by the Secretary without the Sec-
retary making a determination that the process or treat-
ment involved has not been shown to meet the require-
ments of subclauses (I) through (III) of clause (i).
For purposes of paragraph (3), a determination by the Secretary
that a process or treatment has not been shown to meet the re-
quirements of subclauses (I) through (III) of subparagraph (B)(i)
shall constitute final agency action under such subclauses.
(i) Unless its label bears (1) the common or usual name of the
food, if any there be, and (2) in case it is fabricated from two or
more ingredients, the common or usual name of each such ingre-
dient and if the food purports to be a beverage containing vegetable
or fruit juice, a statement with appropriate prominence on the in-
formation panel of the total percentage of such fruit or vegetable
juice contained in the food; except that spices, flavorings, and colors
not required to be certified under section 721(c) unless sold as
spices, flavorings, or such colors, may be designated as spices,
flavorings, and colorings without naming each. To the extent that
compliance with the requirements of clause (2) of this paragraph
is impracticable, or results in deception or unfair competition, ex-
emptions shall be established by regulations promulgated by the
Secretary.
(j) If it purports to be or is represented for special dietary uses,
unless its label bears such information concerning its vitamin, min-
eral, and other dietary properties as the Secretary determines to
be, and by regulations prescribes as, necessary in order fully to in-
form purchasers as to its value for such uses.
(k) If it bears or contains any artificial flavoring, artificial
coloring, or chemical preservative, unless it bears labeling stating
that fact, except that to the extent that compliance with the re-
quirements of this paragraph is impracticable, exemptions shall be
established by regulations promulgated by the Secretary. The pro-
visions of this paragraph and paragraphs (g) and (i) with respect
to artificial coloring shall not apply in the case of butter, cheese,
or ice cream. The provisions of this paragraph with respect to
chemical preservatives shall not apply to a pesticide chemical when
used in or on a raw agricultural commodity which is the produce
of the soil.
(l) If it is a raw agricultural commodity which is the produce
of the soil, bearing or containing a pesticide chemical applied after
harvest, unless the shipping container of such commodity bears la-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
47
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
beling which declares the presence of such chemical in or on such
commodity and the common or usual name and the function of
such chemical, except that no such declaration shall be required
while such commodity, having been removed from the shipping con-
tainer, is being held or displayed for sale at retail out of such con-
tainer in accordance with the custom of the trade.
(m) If it is a color additive, unless its packaging and labeling
are in conformity with such packaging and labeling requirements,
applicable to such color additive, as may be contained in regula-
tions issued under section 721.
(n) If its packaging or labeling is in violation of an applicable
regulation issued pursuant to section 3 or 4 of the Poison Preven-
tion Packaging Act of 1970.
ø(o) Repealed by Pub. L. 106–554, December 21, 2000.¿
ø(p) Repealed by Pub. L. 104-124, April 1, 1996.¿
(q)(1) Except as provided in subparagraphs (3), (4), and (5), if
it is a food intended for human consumption and is offered for sale,
unless its label or labeling bears nutrition information that
provides—
(A)(i) the serving size which is an amount customarily con-
sumed and which is expressed in a common household measure
that is appropriate to the food, or
(ii) if the use of the food is not typically expressed in a
serving size, the common household unit of measure that ex-
presses the serving size of the food,
(B) the number of servings or other units of measure per
container,
(C) the total number of calories—
(i) derived from any source, and
(ii) derived from the total fat,
in each serving size or other unit of measure of the food,
(D) the amount of the following nutrients: Total fat, satu-
rated fat, cholesterol, sodium, total carbohydrates, complex car-
bohydrates, sugars, dietary fiber, and total protein contained in
each serving size or other unit of measure,
(E) any vitamin, mineral, or other nutrient required to be
placed on the label and labeling of food under this Act before
October 1, 1990, if the Secretary determines that such informa-
tion will assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary prac-
tices.
The Secretary may by regulation require any information required
to be placed on the label or labeling by this subparagraph or sub-
paragraph (2)(A) to be highlighted on the label or labeling by larger
type, bold type, or contrasting color if the Secretary determines
that such highlighting will assist consumers in maintaining
healthy dietary practices.
(2)(A) If the Secretary determines that a nutrient other than
a nutrient required by subparagraph (1)(C), (1)(D), or (1)(E) should
be included in the label or labeling of food subject to subparagraph
(1) for purposes of providing information regarding the nutritional
value of such food that will assist consumers in maintaining
healthy dietary practices, the Secretary may by regulation require
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
48
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 The date is November 8, 1991.
1 The date is November 8, 1991.
2 The date is May 8, 1993.
that information relating to such additional nutrient be included in
the label or labeling of such food.
(B) If the Secretary determines that the information relating to
a nutrient required by subparagraph (1)(C), (1)(D), or (1)(E) or
clause (A) of this subparagraph to be included in the label or label-
ing of food is not necessary to assist consumers in maintaining
healthy dietary practices, the Secretary may by regulation remove
information relating to such nutrient from such requirement.
(3) For food that is received in bulk containers at a retail es-
tablishment, the Secretary may, by regulation, provide that the nu-
trition information required by subparagraphs (1) and (2) be dis-
played at the location in the retail establishment at which the food
is offered for sale.
(4)(A) The Secretary shall provide for furnishing the nutrition
information required by subparagraphs (1) and (2) with respect to
raw agricultural commodities and raw fish by issuing voluntary nu-
trition guidelines, as provided by clause (B) or by issuing regula-
tions that are mandatory as provided by clause (D).
(B)(i) Upon the expiration of 12 months after the date of the
enactment of the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 1,
the Secretary, after providing an opportunity for comment, shall
issue guidelines for food retailers offering raw agricultural com-
modities or raw fish to provide nutrition information specified in
subparagraphs (1) and (2). Such guidelines shall take into account
the actions taken by food retailers during such 12-month period to
provide to consumers nutrition information on raw agricultural
commodities and raw fish. Such guidelines shall only apply—
(I) in the case of raw agricultural commodities, to the 20
varieties of vegetables most frequently consumed during a year
and the 20 varieties of fruit most frequently consumed during
a year, and
(II) to the 20 varieties of raw fish most frequently con-
sumed during a year.
The vegetables, fruits, and raw fish to which such guidelines apply
shall be determined by the Secretary by regulation and the Sec-
retary may apply such guidelines regionally.
(ii) Upon the expiration of 12 months after the date of the en-
actment of the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 1, the
Secretary shall issue a final regulation defining the circumstances
that constitute substantial compliance by food retailers with the
guidelines issued under subclause (i). The regulation shall provide
that there is not substantial compliance if a significant number of
retailers have failed to comply with the guidelines. The size of the
retailers and the portion of the market served by retailers in com-
pliance with the guidelines shall be considered in determining
whether the substantial-compliance standard has been met.
(C)(i) Upon the expiration of 30 months after the date of the
enactment of the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990 2,
the Secretary shall issue a report on actions taken by food retailers
to provide consumers with nutrition information for raw agricul-
tural commodities and raw fish under the guidelines issued under
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
49
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
clause (A). Such report shall include a determination of whether
there is substantial compliance with the guidelines.
(ii) If the Secretary finds that there is substantial compliance
with the guidelines, the Secretary shall issue a report and make a
determination of the type required in subclause (i) every two years.
(D)(i) If the Secretary determines that there is not substantial
compliance with the guidelines issued under clause (A), the Sec-
retary shall at the time such determination is made issue proposed
regulations requiring that any person who offers raw agricultural
commodities or raw fish to consumers provide, in a manner pre-
scribed by regulations, the nutrition information required by sub-
paragraphs (1) and (2). The Secretary shall issue final regulations
imposing such requirements 6 months after issuing the proposed
regulations. The final regulations shall become effective 6 months
after the date of their promulgation.
(ii) Regulations issued under subclause (i) may require that the
nutrition information required by subparagraphs (1) and (2) be pro-
vided for more than 20 varieties of vegetables, 20 varieties of fruit,
and 20 varieties of fish most frequently consumed during a year if
the Secretary finds that a larger number of such products are fre-
quently consumed. Such regulations shall permit such information
to be provided in a single location in each area in which raw agri-
cultural commodities and raw fish are offered for sale. Such regula-
tions may provide that information shall be expressed as an aver-
age or range per serving of the same type of raw agricultural com-
modity or raw fish. The Secretary shall develop and make available
to the persons who offer such food to consumers the information re-
quired by subparagraphs (1) and (2).
(iii) Regulations issued under subclause (i) shall permit the re-
quired information to be provided in each area of an establishment
in which raw agricultural commodities and raw fish are offered for
sale. The regulations shall permit food retailers to display the re-
quired information by supplying copies of the information provided
by the Secretary, by making the information available in brochure,
notebook or leaflet form, or by posting a sign disclosing the infor-
mation. Such regulations shall also permit presentation of the re-
quired information to be supplemented by a video, live demonstra-
tion, or other media which the Secretary approves.
(E) For purposes of this subparagraph, the term ‘‘fish’’ includes
freshwater or marine fin fish, crustaceans, and mollusks, including
shellfish, amphibians, and other forms of aquatic animal life.
(F) No person who offers raw agricultural commodities or raw
fish to consumers may be prosecuted for minor violations of this
subparagraph if there has been substantial compliance with the re-
quirements of this paragraph.
(5)(A) Subparagraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) shall not apply to
food—
(i) which is served in restaurants or other establishments
in which food is served for immediate human consumption or
which is sold for sale or use in such establishments,
(ii) which is processed and prepared primarily in a retail
establishment, which is ready for human consumption, which
is of the type described in subclause (i), and which is offered
for sale to consumers but not for immediate human consump-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
50
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
tion in such establishment and which is not offered for sale
outside such establishment,
(iii) which is an infant formula subject to section 412,
(iv) which is a medical food as defined in section 5(b) of the
Orphan Drug Act (21 U.S.C. 360ee(b)), or
(v) which is described in section 405(2).
(B) Subparagraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply to the label of
a food if the Secretary determines by regulations that compliance
with such subparagraphs is impracticable because the package of
such food is too small to comply with the requirements of such sub-
paragraphs and if the label of such food does not contain any nutri-
tion information.
(C) If a food contains insignificant amounts, as determined by
the Secretary, of all the nutrients required by subparagraphs (1)
and (2) to be listed in the label or labeling of food, the require-
ments of such subparagraphs shall not apply to such food if the
label, labeling, or advertising of such food does not make any claim
with respect to the nutritional value of such food. If a food contains
insignificant amounts, as determined by the Secretary, of more
than one-half the nutrients required by subparagraphs (1) and (2)
to be in the label or labeling of the food, the Secretary shall require
the amounts of such nutrients to be stated in a simplified form pre-
scribed by the Secretary.
(D) If a person offers food for sale and has annual gross sales
made or business done in sales to consumers which is not more
than $500,000 or has annual gross sales made or business done in
sales of food to consumers which is not more than $50,000, the re-
quirements of subparagraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) shall not apply
with respect to food sold by such person to consumers unless the
label or labeling of food offered by such person provides nutrition
information or makes a nutrition claim.
(E)(i) During the 12-month period for which an exemption from
subparagraphs (1) and (2) is claimed pursuant to this subclause,
the requirements of such subparagraphs shall not apply to any food
product if—
(I) the labeling for such product does not provide nutrition
information or make a claim subject to paragraph (r),
(II) the person who claims for such product an exemption
from such subparagraphs employed fewer than an average of
100 full-time equivalent employees,
(III) such person provided the notice described in sub-
clause (iii), and
(IV) in the case of a food product which was sold in the 12-
month period preceding the period for which an exemption was
claimed, fewer than 100,000 units of such product were sold in
the United States during such preceding period, or in the case
of a food product which was not sold in the 12-month period
preceding the period for which such exemption is claimed,
fewer than 100,000 units of such product are reasonably antici-
pated to be sold in the United States during the period for
which such exemption is claimed.
(ii) During the 12-month period after the applicable date re-
ferred to in this sentence, the requirements of subparagraphs (1)
and (2) shall not apply to any food product which was first intro-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
51
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
duced into interstate commerce before May 8, 1994, if the labeling
for such product does not provide nutrition information or make a
claim subject to paragraph (r), if such person provided the notice
described in subclause (iii), and if—
(I) during the 12-month period preceding May 8, 1994, the
person who claims for such product an exemption from such
subparagraphs employed fewer than an average of 300 full-
time equivalent employees and fewer than 600,000 units of
such product were sold in the United States,
(II) during the 12-month period preceding May 8, 1995, the
person who claims for such product an exemption from such
subparagraphs employed fewer than an average of 300 full-
time equivalent employees and fewer than 400,000 units of
such product were sold in the United States, or
(III) during the 12-month period preceding May 8, 1996,
the person who claims for such product an exemption from
such subparagraphs employed fewer than an average of 200
full-time equivalent employees and fewer than 200,000 units of
such product were sold in the United States.
(iii) The notice referred to in subclauses (i) and (ii) shall be
given to the Secretary prior to the beginning of the period during
which the exemption under subclause (i) or (ii) is to be in effect,
shall state that the person claiming such exemption for a food
product has complied with the applicable requirements of subclause
(i) or (ii), and shall—
(I) state the average number of full-time equivalent em-
ployees such person employed during the 12 months preceding
the date such person claims such exemption,
(II) state the approximate number of units the person
claiming the exemption sold in the United States,
(III) if the exemption is claimed for a food product which
was sold in the 12-month period preceding the period for which
the exemption was claimed, state the approximate number of
units of such product which were sold in the United States
during such preceding period, and, if the exemption is claimed
for a food product which was not sold in such preceding period,
state the number of units of such product which such person
reasonably anticipates will be sold in the United States during
the period for which the exemption was claimed, and
(IV) contain such information as the Secretary may require
to verify the information required by the preceding provisions
of this subclause if the Secretary has questioned the validity
of such information.
If a person is not an importer, has fewer than 10 full-time equiva-
lent employees, and sells fewer than 10,000 units of any food prod-
uct in any year, such person is not required to file a notice for such
product under this subclause for such year.
(iv) In the case of a person who claimed an exemption under
subclause (i) or (ii), if, during the period of such exemption, the
number of full-time equivalent employees of such person exceeds
the number in such subclause or if the number of food products
sold in the United States exceeds the number in such subclause,
such exemption shall extend to the expiration of 18 months after
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
52
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
the date the number of full-time equivalent employees or food prod-
ucts sold exceeded the applicable number.
(v) For any food product first introduced into interstate com-
merce after May 8, 2002, the Secretary may by regulation lower
the employee or units of food products requirement of subclause (i)
if the Secretary determines that the cost of compliance with such
lower requirement will not place an undue burden on persons sub-
ject to such lower requirement.
(vi) For purposes of subclauses (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), and (v)—
(I) the term ‘‘unit’’ means the packaging or, if there is no
packaging, the form in which a food product is offered for sale
to consumers,
(II) the term ‘‘food product’’ means food in any sized pack-
age which is manufactured by a single manufacturer or which
bears the same brand name, which bears the same statement
of identity, and which has similar preparation methods, and
(III) the term ‘‘person’’ in the case of a corporation includes
all domestic and foreign affiliates of the corporation.
(F) A dietary supplement product (including a food to which
section 411 applies) shall comply with the requirements of subpara-
graphs (1) and (2) in a manner which is appropriate for the product
and which is specified in regulations of the Secretary which shall
provide that—
(i) nutrition information shall first list those dietary ingre-
dients that are present in the product in a significant amount
and for which a recommendation for daily consumption has
been established by the Secretary, except that a dietary ingre-
dient shall not be required to be listed if it is not present in
a significant amount, and shall list any other dietary ingre-
dient present and identified as having no such recommenda-
tion;
(ii) the listing of dietary ingredients shall include the
quantity of each such ingredient (or of a proprietary blend of
such ingredients) per serving;
(iii) the listing of dietary ingredients may include the
source of a dietary ingredient; and
(iv) the nutrition information shall immediately precede
the ingredient information required under subclause (i), except
that no ingredient identified pursuant to subclause (i) shall be
required to be identified a second time.
(G) Subparagraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) shall not apply to food
which is sold by a food distributor if the food distributor principally
sells food to restaurants or other establishments in which food is
served for immediate human consumption and does not manufac-
ture, process, or repackage the food it sells.
(r)(1) Except as provided in clauses (A) through (C) of subpara-
graph (5), if it is a food intended for human consumption which is
offered for sale and for which a claim is made in the label or label-
ing of the food which expressly or by implication—
(A) characterizes the level of any nutrient which is of the
type required by paragraph (q)(1) or (q)(2) to be in the label or
labeling of the food unless the claim is made in accordance
with subparagraph (2), or
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
53
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(B) characterizes the relationship of any nutrient which is
of the type required by paragraph (q)(1) or (q)(2) to be in the
label or labeling of the food to a disease or a health-related
condition unless the claim is made in accordance with subpara-
graph (3) or (5)(D).
A statement of the type required by paragraph (q) that appears as
part of the nutrition information required or permitted by such
paragraph is not a claim which is subject to this paragraph and a
claim subject to clause (A) is not subject to clause (B).
(2)(A) Except as provided in subparagraphs (4)(A)(ii) and
(4)(A)(iii) and clauses (A) through (C) of subparagraph (5), a claim
described in subparagraph (1)(A)—
(i) may be made only if the characterization of the level
made in the claim uses terms which are defined in regulations
of the Secretary,
(ii) may not state the absence of a nutrient unless—
(I) the nutrient is usually present in the food or in a
food which substitutes for the food as defined by the Sec-
retary by regulation, or
(II) the Secretary by regulation permits such a state-
ment on the basis of a finding that such a statement would
assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary practices
and the statement discloses that the nutrient is not usu-
ally present in the food,
(iii) may not be made with respect to the level of choles-
terol in the food if the food contains, as determined by the Sec-
retary by regulation, fat or saturated fat in an amount which
increases to persons in the general population the risk of dis-
ease or a health related condition which is diet related
unless—
(I) the Secretary finds by regulation that the level of
cholesterol is substantially less than the level usually
present in the food or in a food which substitutes for the
food and which has a significant market share, or the Sec-
retary by regulation permits a statement regarding the ab-
sence of cholesterol on the basis of a finding that choles-
terol is not usually present in the food and that such a
statement would assist consumers in maintaining healthy
dietary practices and a requirement that the statement
disclose that cholesterol is not usually present in the food,
and
(II) the label or labeling of the food discloses the level
of such fat or saturated fat in immediate proximity to such
claim and with appropriate prominence which shall be no
less than one-half the size of the claim with respect to the
level of cholesterol,
(iv) may not be made with respect to the level of saturated
fat in the food if the food contains cholesterol unless the label
or labeling of the food discloses the level of cholesterol in the
food in immediate proximity to such claim and with appro-
priate prominence which shall be no less than one-half the size
of the claim with respect to the level of saturated fat,
(v) may not state that a food is high in dietary fiber unless
the food is low in total fat as defined by the Secretary or the
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
54
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
label or labeling discloses the level of total fat in the food in
immediate proximity to such statement and with appropriate
prominence which shall be no less than one-half the size of the
claim with respect to the level of dietary fiber, and
(vi) may not be made if the Secretary by regulation pro-
hibits the claim because the claim is misleading in light of the
level of another nutrient in the food.
(B) If a claim described in subparagraph (1)(A) is made with
respect to a nutrient in a food and the Secretary makes a deter-
mination that the food contains a nutrient at a level that increases
to persons in the general population the risk of a disease or health-
related condition that is diet related, the label or labeling of such
food shall contain, prominently and in immediate proximity to such
claim, the following statement: ‘‘See nutrition information for   content.’’ The blank shall identify the nutrient associated with the
increased disease or health-related condition risk. In making the
determination described in this clause, the Secretary shall take
into account the significance of the food in the total daily diet.
(C) Subparagraph (2)(A) does not apply to a claim described in
subparagraph (1)(A) and contained in the label or labeling of a food
if such claim is contained in the brand name of such food and such
brand name was in use on such food before October 25, 1989, un-
less the brand name contains a term defined by the Secretary
under subparagraph (2)(A)(i). Such a claim is subject to paragraph
(a).
(D) Subparagraph (2) does not apply to a claim described in
subparagraph (1)(A) which uses the term ‘‘diet’’ and is contained in
the label or labeling of a soft drink if (i) such claim is contained
in the brand name of such soft drink, (ii) such brand name was in
use on such soft drink before October 25, 1989, and (iii) the use of
the term ‘‘diet’’ was in conformity with section 105.66 of title 21 of
the Code of Federal Regulations. Such a claim is subject to para-
graph (a).
(E) Subclauses (i) through (v) of subparagraph (2)(A) do not
apply to a statement in the label or labeling of food which describes
the percentage of vitamins and minerals in the food in relation to
the amount of such vitamins and minerals recommended for daily
consumption by the Secretary.
(F) Subclause (i) clause (A) does not apply to a statement in
the labeling of a dietary supplement that characterizes the percent-
age level of a dietary ingredient for which the Secretary has not es-
tablished a reference daily intake, daily recommended value, or
other recommendation for daily consumption.
(G) A claim of the type described in subparagraph (1)(A) for a
nutrient, for which the Secretary has not promulgated a regulation
under clause (A)(i), shall be authorized and may be made with re-
spect to a food if—
(i) a scientific body of the United States Government with
official responsibility for public health protection or research
directly relating to human nutrition (such as the National In-
stitutes of Health or the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention) or the National Academy of Sciences or any of its sub-
divisions has published an authoritative statement, which is
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
55
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
currently in effect, which identifies the nutrient level to which
the claim refers;
(ii) a person has submitted to the Secretary, at least 120
days (during which the Secretary may notify any person who
is making a claim as authorized by clause (C) that such person
has not submitted all the information required by such clause)
before the first introduction into interstate commerce of the
food with a label containing the claim, (I) a notice of the claim,
which shall include the exact words used in the claim and shall
include a concise description of the basis upon which such per-
son relied for determining that the requirements of subclause
(i) have been satisfied, (II) a copy of the statement referred to
in subclause (i) upon which such person relied in making the
claim, and (III) a balanced representation of the scientific lit-
erature relating to the nutrient level to which the claim refers;
(iii) the claim and the food for which the claim is made are
in compliance with clauses (A) and (B), and are otherwise in
compliance with paragraph (a) and section 201(n); and
(iv) the claim is stated in a manner so that the claim is
an accurate representation of the authoritative statement re-
ferred to in subclause (i) and so that the claim enables the
public to comprehend the information provided in the claim
and to understand the relative significance of such information
in the context of a total daily diet.
For purposes of this clause, a statement shall be regarded as an
authoritative statement of a scientific body described in subclause
(i) only if the statement is published by the scientific body and
shall not include a statement of an employee of the scientific body
made in the individual capacity of the employee.
(H) A claim submitted under the requirements of clause (G)
may be made until—
(i) such time as the Secretary issues a regulation—
(I) prohibiting or modifying the claim and the regula-
tion has become effective, or
(II) finding that the requirements of clause (G) have
not been met, including finding that the petitioner had not
submitted all the information required by such clause; or
(ii) a district court of the United States in an enforcement
proceeding under chapter III has determined that the require-
ments of clause (G) have not been met.
(3)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (5), a claim de-
scribed in subparagraph (1)(B) may only be made—
(i) if the claim meets the requirements of the regulations
of the Secretary promulgated under clause (B), and
(ii) if the food for which the claim is made does not con-
tain, as determined by the Secretary by regulation, any nutri-
ent in an amount which increases to persons in the general
population the risk of a disease or health-related condition
which is diet related, taking into account the significance of
the food in the total daily diet, except that the Secretary may
by regulation permit such a claim based on a finding that such
a claim would assist consumers in maintaining healthy dietary
practices and based on a requirement that the label contain a
disclosure of the type required by subparagraph (2)(B).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
56
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(B)(i) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations authorizing
claims of the type described in subparagraph (1)(B) only if the Sec-
retary determines, based on the totality of publicly available sci-
entific evidence (including evidence from well-designed studies con-
ducted in a manner which is consistent with generally recognized
scientific procedures and principles), that there is significant sci-
entific agreement, among experts qualified by scientific training
and experience to evaluate such claims, that the claim is supported
by such evidence.
(ii) A regulation described in subclause (i) shall describe—
(I) the relationship between a nutrient of the type required
in the label or labeling of food by paragraph (q)(1) or (q)(2) and
a disease or health-related condition, and
(II) the significance of each such nutrient in affecting such
disease or health-related condition.
(iii) A regulation described in subclause (i) shall require such
claim to be stated in a manner so that the claim is an accurate rep-
resentation of the matters set out in subclause (ii) and so that the
claim enables the public to comprehend the information provided in
the claim and to understand the relative significance of such infor-
mation in the context of a total daily diet.
(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of clauses (A)(i) and (B), a
claim of the type described in subparagraph (1)(B) which is not au-
thorized by the Secretary in a regulation promulgated in accord-
ance with clause (B) shall be authorized and may be made with re-
spect to a food if—
(i) a scientific body of the United States Government with
official responsibility for public health protection or research
directly relating to human nutrition (such as the National In-
stitutes of Health or the Centers for Disease Control and Pre-
vention) or the National Academy of Sciences or any of its sub-
divisions has published an authoritative statement, which is
currently in effect, about the relationship between a nutrient
and a disease or health-related condition to which the claim re-
fers;
(ii) a person has submitted to the Secretary, at least 120
days (during which the Secretary may notify any person who
is making a claim as authorized by clause (C) that such person
has not submitted all the information required by such clause)
before the first introduction into interstate commerce of the
food with a label containing the claim, (I) a notice of the claim,
which shall include the exact words used in the claim and shall
include a concise description of the basis upon which such per-
son relied for determining that the requirements of subclause
(i) have been satisfied, (II) a copy of the statement referred to
in subclause (i) upon which such person relied in making the
claim, and (III) a balanced representation of the scientific lit-
erature relating to the relationship between a nutrient and a
disease or health-related condition to which the claim refers;
(iii) the claim and the food for which the claim is made are
in compliance with clause (A)(ii) and are otherwise in compli-
ance with paragraph (a) and section 201(n); and
(iv) the claim is stated in a manner so that the claim is
an accurate representation of the authoritative statement re-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
57
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ferred to in subclause (i) and so that the claim enables the
public to comprehend the information provided in the claim
and to understand the relative significance of such information
in the context of a total daily diet.
For purposes of this clause, a statement shall be regarded as an
authoritative statement of a scientific body described in subclause
(i) only if the statement is published by the scientific body and
shall not include a statement of an employee of the scientific body
made in the individual capacity of the employee.
(D) A claim submitted under the requirements of clause (C)
may be made until—
(i) such time as the Secretary issues a regulation under
the standard in clause (B)(i)—
(I) prohibiting or modifying the claim and the regula-
tion has become effective, or
(II) finding that the requirements of clause (C) have
not been met, including finding that the petitioner has not
submitted all the information required by such clause; or
(ii) a district court of the United States in an enforcement
proceeding under chapter III has determined that the require-
ments of clause (C) have not been met.
(4)(A)(i) Any person may petition the Secretary to issue a regu-
lation under subparagraph (2)(A)(i) or (3)(B) relating to a claim de-
scribed in subparagraph (1)(A) or (1)(B). Not later than 100 days
after the petition is received by the Secretary, the Secretary shall
issue a final decision denying the petition or file the petition for
further action by the Secretary. If the Secretary does not act within
such 100 days, the petition shall be deemed to be denied unless an
extension is mutually agreed upon by the Secretary and the peti-
tioner. If the Secretary denies the petition or the petition is deemed
to be denied, the petition shall not be made available to the public.
If the Secretary files the petition, the Secretary shall deny the peti-
tion or issue a proposed regulation to take the action requested in
the petition not later than 90 days after the date of such decision.
If the Secretary does not act within such 90 days, the petition shall
be deemed to be denied unless an extension is mutually agreed
upon by the Secretary and the petitioner. If the Secretary issues
a proposed regulation, the rulemaking shall be completed within
540 days of the date the petition is received by the Secretary. If
the Secretary does not issue a regulation within such 540 days, the
Secretary shall provide the Committee on Commerce of the House
of Representatives and the Committee on Labor and Human Re-
sources of the Senate the reasons action on the regulation did not
occur within such 540 days.
(ii) Any person may petition the Secretary for permission to
use in a claim described in subparagraph (1)(A) terms that are con-
sistent with the terms defined by the Secretary under subpara-
graph (2)(A)(i). Within 90 days of the submission of such a petition,
the Secretary shall issue a final decision denying the petition or
granting such permission.
(iii) Any person may petition the Secretary for permission to
use an implied claim described in subparagraph (1)(A) in a brand
name. After publishing notice of an opportunity to comment on the
petition in the Federal Register and making the petition available
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
58
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
to the public, the Secretary shall grant the petition if the Secretary
finds that such claim is not misleading and is consistent with
terms defined by the Secretary under subparagraph (2)(A)(i). The
Secretary shall grant or deny the petition within 100 days of the
date it is submitted to the Secretary and the petition shall be con-
sidered granted if the Secretary does not act on it within such 100
days.
(B) A petition under clause (A)(i) respecting a claim described
in subparagraph (1)(A) or (1)(B) shall include an explanation of the
reasons why the claim meets the requirements of this paragraph
and a summary of the scientific data which supports such reasons.
(C) If a petition for a regulation under subparagraph (3)(B) re-
lies on a report from an authoritative scientific body of the United
States, the Secretary shall consider such report and shall justify
any decision rejecting the conclusions of such report.
(5)(A) This paragraph does not apply to infant formulas subject
to section 412(h) and medical foods as defined in section 5(b) of the
Orphan Drug Act.
(B) Subclauses (iii) through (v) of subparagraph (2)(A) and sub-
paragraph (2)(B) do not apply to food which is served in res-
taurants or other establishments in which food is served for imme-
diate human consumption or which is sold for sale or use in such
establishments.
(C) A subparagraph (1)(A) claim made with respect to a food
which claim is required by a standard of identity issued under sec-
tion 401 shall not be subject to subparagraph (2)(A)(i) or (2)(B).
(D) A subparagraph (1)(B) claim made with respect to a dietary
supplement of vitamins, minerals, herbs, or other similar nutri-
tional substances shall not be subject to subparagraph (3) but shall
be subject to a procedure and standard, respecting the validity of
such claim, established by regulation of the Secretary.
(6) For purposes of paragraph (r)(1)(B), a statement for a die-
tary supplement may be made if—
(A) the statement claims a benefit related to a classical nu-
trient deficiency disease and discloses the prevalence of such
disease in the United States, describes the role of a nutrient
or dietary ingredient intended to affect the structure or func-
tion in humans, characterizes the documented mechanism by
which a nutrient or dietary ingredient acts to maintain such
structure or function, or describes general well-being from con-
sumption of a nutrient or dietary ingredient,
(B) the manufacturer of the dietary supplement has sub-
stantiation that such statement is truthful and not misleading,
and
(C) the statement contains, prominently displayed and in
boldface type, the following: ‘‘This statement has not been eval-
uated by the Food and Drug Administration. This product is
not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease.’’.
A statement under this subparagraph may not claim to diagnose,
mitigate, treat, cure, or prevent a specific disease or class of dis-
eases. If the manufacturer of a dietary supplement proposes to
make a statement described in the first sentence of this subpara-
graph in the labeling of the dietary supplement, the manufacturer
shall notify the Secretary no later than 30 days after the first mar-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
59
Sec. 403
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
keting of the dietary supplement with such statement that such a
statement is being made.
(7) The Secretary may make proposed regulations issued under
this paragraph effective upon publication pending consideration of
public comment and publication of a final regulation if the Sec-
retary determines that such action is necessary—
(A) to enable the Secretary to review and act promptly on
petitions the Secretary determines provide for information nec-
essary to—
(i) enable consumers to develop and maintain healthy
dietary practices;
(ii) enable consumers to be informed promptly and ef-
fectively of important new knowledge regarding nutritional
and health benefits of food; or
(iii) ensure that scientifically sound nutritional and
health information is provided to consumers as soon as
possible; or
(B) to enable the Secretary to act promptly to ban or mod-
ify a claim under this paragraph.
Such proposed regulations shall be deemed final agency action for
purposes of judicial review.
(s) If—
(1) it is a dietary supplement; and
(2)(A) the label or labeling of the supplement fails to list—
(i) the name of each ingredient of the supplement that
is described in section 201(ff); and
(ii)(I) the quantity of each such ingredient; or
(II) with respect to a proprietary blend of such ingredi-
ents, the total quantity of all ingredients in the blend;
(B) the label or labeling of the dietary supplement fails to
identify the product by using the term ‘‘dietary supplement’’,
which term may be modified with the name of such an ingre-
dient;
(C) the supplement contains an ingredient described in
section 201(ff)(1)(C), and the label or labeling of the supple-
ment fails to identify any part of the plant from which the in-
gredient is derived;
(D) the supplement—
(i) is covered by the specifications of an official com-
pendium;
(ii) is represented as conforming to the specifications
of an official compendium; and
(iii) fails to so conform; or
(E) the supplement—
(i) is not covered by the specifications of an official
compendium; and
(ii)(I) fails to have the identity and strength that the
supplement is represented to have; or
(II) fails to meet the quality (including tablet or cap-
sule disintegration), purity, or compositional specifications,
based on validated assay or other appropriate methods,
that the supplement is represented to meet.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
60
Sec. 403A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
A dietary supplement shall not be deemed misbranded solely be-
cause its label or labeling contains directions or conditions of use
or warnings.
(t) If it purports to be or is represented as catfish, unless it is
fish classified within the family Ictaluridae.
(u) If it purports to be or is represented as ginseng, unless it
is an herb or herbal ingredient derived from a plant classified with-
in the genus Panax.
(v) If—
(1) it fails to bear a label required by the Secretary under
section 801(n)(1) (relating to food refused admission into the
United States);
(2) the Secretary finds that the food presents a threat of
serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or
animals; and
(3) upon or after notifying the owner or consignee involved
that the label is required under section 801, the Secretary in-
forms the owner or consignee that the food presents such a
threat.
SEC. 403A. ø21 U.S.C. 343–1¿ (a) Except as provided in sub-
section (b), no State or political subdivision of a State may directly
or indirectly establish under any authority or continue in effect as
to any food in interstate commerce—
(1) any requirement for a food which is the subject of a
standard of identity established under section 401 that is not
identical to such standard of identity or that is not identical to
the requirement of section 403(g), except that this paragraph
does not apply to a standard of identity of a State or political
subdivision of a State for maple syrup that is of the type re-
quired by sections 401 and 403(g),
(2) any requirement for the labeling of food of the type re-
quired by section 403(c), 403(e), or 403(i)(2) that is not iden-
tical to the requirement of such section, except that this para-
graph does not apply to a requirement of a State or political
subdivision of a State that is of the type required by section
403(c) and that is applicable to maple syrup,
(3) any requirement for the labeling of food of the type re-
quired by section 403(b), 403(d), 403(f), 403(h), 403(i)(1), or
403(k) that is not identical to the requirement of such section,
except that this paragraph does not apply to a requirement of
a State or political subdivision of a State that is of the type re-
quired by section 403(h)(1) and that is applicable to maple
syrup,
(4) any requirement for nutrition labeling of food that is
not identical to the requirement of section 403(q), except a re-
quirement for nutrition labeling of food which is exempt under
subclause (i) or (ii) of section 403(q)(5)(A), or
(5) any requirement respecting any claim of the type de-
scribed in section 403(r)(1) made in the label or labeling of food
that is not identical to the requirement of section 403(r), except
a requirement respecting a claim made in the label or labeling
of food which is exempt under section 403(r)(5)(B).
Paragraph (3) shall take effect in accordance with section 6(b) of
the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act of 1990.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
61
Sec. 404
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(b) Upon petition of a State or a political subdivision of a State,
the Secretary may exempt from subsection (a), under such condi-
tions as may be prescribed by regulation, any State or local re-
quirement that—
(1) would not cause any food to be in violation of any appli-
cable requirement under Federal law,
(2) would not unduly burden interstate commerce, and
(3) is designed to address a particular need for information
which need is not met by the requirements of the sections re-
ferred to in subsection (a).
DIETARY SUPPLEMENT LABELING EXEMPTIONS
SEC. 403B. ø21 U.S.C. 343–2¿ (a) IN GENERAL.—A publication,
including an article, a chapter in a book, or an official abstract of
a peer-reviewed scientific publication that appears in an article and
was prepared by the author or the editors of the publication, which
is reprinted in its entirety, shall not be defined as labeling when
used in connection with the sale of a dietary supplement to con-
sumers when it—
(1) is not false or misleading;
(2) does not promote a particular manufacturer or brand of
a dietary supplement;
(3) is displayed or presented, or is displayed or presented
with other such items on the same subject matter, so as to
present a balanced view of the available scientific information
on a dietary supplement;
(4) if displayed in an establishment, is physically separate
from the dietary supplements; and
(5) does not have appended to it any information by sticker
or any other method.
(b) APPLICATION.—Subsection (a) shall not apply to or restrict
a retailer or wholesaler of dietary supplements in any way whatso-
ever in the sale of books or other publications as a part of the busi-
ness of such retailer or wholesaler.
(c) BURDEN OF PROOF.—In any proceeding brought under sub-
section (a), the burden of proof shall be on the United States to es-
tablish that an article or other such matter is false or misleading.
DISCLOSURE
SEC. 403C. ø21 U.S.C. 343–3¿ (a) No provision of section
201(n), 403(a), or 409 shall be construed to require on the label or
labeling of a food a separate radiation disclosure statement that is
more prominent than the declaration of ingredients required by
section 403(i)(2).
(b) In this section, the term ‘‘radiation disclosure statement’’
means a written statement that discloses that a food has been in-
tentionally subject to radiation.
EMERGENCY PERMIT CONTROL
SEC. 404. ø21 U.S.C. 344¿ (a) Whenever the Secretary finds
after investigation that the distribution in interstate commerce of
any class of food may, by reason of contamination with micro-orga-
nisms during the manufacture, processing, or packing thereof in
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
62
Sec. 405
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
any locality, be injurious to health, and that such injurious nature
cannot be adequately determined after such articles have entered
interstate commerce, he then, and in such case only, shall promul-
gate regulations providing for the issuance, to manufacturers, proc-
essors, or packers of such class of food in such locality of permits
to which shall be attached such conditions governing the manufac-
ture, processing, or packaging of such class of food, for such tem-
porary period of time, as may be necessary to protect the public
health; and after the effective date of such regulations, and during
such temporary period, no person shall introduce or deliver for in-
troduction into interstate commerce any such food manufactured,
processed, or packed by any such manufacturer, processor, or pack-
er unless such manufacturer, processor, or packer holds a permit
issued by the Secretary as provided by such regulations.
(b) The Secretary is authorized to suspend immediately upon
notice any permit issued under authority of this section if it is
found that any of the conditions of the permit have been violated.
The holder of a permit so suspended shall be privileged at any time
to apply for the reinstatement of such permit, and the Secretary
shall, immediately after prompt hearing and an inspection of the
establishment, reinstate such permit if it is found that adequate
measures have been taken to comply with and maintain the condi-
tions of the permit, as originally issued or as amended.
(c) Any officer or employee duly designated by the Secretary
shall have access to any factory or establishment, the operator of
which holds a permit from the Secretary, for the purpose of
ascertaining whether or not the conditions of the permit are being
complied with, and denial of access for such inspection shall be
ground for suspension of the permit until such access is freely
given by the operator.
REGULATIONS MAKING EXEMPTIONS
SEC. 405. ø21 U.S.C. 345¿ The Secretary shall promulgate reg-
ulations exempting from any labeling requirement of this Act (1)
small open containers of fresh fruits and fresh vegetables and (2)
food which is in accordance with the practice of the trade, to be
processed, labeled, or repacked in substantial quantities at estab-
lishments other than those where originally processed or packed, or
condition that such food is not adulterated or misbranded under
the provisions of this Act upon removal from such processing, label-
ing, or repacking establishment. This section does not apply to the
labeling requirements of sections 403(q) and 403(r).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
63
Sec. 407
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 See the Revolving Fund provision in the Appendix on page 547.
2 Public Law 81–459, March 16, 1950 (64 Stat. 20), amended section 15 of the Federal Trade
Commission Act by adding the following subsection:
‘‘(f) For the purposes of this section and section 407 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic
Act, as amended, the term ‘oleomargarine’ or ‘margarine’ includes—
‘‘(1) all substances, mixtures, and compounds known as oleomargarine or margarine;
‘‘(2) all substances, mixtures, and compounds which have a consistence similar to that of
butter and which contain any edible oils or fats other than milk fat if made in imitation
or semblance of butter.’’
In repealing section 2301 of the Internal Revenue Code (relating to the tax on oleomargarine)
Public Law 81–459 declared, in part: ‘‘The Congress hereby finds and declares that the sale,
or the serving in public eating places, of colored oleomargarine or colored margarine without
clear identification as such or which is otherwise adulterated or misbranded within the meaning
of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act depresses the market in interstate commerce for
butter and for oleomargarine or margarine clearly identified and neither adulterated nor mis-
branded, and constitutes a burden on interstate commerce in such articles. Such burden exists,
irrespective of whether such oleomargarine or margarine originates from an interstate source
or from the State in which it is sold.’’
Sec. 6 of Public Law 81–459 states that ‘‘nothing in this Act shall be construed as authorizing
the possession, sale, or serving of colored oleomargarine or colored margarine in any State or
Territory in contravention of the laws of such State or Territory.’’
TOLERANCES FOR POISONOUS INGREDIENTS IN FOOD
SEC. 406. 1 ø21 U.S.C. 346¿ Any poisonous or deleterious sub-
stance added to any food, except where such substance is required
in the production thereof or cannot be avoided by good manufac-
turing practice shall be deemed to be unsafe for purposes of the ap-
plication of clause (2)(A) of section 402(a); but when such substance
is so required or cannot be so avoided, the Secretary shall promul-
gate regulations limiting the quantity therein or thereon to such
extent as he finds necessary for the protection of public health, and
any quantity exceeding the limits so fixed shall also be deemed to
be unsafe for purposes of the application of clause (2)(A) of section
402(a). While such a regulation is in effect limiting the quantity of
any such substance in the case of any food, such food shall not, by
reason of bearing or containing any added amount of such sub-
stance, be considered to be adulterated within the meaning of
clause (1) of section 402(a). In determining the quantity of such
added substance to be tolerated in or on different articles of food
the Secretary shall take into account the extent to which the use
of such substance is required or cannot be avoided in the produc-
tion of each such article, and the other ways in which the consumer
may be affected by the same or other poisonous or deleterious sub-
stances.
OLEOMARGARINE OR MARGARINE
SEC. 407. 2 ø21 U.S.C. 347¿ (a) Colored oleomargarine or col-
ored margarine which is sold in the same State or Territory in
which it is produced shall be subject in the same manner and to
the same extent to the provisions of this Act as if it had been intro-
duced in interstate commerce.
(b) No person shall sell, or offer for sale, colored oleomargarine
or colored margarine unless—
(1) such oleomargarine or margarine is packaged,
(2) the net weight of the contents of any package sold in
a retail establishment is one pound or less,
(3) there appears on the label of the package (A) the word
‘‘oleomargarine’’ or ‘‘margarine’’ in type or lettering at least as
large as any other type or lettering on such label, and (B) a
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
64
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should be ‘‘(except subsections (a) and (f))’’.
2 See the Revolving Fund provision in the Appendix on page 547.
full and accurate statement of all the ingredients contained in
such oleomargarine, or margarine, and
(4) each part of the contents of the package is contained
in a wrapper which bears the word ‘‘oleomargarine’’ or ‘‘mar-
garine’’ in type or lettering not smaller than 20-point type.
The requirements of this subsection shall be in addition to and not
in lieu of any of the other requirements of this Act.
(c) No person shall possess in a form ready for serving colored
oleomargarine or colored margarine at a public eating place unless
a notice that oleomargarine or margarine is served is displayed
prominently and conspicuously in such place and in such manner
as to render it likely to be read and understood by the ordinary in-
dividual being served in such eating place or is printed or is other-
wise set forth on the menu in type or lettering not smaller than
that normally used to designate the serving of other food items. No
person shall serve colored oleomargarine or colored margarine at a
public eating place, whether or not any charge is made therefor,
unless (1) each separate serving bears or is accompanied by label-
ing identifying it as oleomargarine or margarine, or (2) each sepa-
rate serving thereof is triangular in shape.
(d) Colored oleomargarine or colored margarine when served
with meals at a public eating place shall at the time of such service
be exempt from the labeling requirements of section 403 (except (a)
and 403 (f)) 1 if it complies with the requirements of subsection (b)
of this section.
(e) For the purpose of this section colored oleomargarine or col-
ored margarine is oleomargarine or margarine having a tint or
shade containing more than one and six-tenths degrees of yellow,
or of yellow and red collectively, but with an excess of yellow over
red, measured in terms of Lovibond tintometer scale or its equiva-
lent.
TOLERANCES AND EXEMPTIONS FOR PESTICIDE CHEMICAL RESIDUES
SEC. 408. 2 ø21 U.S.C. 346a¿ (a) REQUIREMENT FOR TOLERANCE
OR EXEMPTION.—
(1) GENERAL RULE.—Except as provided in paragraph (2)
or (3), any pesticide chemical residue in or on a food shall be
deemed unsafe for the purpose of section 402(a)(2)(B) unless—
(A) a tolerance for such pesticide chemical residue in
or on such food is in effect under this section and the
quantity of the residue is within the limits of the toler-
ance; or
(B) an exemption from the requirement of a tolerance
is in effect under this section for the pesticide chemical
residue.
For the purposes of this section, the term ‘‘food’’, when used as
a noun without modification, shall mean a raw agricultural
commodity or processed food.
(2) PROCESSED FOOD.—Notwithstanding paragraph (1)—
(A) if a tolerance is in effect under this section for a
pesticide chemical residue in or on a raw agricultural com-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
65
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
modity, a pesticide chemical residue that is present in or
on a processed food because the food is made from that
raw agricultural commodity shall not be considered unsafe
within the meaning of section 402(a)(2)(B) despite the lack
of a tolerance for the pesticide chemical residue in or on
the processed food if the pesticide chemical has been used
in or on the raw agricultural commodity in conformity with
a tolerance under this section, such residue in or on the
raw agricultural commodity has been removed to the ex-
tent possible in good manufacturing practice, and the con-
centration of the pesticide chemical residue in the proc-
essed food is not greater than the tolerance prescribed for
the pesticide chemical residue in the raw agricultural com-
modity; or
(B) if an exemption for the requirement for a tolerance
is in effect under this section for a pesticide chemical res-
idue in or on a raw agricultural commodity, a pesticide
chemical residue that is present in or on a processed food
because the food is made from that raw agricultural com-
modity shall not be considered unsafe within the meaning
of section 402(a)(2)(B).
(3) RESIDUES OF DEGRADATION PRODUCTS.—If a pesticide
chemical residue is present in or on a food because it is a me-
tabolite or other degradation product of a precursor substance
that itself is a pesticide chemical or pesticide chemical residue,
such a residue shall not be considered to be unsafe within the
meaning of section 402(a)(2)(B) despite the lack of a tolerance
or exemption from the need for a tolerance for such residue in
or on such food if—
(A) the Administrator has not determined that the
degradation product is likely to pose any potential health
risk from dietary exposure that is of a different type than,
or of a greater significance than, any risk posed by dietary
exposure to the precursor substance;
(B) either—
(i) a tolerance is in effect under this section for
residues of the precursor substance in or on the food,
and the combined level of residues of the degradation
product and the precursor substance in or on the food
is at or below the stoichiometrically equivalent level
that would be permitted by the tolerance if the residue
consisted only of the precursor substance rather than
the degradation product; or
(ii) an exemption from the need for a tolerance is
in effect under this section for residues of the pre-
cursor substance in or on the food; and
(C) the tolerance or exemption for residues of the pre-
cursor substance does not state that it applies only to par-
ticular named substances and does not state that it does
not apply to residues of the degradation product.
(4) EFFECT OF TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION.—While a toler-
ance or exemption from the requirement for a tolerance is in
effect under this section for a pesticide chemical residue with
respect to any food, the food shall not by reason of bearing or
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
66
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
containing any amount of such a residue be considered to be
adulterated within the meaning of section 402(a)(1).
(b) AUTHORITY AND STANDARD FOR TOLERANCE.—
(1) AUTHORITY.—The Administrator may issue regulations
establishing, modifying, or revoking a tolerance for a pesticide
chemical residue in or on a food—
(A) in response to a petition filed under subsection (d);
or
(B) on the Administrator’s own initiative under sub-
section (e).
As used in this section, the term ‘‘modify’’ shall not mean ex-
panding the tolerance to cover additional foods.
(2) STANDARD.—
(A) GENERAL RULE.—
(i) STANDARD.—The Administrator may establish
or leave in effect a tolerance for a pesticide chemical
residue in or on a food only if the Administrator deter-
mines that the tolerance is safe. The Administrator
shall modify or revoke a tolerance if the Administrator
determines it is not safe.
(ii) DETERMINATION OF SAFETY.—As used in this
section, the term ‘‘safe’’, with respect to a tolerance for
a pesticide chemical residue, means that the Adminis-
trator has determined that there is a reasonable cer-
tainty that no harm will result from aggregate expo-
sure to the pesticide chemical residue, including all
anticipated dietary exposures and all other exposures
for which there is reliable information.
(iii) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—With respect to a
tolerance, a pesticide chemical residue meeting the
standard under clause (i) is not an eligible pesticide
chemical residue for purposes of subparagraph (B).
(B) TOLERANCES
FOR
ELIGIBLE
PESTICIDE
CHEMICAL
RESIDUES.—
(i) DEFINITION.—As used in this subparagraph,
the term ‘‘eligible pesticide chemical residue’’ means a
pesticide chemical residue as to which—
(I) the Administrator is not able to identify a
level of exposure to the residue at which the res-
idue will not cause or contribute to a known or an-
ticipated harm to human health (referred to in
this section as a ‘‘nonthreshold effect’’);
(II) the lifetime risk of experiencing the non-
threshold effect is appropriately assessed by quan-
titative risk assessment; and
(III) with regard to any known or anticipated
harm to human health for which the Adminis-
trator is able to identify a level at which the res-
idue will not cause such harm (referred to in this
section as a ‘‘threshold effect’’), the Administrator
determines that the level of aggregate exposure is
safe.
(ii) DETERMINATION
OF
TOLERANCE.—Notwith-
standing subparagraph (A)(i), a tolerance for an eligi-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
67
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ble pesticide chemical residue may be left in effect or
modified under this subparagraph if—
(I) at least one of the conditions described in
clause (iii) is met; and
(II) both of the conditions described in clause
(iv) are met.
(iii) CONDITIONS REGARDING USE.—For purposes of
clause (ii), the conditions described in this clause with
respect to a tolerance for an eligible pesticide chemical
residue are the following:
(I) Use of the pesticide chemical that produces
the residue protects consumers from adverse ef-
fects on health that would pose a greater risk
than the dietary risk from the residue.
(II) Use of the pesticide chemical that pro-
duces the residue is necessary to avoid a signifi-
cant disruption in domestic production of an ade-
quate, wholesome, and economical food supply.
(iv) CONDITIONS REGARDING RISK.—For purposes of
clause (ii), the conditions described in this clause with
respect to a tolerance for an eligible pesticide chemical
residue are the following:
(I) The yearly risk associated with the non-
threshold effect from aggregate exposure to the
residue does not exceed 10 times the yearly risk
that would be allowed under subparagraph (A) for
such effect.
(II) The tolerance is limited so as to ensure
that the risk over a lifetime associated with the
nonthreshold effect from aggregate exposure to
the residue is not greater than twice the lifetime
risk that would be allowed under subparagraph
(A) for such effect.
(v) REVIEW.—Five years after the date on which
the Administrator makes a determination to leave in
effect or modify a tolerance under this subparagraph,
and thereafter as the Administrator deems appro-
priate, the Administrator shall determine, after notice
and opportunity for comment, whether it has been
demonstrated to the Administrator that a condition
described in clause (iii)(I) or clause (iii)(II) continues to
exist with respect to the tolerance and that the yearly
and lifetime risks from aggregate exposure to such
residue continue to comply with the limits specified in
clause (iv). If the Administrator determines by such
date that such demonstration has not been made, the
Administrator shall, not later than 180 days after the
date of such determination, issue a regulation under
subsection (e)(1) to modify or revoke the tolerance.
(vi) INFANTS AND CHILDREN.—Any tolerance under
this subparagraph shall meet the requirements of sub-
paragraph (C).
(C) EXPOSURE OF INFANTS AND CHILDREN.—In estab-
lishing, modifying, leaving in effect, or revoking a toler-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
68
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ance or exemption for a pesticide chemical residue, the
Administrator—
(i) shall assess the risk of the pesticide chemical
residue based on—
(I) available information about consumption
patterns among infants and children that are like-
ly to result in disproportionately high consump-
tion of foods containing or bearing such residue
among infants and children in comparison to the
general population;
(II) available information concerning the spe-
cial susceptibility of infants and children to the
pesticide chemical residues, including neurological
differences between infants and children and
adults, and effects of in utero exposure to pes-
ticide chemicals; and
(III) available information concerning the cu-
mulative effects on infants and children of such
residues and other substances that have a com-
mon mechanism of toxicity; and
(ii) shall—
(I) ensure that there is a reasonable certainty
that no harm will result to infants and children
from aggregate exposure to the pesticide chemical
residue; and
(II) publish a specific determination regarding
the safety of the pesticide chemical residue for in-
fants and children.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Sec-
retary of Agriculture, in consultation with the Adminis-
trator, shall conduct surveys to document dietary exposure
to pesticides among infants and children. In the case of
threshold effects, for purposes of clause (ii)(I) an additional
tenfold margin of safety for the pesticide chemical residue
and other sources of exposure shall be applied for infants
and children to take into account potential pre- and post-
natal toxicity and completeness of the data with respect to
exposure and toxicity to infants and children. Notwith-
standing such requirement for an additional margin of
safety, the Administrator may use a different margin of
safety for the pesticide chemical residue only if, on the
basis of reliable data, such margin will be safe for infants
and children.
(D) FACTORS.—In establishing, modifying, leaving in
effect, or revoking a tolerance or exemption for a pesticide
chemical residue, the Administrator shall consider, among
other relevant factors—
(i) the validity, completeness, and reliability of the
available data from studies of the pesticide chemical
and pesticide chemical residue;
(ii) the nature of any toxic effect shown to be
caused by the pesticide chemical or pesticide chemical
residue in such studies;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
69
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(iii) available information concerning the relation-
ship of the results of such studies to human risk;
(iv) available information concerning the dietary
consumption patterns of consumers (and major identi-
fiable subgroups of consumers);
(v) available information concerning the cumu-
lative effects of such residues and other substances
that have a common mechanism of toxicity;
(vi) available information concerning the aggre-
gate exposure levels of consumers (and major identifi-
able subgroups of consumers) to the pesticide chemical
residue and to other related substances, including die-
tary exposure under the tolerance and all other toler-
ances in effect for the pesticide chemical residue, and
exposure from other non-occupational sources;
(vii) available information concerning the varia-
bility of the sensitivities of major identifiable sub-
groups of consumers;
(viii) such information as the Administrator may
require on whether the pesticide chemical may have
an effect in humans that is similar to an effect pro-
duced by a naturally occurring estrogen or other endo-
crine effects; and
(ix) safety factors which in the opinion of experts
qualified by scientific training and experience to evalu-
ate the safety of food additives are generally recog-
nized as appropriate for the use of animal experimen-
tation data.
(E) DATA AND INFORMATION REGARDING ANTICIPATED
AND ACTUAL RESIDUE LEVELS.—
(i) AUTHORITY.—In establishing, modifying, leav-
ing in effect, or revoking a tolerance for a pesticide
chemical residue, the Administrator may consider
available data and information on the anticipated res-
idue levels of the pesticide chemical in or on food and
the actual residue levels of the pesticide chemical that
have been measured in food, including residue data
collected by the Food and Drug Administration.
(ii) REQUIREMENT.—If the Administrator relies on
anticipated or actual residue levels in establishing,
modifying, or leaving in effect a tolerance, the Admin-
istrator shall pursuant to subsection (f)(1) require that
data be provided five years after the date on which the
tolerance is established, modified, or left in effect, and
thereafter as the Administrator deems appropriate,
demonstrating that such residue levels are not above
the levels so relied on. If such data are not so pro-
vided, or if the data do not demonstrate that the res-
idue levels are not above the levels so relied on, the
Administrator shall, not later than 180 days after the
date on which the data were required to be provided,
issue a regulation under subsection (e)(1), or an order
under subsection (f)(2), as appropriate, to modify or re-
voke the tolerance.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
70
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(F) PERCENT OF FOOD ACTUALLY TREATED.—In estab-
lishing, modifying, leaving in effect, or revoking a toler-
ance for a pesticide chemical residue, the Administrator
may, when assessing chronic dietary risk, consider avail-
able data and information on the percent of food actually
treated with the pesticide chemical (including aggregate
pesticide use data collected by the Department of Agri-
culture) only if the Administrator—
(i) finds that the data are reliable and provide a
valid basis to show what percentage of the food de-
rived from such crop is likely to contain such pesticide
chemical residue;
(ii) finds that the exposure estimate does not un-
derstate exposure for any significant subpopulation
group;
(iii) finds that, if data are available on pesticide
use and consumption of food in a particular area, the
population in such area is not dietarily exposed to res-
idues above those estimated by the Administrator; and
(iv) provides for the periodic reevaluation of the
estimate of anticipated dietary exposure.
(3) DETECTION METHODS.—
(A) GENERAL RULE.—A tolerance for a pesticide chem-
ical residue in or on a food shall not be established or
modified by the Administrator unless the Administrator
determines, after consultation with the Secretary, that
there is a practical method for detecting and measuring
the levels of the pesticide chemical residue in or on the
food.
(B) DETECTION
LIMIT.—A tolerance for a pesticide
chemical residue in or on a food shall not be established
at or modified to a level lower than the limit of detection
of the method for detecting and measuring the pesticide
chemical residue specified by the Administrator under sub-
paragraph (A).
(4) INTERNATIONAL
STANDARDS.—In establishing a toler-
ance for a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food, the Ad-
ministrator shall determine whether a maximum residue level
for the pesticide chemical has been established by the Codex
Alimentarius Commission. If a Codex maximum residue level
has been established for the pesticide chemical and the Admin-
istrator does not propose to adopt the Codex level, the Admin-
istrator shall publish for public comment a notice explaining
the reasons for departing from the Codex level.
(c) AUTHORITY AND STANDARD FOR EXEMPTIONS.—
(1) AUTHORITY.—The Administrator may issue a regulation
establishing, modifying, or revoking an exemption from the re-
quirement for a tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue in or
on food—
(A) in response to a petition filed under subsection (d);
or
(B) on the Administrator’s initiative under subsection
(e).
(2) STANDARD.—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
71
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(A) GENERAL RULE.—
(i) STANDARD.—The Administrator may establish
or leave in effect an exemption from the requirement
for a tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue in or on
food only if the Administrator determines that the ex-
emption is safe. The Administrator shall modify or re-
voke an exemption if the Administrator determines it
is not safe.
(ii) DETERMINATION OF SAFETY.—The term ‘‘safe’’,
with respect to an exemption for a pesticide chemical
residue, means that the Administrator has determined
that there is a reasonable certainty that no harm will
result from aggregate exposure to the pesticide chem-
ical residue, including all anticipated dietary expo-
sures and all other exposures for which there is reli-
able information.
(B) FACTORS.—In making a determination under this
paragraph, the Administrator shall take into account,
among other relevant considerations, the considerations
set forth in subparagraphs (C) and (D) of subsection (b)(2).
(3) LIMITATION.—An exemption from the requirement for a
tolerance for a pesticide chemical residue in or on food shall
not be established or modified by the Administrator unless the
Administrator 
determines, 
after 
consultation 
with 
the
Secretary—
(A) that there is a practical method for detecting and
measuring the levels of such pesticide chemical residue in
or on food; or
(B) that there is no need for such a method, and states
the reasons for such determination in issuing the regula-
tion establishing or modifying the exemption.
(d) PETITION FOR TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION.—
(1) PETITIONS AND PETITIONERS.—Any person may file with
the Administrator a petition proposing the issuance of a
regulation—
(A) establishing, modifying, or revoking a tolerance for
a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food; or
(B) establishing, modifying, or revoking an exemption
from the requirement of a tolerance for such a residue.
(2) PETITION CONTENTS.—
(A) ESTABLISHMENT.—A petition under paragraph (1)
to establish a tolerance or exemption for a pesticide chem-
ical residue shall be supported by such data and informa-
tion as are specified in regulations issued by the Adminis-
trator, including—
(i)(I) an informative summary of the petition and
of the data, information, and arguments submitted or
cited in support of the petition; and
(II) a statement that the petitioner agrees that
such summary or any information it contains may be
published as a part of the notice of filing of the peti-
tion to be published under this subsection and as part
of a proposed or final regulation issued under this sec-
tion;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
72
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(ii) the name, chemical identity, and composition
of the pesticide chemical residue and of the pesticide
chemical that produces the residue;
(iii) data showing the recommended amount, fre-
quency, method, and time of application of that pes-
ticide chemical;
(iv) full reports of tests and investigations made
with respect to the safety of the pesticide chemical, in-
cluding full information as to the methods and con-
trols used in conducting those tests and investigations;
(v) full reports of tests and investigations made
with respect to the nature and amount of the pesticide
chemical residue that is likely to remain in or on the
food, including a description of the analytical methods
used;
(vi) a practical method for detecting and meas-
uring the levels of the pesticide chemical residue in or
on the food, or for exemptions, a statement why such
a method is not needed;
(vii) a proposed tolerance for the pesticide chem-
ical residue, if a tolerance is proposed;
(viii) if the petition relates to a tolerance for a
processed food, reports of investigations conducted
using the processing method(s) used to produce that
food;
(ix) such information as the Administrator may
require to make the determination under subsection
(b)(2)(C);
(x) such information as the Administrator may re-
quire on whether the pesticide chemical may have an
effect in humans that is similar to an effect produced
by a naturally occurring estrogen or other endocrine
effects;
(xi) information regarding exposure to the pes-
ticide chemical residue due to any tolerance or exemp-
tion already granted for such residue;
(xii) practical methods for removing any amount
of the residue that would exceed any proposed toler-
ance; and
(xiii) such other data and information as the Ad-
ministrator requires by regulation to support the peti-
tion.
If information or data required by this subparagraph is
available to the Administrator, the person submitting the
petition may cite the availability of the information or data
in lieu of submitting it. The Administrator may require a
petition to be accompanied by samples of the pesticide
chemical with respect to which the petition is filed.
(B) MODIFICATION
OR
REVOCATION.—The Adminis-
trator may by regulation establish the requirements for in-
formation and data to support a petition to modify or re-
voke a tolerance or to modify or revoke an exemption from
the requirement for a tolerance.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
73
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(3) NOTICE.—A notice of the filing of a petition that the
Administrator determines has met the requirements of para-
graph (2) shall be published by the Administrator within 30
days after such determination. The notice shall announce the
availability of a description of the analytical methods available
to the Administrator for the detection and measurement of the
pesticide chemical residue with respect to which the petition is
filed or shall set forth the petitioner’s statement of why such
a method is not needed. The notice shall include the summary
required by paragraph (2)(A)(i)(I).
(4) ACTIONS BY THE ADMINISTRATOR.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The Administrator shall, after giv-
ing due consideration to a petition filed under paragraph
(1) 
and 
any 
other 
information 
available 
to 
the
Administrator—
(i) issue a final regulation (which may vary from
that sought by the petition) establishing, modifying, or
revoking a tolerance for the pesticide chemical residue
or an exemption of the pesticide chemical residue from
the requirement of a tolerance (which final regulation
shall be issued without further notice and without fur-
ther period for public comment);
(ii) issue a proposed regulation under subsection
(e), and thereafter issue a final regulation under such
subsection; or
(iii) issue an order denying the petition.
(B) PRIORITIES.—The Administrator shall give priority
to petitions for the establishment or modification of a toler-
ance or exemption for a pesticide chemical residue that ap-
pears to pose a significantly lower risk to human health
from dietary exposure than pesticide chemical residues
that have tolerances in effect for the same or similar uses.
(C) EXPEDITED REVIEW OF CERTAIN PETITIONS.—
(i) DATE CERTAIN FOR REVIEW.—If a person files a
complete petition with the Administrator proposing
the issuance of a regulation establishing a tolerance or
exemption for a pesticide chemical residue that pre-
sents a lower risk to human health than a pesticide
chemical residue for which a tolerance has been left in
effect or modified under subsection (b)(2)(B), the Ad-
ministrator shall complete action on such petition
under this paragraph within 1 year.
(ii) REQUIRED DETERMINATIONS.—If the Adminis-
trator issues a final regulation establishing a tolerance
or exemption for a safer pesticide chemical residue
under clause (i), the Administrator shall, not later
than 180 days after the date on which the regulation
is issued, determine whether a condition described in
subclause (I) or (II) of subsection (b)(2)(B)(iii) con-
tinues to exist with respect to a tolerance that has
been left in effect or modified under subsection
(b)(2)(B). If such condition does not continue to exist,
the Administrator shall, not later than 180 days after
the date on which the determination under the pre-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
74
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ceding sentence is made, issue a regulation under sub-
section (e)(1) to modify or revoke the tolerance.
(e) ACTION ON ADMINISTRATOR’S OWN INITIATIVE.—
(1) GENERAL
RULE.—The Administrator may issue a
regulation—
(A) establishing, modifying, suspending under sub-
section (l)(3), or revoking a tolerance for a pesticide chem-
ical or a pesticide chemical residue;
(B) establishing, modifying, suspending under sub-
section (l)(3), or revoking an exemption of a pesticide
chemical residue from the requirement of a tolerance; or
(C) establishing general procedures and requirements
to implement this section.
(2) NOTICE.—Before issuing a final regulation under para-
graph (1), the Administrator shall issue a notice of proposed
rulemaking and provide a period of not less than 60 days for
public comment on the proposed regulation, except that a
shorter period for comment may be provided if the Adminis-
trator for good cause finds that it would be in the public inter-
est to do so and states the reasons for the finding in the notice
of proposed rulemaking.
(f) SPECIAL DATA REQUIREMENTS.—
(1) REQUIRING SUBMISSION OF ADDITIONAL DATA.—If the
Administrator determines that additional data or information
are reasonably required to support the continuation of a toler-
ance or exemption that is in effect under this section for a pes-
ticide chemical residue on a food, the Administrator shall—
(A) issue a notice requiring the person holding the pes-
ticide registrations associated with such tolerance or ex-
emption to submit the data or information under section
3(c)(2)(B) of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act;
(B) issue a rule requiring that testing be conducted on
a substance or mixture under section 4 of the Toxic Sub-
stances Control Act; or
(C) publish in the Federal Register, after first pro-
viding notice and an opportunity for comment of not less
than 60 days’ duration, an order—
(i) requiring the submission to the Administrator
by one or more interested persons of a notice identi-
fying the person or persons who will submit the re-
quired data and information;
(ii) describing the type of data and information re-
quired to be submitted to the Administrator and stat-
ing why the data and information could not be ob-
tained under the authority of section 3(c)(2)(B) of the
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act or
section 4 of the Toxic Substances Control Act;
(iii) describing the reports of the Administrator re-
quired to be prepared during and after the collection
of the data and information;
(iv) requiring the submission to the Administrator
of the data, information, and reports referred to in
clauses (ii) and (iii); and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
75
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(v) establishing dates by which the submissions
described in clauses (i) and (iv) must be made.
The Administrator may under subparagraph (C) revise any
such order to correct an error. The Administrator may
under this paragraph require data or information per-
taining to whether the pesticide chemical may have an ef-
fect in humans that is similar to an effect produced by a
naturally occurring estrogen or other endocrine effects.
(2) NONCOMPLIANCE.—If a submission required by a notice
issued in accordance with paragraph (1)(A), a rule issued
under paragraph (1)(B), or an order issued under paragraph
(1)(C) is not made by the time specified in such notice, rule, or
order, the Administrator may by order published in the Fed-
eral Register modify or revoke the tolerance or exemption in
question. In any review of such an order under subsection
(g)(2), the only material issue shall be whether a submission
required under paragraph (1) was not made by the time speci-
fied.
(g) EFFECTIVE DATE, OBJECTIONS, HEARINGS, AND ADMINISTRA-
TIVE REVIEW.—
(1) EFFECTIVE DATE.—A regulation or order issued under
subsection (d)(4), (e)(1), or (f)(2) shall take effect upon publica-
tion unless the regulation or order specifies otherwise. The Ad-
ministrator may stay the effectiveness of the regulation or
order if, after issuance of such regulation or order, objections
are filed with respect to such regulation or order pursuant to
paragraph (2).
(2) FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.—
(A) OBJECTIONS.—Within 60 days after a regulation or
order is issued under subsection (d)(4), (e)(1)(A), (e)(1)(B),
(f)(2), (n)(3), or (n)(5)(C), any person may file objections
thereto with the Administrator, specifying with particu-
larity the provisions of the regulation or order deemed ob-
jectionable and stating reasonable grounds therefor. If the
regulation or order was issued in response to a petition
under subsection (d)(1), a copy of each objection filed by a
person other than the petitioner shall be served by the Ad-
ministrator on the petitioner.
(B) HEARING.—An objection may include a request for
a public evidentiary hearing upon the objection. The Ad-
ministrator shall, upon the initiative of the Administrator
or upon the request of an interested person and after due
notice, hold a public evidentiary hearing if and to the ex-
tent the Administrator determines that such a public hear-
ing is necessary to receive factual evidence relevant to ma-
terial issues of fact raised by the objections. The presiding
officer in such a hearing may authorize a party to obtain
discovery from other persons and may upon a showing of
good cause made by a party issue a subpoena to compel
testimony or production of documents from any person.
The presiding officer shall be governed by the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure in making any order for the pro-
tection of the witness or the content of documents pro-
duced and shall order the payment of reasonable fees and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
76
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
expenses as a condition to requiring testimony of the wit-
ness. On contest, such a subpoena may be enforced by a
Federal district court.
(C) FINAL DECISION.—As soon as practicable after re-
ceiving the arguments of the parties, the Administrator
shall issue an order stating the action taken upon each
such objection and setting forth any revision to the regula-
tion or prior order that the Administrator has found to be
warranted. If a hearing was held under subparagraph (B),
such order and any revision to the regulation or prior
order shall, with respect to questions of fact at issue in the
hearing, be based only on substantial evidence of record at
such hearing, and shall set forth in detail the findings of
facts and the conclusions of law or policy upon which the
order or regulation is based.
(h) JUDICIAL REVIEW.—
(1) PETITION.—In a case of actual controversy as to the va-
lidity of any regulation issued under subsection (e)(1)(C), or
any order issued under subsection (f)(1)(C) or (g)(2)(C), or any
regulation that is the subject of such an order, any person who
will be adversely affected by such order or regulation may ob-
tain judicial review by filing in the United States Court of Ap-
peals for the circuit wherein that person resides or has its
principal place of business, or in the United States Court of
Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, within 60 days
after publication of such order or regulation, a petition praying
that the order or regulation be set aside in whole or in part.
(2) RECORD
AND
JURISDICTION.—A copy of the petition
under paragraph (1) shall be forthwith transmitted by the
clerk of the court to the Administrator, or any officer des-
ignated by the Administrator for that purpose, and thereupon
the Administrator shall file in the court the record of the pro-
ceedings on which the Administrator based the order or regula-
tion, as provided in section 2112 of title 28, United States
Code. Upon the filing of such a petition, the court shall have
exclusive jurisdiction to affirm or set aside the order or regula-
tion complained of in whole or in part. As to orders issued fol-
lowing a public evidentiary hearing, the findings of the Admin-
istrator with respect to questions of fact shall be sustained
only if supported by substantial evidence when considered on
the record as a whole.
(3) ADDITIONAL EVIDENCE.—If a party applies to the court
for leave to adduce additional evidence and shows to the satis-
faction of the court that the additional evidence is material and
that there were reasonable grounds for the failure to adduce
the evidence in the proceeding before the Administrator, the
court may order that the additional evidence (and evidence in
rebuttal thereof) shall be taken before the Administrator in the
manner and upon the terms and conditions the court deems
proper. The Administrator may modify prior findings as to the
facts by reason of the additional evidence so taken and may
modify the order or regulation accordingly. The Administrator
shall file with the court any such modified finding, order, or
regulation.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
77
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(4) FINAL JUDGMENT; SUPREME COURT REVIEW.—The judg-
ment of the court affirming or setting aside, in whole or in
part, any regulation or any order and any regulation which is
the subject of such an order shall be final, subject to review by
the Supreme Court of the United States as provided in section
1254 of title 28 of the United States Code. The commencement
of proceedings under this subsection shall not, unless specifi-
cally ordered by the court to the contrary, operate as a stay of
a regulation or order.
(5) APPLICATION.—Any issue as to which review is or was
obtainable under this subsection shall not be the subject of ju-
dicial review under any other provision of law.
(i) CONFIDENTIALITY AND USE OF DATA.—
(1) GENERAL
RULE.—Data and information that are or
have been submitted to the Administrator under this section or
section 409 in support of a tolerance or an exemption from a
tolerance shall be entitled to confidential treatment for reasons
of business confidentiality and to exclusive use and data com-
pensation to the same extent provided by sections 3 and 10 of
the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.
(2) EXCEPTIONS.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Data and information that are enti-
tled to confidential treatment under paragraph (1) may be
disclosed, under such security requirements as the Admin-
istrator may provide by regulation, to—
(i) employees of the United States authorized by
the Administrator to examine such data and informa-
tion in the carrying out of their official duties under
this Act or other Federal statutes intended to protect
the public health; or
(ii) contractors with the United States authorized
by the Administrator to examine such data and infor-
mation in the carrying out of contracts under this Act
or such statutes.
(B) CONGRESS.—This subsection does not authorize the
withholding of data or information from either House of
Congress or from, to the extent of matter within its juris-
diction, any committee or subcommittee of such committee
or any joint committee of Congress or any subcommittee of
such joint committee.
(3) SUMMARIES.—Notwithstanding any provision of this
subsection or other law, the Administrator may publish the in-
formative summary required by subsection (d)(2)(A)(i) and
may, in issuing a proposed or final regulation or order under
this section, publish an informative summary of the data relat-
ing to the regulation or order.
(j) STATUS OF PREVIOUSLY ISSUED REGULATIONS.—
(1) REGULATIONS UNDER SECTION 406.—Regulations affect-
ing pesticide chemical residues in or on raw agricultural com-
modities promulgated, in accordance with section 701(e), under
the authority of section 406(a) upon the basis of public hear-
ings instituted before January 1, 1953, shall be deemed to be
regulations issued under this section and shall be subject to
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
78
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
modification or revocation under subsections (d) and (e), and
shall be subject to review under subsection (q).
(2) REGULATIONS UNDER SECTION 409.—Regulations that es-
tablished tolerances for substances that are pesticide chemical
residues in or on processed food, or that otherwise stated the
conditions under which such pesticide chemicals could be safe-
ly used, and that were issued under section 409 on or before
the date of the enactment of this paragraph, shall be deemed
to be regulations issued under this section and shall be subject
to modification or revocation under subsection (d) or (e), and
shall be subject to review under subsection (q).
(3) REGULATIONS UNDER SECTION 408.—Regulations that es-
tablished tolerances or exemptions under this section that were
issued on or before the date of the enactment of this paragraph
shall remain in effect unless modified or revoked under sub-
section (d) or (e), and shall be subject to review under sub-
section (q).
(4) CERTAIN
SUBSTANCES.—With respect to a substance
that is not included in the definition of the term ‘pesticide
chemical’ under section 201(q)(1) but was so included on the
day before the date of the enactment of the Antimicrobial Reg-
ulation Technical Corrections Act of 1998, the following applies
as of such date of enactment:
(A) Notwithstanding paragraph (2), any regulation ap-
plying to the use of the substance that was in effect on the
day before such date, and was on such day deemed in such
paragraph to have been issued under this section, shall be
considered to have been issued under section 409.
(B) Notwithstanding paragraph (3), any regulation ap-
plying to the use of the substance that was in effect on
such day and was issued under this section (including any
such regulation issued before the date of the enactment of
the Food Quality Protection Act of 1996) is deemed to have
been issued under section 409.
(k) TRANSITIONAL PROVISION.—If, on the day before the date of
the enactment of this subsection, a substance that is a pesticide
chemical was, with respect to a particular pesticidal use of the sub-
stance and any resulting pesticide chemical residue in or on a par-
ticular food—
(1) regarded by the Administrator or the Secretary as gen-
erally recognized as safe for use within the meaning of the pro-
visions of subsection (a) or section 201(s) as then in effect; or
(2) regarded by the Secretary as a substance described by
section 201(s)(4);
such a pesticide chemical residue shall be regarded as exempt from
the requirement for a tolerance, as of the date of enactment of this
subsection. The Administrator shall by regulation indicate which
substances are described by this subsection. Any exemption under
this subsection may be modified or revoked as if it had been issued
under subsection (c).
(l) HARMONIZATION WITH ACTION UNDER OTHER LAWS.—
(1) COORDINATION WITH FIFRA.—To the extent practicable
and consistent with the review deadlines in subsection (q), in
issuing a final rule under this subsection that suspends or re-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
79
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
vokes a tolerance or exemption for a pesticide chemical residue
in or on food, the Administrator shall coordinate such action
with any related necessary action under the Federal Insecti-
cide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.
(2) REVOCATION OF TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION FOLLOWING
CANCELLATION OF ASSOCIATED REGISTRATIONS.—If the Adminis-
trator, acting under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act, cancels the registration of each pesticide that
contains a particular pesticide chemical and that is labeled for
use on a particular food, or requires that the registration of
each such pesticide be modified to prohibit its use in connec-
tion with the production, storage, or transportation of such
food, due in whole or in part to dietary risks to humans posed
by residues of that pesticide chemical on that food, the Admin-
istrator shall revoke any tolerance or exemption that allows
the presence of the pesticide chemical, or any pesticide chem-
ical residue that results from its use, in or on that food. Sub-
section (e) shall apply to actions taken under this paragraph.
A revocation under this paragraph shall become effective not
later than 180 days after—
(A) the date by which each such cancellation of a reg-
istration has become effective; or
(B) the date on which the use of the canceled pesticide
becomes unlawful under the terms of the cancellation,
whichever is later.
(3) SUSPENSION OF TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION FOLLOWING
SUSPENSION OF ASSOCIATED REGISTRATIONS.—
(A) SUSPENSION.—If the Administrator, acting under
the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act,
suspends the use of each registered pesticide that contains
a particular pesticide chemical and that is labeled for use
on a particular food, due in whole or in part to dietary
risks to humans posed by residues of that pesticide chem-
ical on that food, the Administrator shall suspend any tol-
erance or exemption that allows the presence of the pes-
ticide chemical, or any pesticide chemical residue that re-
sults from its use, in or on that food. Subsection (e) shall
apply to actions taken under this paragraph. A suspension
under this paragraph shall become effective not later than
60 days after the date by which each such suspension of
use has become effective.
(B) EFFECT OF SUSPENSION.—The suspension of a tol-
erance or exemption under subparagraph (A) shall be ef-
fective as long as the use of each associated registration of
a pesticide is suspended under the Federal Insecticide,
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act. While a suspension of a
tolerance or exemption is effective the tolerance or exemp-
tion shall not be considered to be in effect. If the suspen-
sion of use of the pesticide under that Act is terminated,
leaving the registration of the pesticide for such use in ef-
fect under that Act, the Administrator shall rescind any
associated suspension of tolerance or exemption.
(4) TOLERANCES FOR UNAVOIDABLE RESIDUES.—In connec-
tion with action taken under paragraph (2) or (3), or with re-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
80
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
spect to pesticides whose registrations were suspended or can-
celed prior to the date of the enactment of this paragraph
under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act,
if the Administrator determines that a residue of the canceled
or suspended pesticide chemical will unavoidably persist in the
environment and thereby be present in or on a food, the Ad-
ministrator may establish a tolerance for the pesticide chem-
ical residue. In establishing such a tolerance, the Adminis-
trator shall take into account both the factors set forth in sub-
section (b)(2) and the unavoidability of the residue. Subsection
(e) shall apply to the establishment of such tolerance. The Ad-
ministrator shall review any such tolerance periodically and
modify it as necessary so that it allows no greater level of the
pesticide chemical residue than is unavoidable.
(5) PESTICIDE RESIDUES RESULTING FROM LAWFUL APPLICA-
TION OF PESTICIDE.—Notwithstanding any other provision of
this Act, if a tolerance or exemption for a pesticide chemical
residue in or on a food has been revoked, suspended, or modi-
fied under this section, an article of that food shall not be
deemed unsafe solely because of the presence of such pesticide
chemical residue in or on such food if it is shown to the satis-
faction of the Secretary that—
(A) the residue is present as the result of an applica-
tion or use of a pesticide at a time and in a manner that
was lawful under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act; and
(B) the residue does not exceed a level that was au-
thorized at the time of that application or use to be
present on the food under a tolerance, exemption, food ad-
ditive regulation, or other sanction then in effect under
this Act;
unless, in the case of any tolerance or exemption revoked, sus-
pended, or modified under this subsection or subsection (d) or
(e), the Administrator has issued a determination that con-
sumption of the legally treated food during the period of its
likely availability in commerce will pose an unreasonable die-
tary risk.
(6) TOLERANCE FOR USE OF PESTICIDES UNDER AN EMER-
GENCY EXEMPTION.—If the Administrator grants an exemption
under section 18 of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act (7 U.S.C. 136p) for a pesticide chemical, the
Administrator shall establish a tolerance or exemption from
the requirement for a tolerance for the pesticide chemical res-
idue. Such a tolerance or exemption from a tolerance shall
have an expiration date. The Administrator may establish such
a tolerance or exemption without providing notice or a period
for comment on the tolerance or exemption. The Administrator
shall promulgate regulations within 365 days after the date of
the enactment of this paragraph governing the establishment
of tolerances and exemptions under this paragraph. Such regu-
lations shall be consistent with the safety standard under sub-
sections (b)(2) and (c)(2) and with section 18 of the Federal In-
secticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.
(m) FEES.—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
81
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(1) AMOUNT.—The Administrator shall by regulation re-
quire the payment of such fees as will in the aggregate, in the
judgment of the Administrator, be sufficient over a reasonable
term to provide, equip, and maintain an adequate service for
the performance of the Administrator’s functions under this
section. Under the regulations, the performance of the Admin-
istrator’s services or other functions under this section,
including—
(A) the acceptance for filing of a petition submitted
under subsection (d);
(B) establishing, modifying, leaving in effect, or revok-
ing a tolerance or establishing, modifying, leaving in effect,
or revoking an exemption from the requirement for a toler-
ance under this section;
(C) the acceptance for filing of objections under sub-
section (g); or
(D) the certification and filing in court of a transcript
of the proceedings and the record under subsection (h);
may be conditioned upon the payment of such fees. The regula-
tions may further provide for waiver or refund of fees in whole
or in part when in the judgment of the Administrator such a
waiver or refund is equitable and not contrary to the purposes
of this subsection.
(2) DEPOSIT.—All fees collected under paragraph (1) shall
be deposited in the Reregistration and Expedited Processing
Fund created by section 4(k) of the Federal Insecticide, Fun-
gicide, and Rodenticide Act. Such fees shall be available to the
Administrator, without fiscal year limitation, for the perform-
ance of the Administrator’s services or functions as specified in
paragraph (1).
(n) NATIONAL UNIFORMITY OF TOLERANCES.—
(1) QUALIFYING
PESTICIDE
CHEMICAL
RESIDUE.—For pur-
poses of this subsection, the term ‘‘qualifying pesticide chem-
ical residue’’ means a pesticide chemical residue resulting from
the use, in production, processing, or storage of a food, of a pes-
ticide chemical that is an active ingredient and that—
(A) was first approved for such use in a registration of
a pesticide issued under section 3(c)(5) of the Federal In-
secticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act on or after April
25, 1985, on the basis of data determined by the Adminis-
trator to meet all applicable requirements for data pre-
scribed by regulations in effect under that Act on April 25,
1985; or
(B) was approved for such use in a reregistration eligi-
bility determination issued under section 4(g) of that Act
on or after the date of enactment of this subsection.
(2) QUALIFYING FEDERAL DETERMINATION.—For purposes of
this subsection, the term ‘‘qualifying Federal determination’’
means a tolerance or exemption from the requirement for a tol-
erance for a qualifying pesticide chemical residue that—
(A) is issued under this section after the date of the
enactment of this subsection and determined by the Ad-
ministrator to meet the standard under subsection
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
82
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(b)(2)(A) (in the case of a tolerance) or (c)(2) (in the case
of an exemption); or
(B)(i) pursuant to subsection (j) is remaining in effect
or is deemed to have been issued under this section, or is
regarded under subsection (k) as exempt from the require-
ment for a tolerance; and
(ii) is determined by the Administrator to meet the
standard under subsection (b)(2)(A) (in the case of a toler-
ance) or (c)(2) (in the case of an exemption).
(3) LIMITATION.—The Administrator may make the deter-
mination described in paragraph (2)(B)(ii) only by issuing a
rule in accordance with the procedure set forth in subsection
(d) or (e) and only if the Administrator issues a proposed rule
and allows a period of not less than 30 days for comment on
the proposed rule. Any such rule shall be reviewable in accord-
ance with subsections (g) and (h).
(4) STATE AUTHORITY.—Except as provided in paragraphs
(5), (6), and (8) no State or political subdivision may establish
or enforce any regulatory limit on a qualifying pesticide chem-
ical residue in or on any food if a qualifying Federal deter-
mination applies to the presence of such pesticide chemical res-
idue in or on such food, unless such State regulatory limit is
identical to such qualifying Federal determination. A State or
political subdivision shall be deemed to establish or enforce a
regulatory limit on a pesticide chemical residue in or on a food
if it purports to prohibit or penalize the production, processing,
shipping, or other handling of a food because it contains a pes-
ticide residue (in excess of a prescribed limit).
(5) PETITION PROCEDURE.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Any State may petition the Adminis-
trator for authorization to establish in such State a regu-
latory limit on a qualifying pesticide chemical residue in or
on any food that is not identical to the qualifying Federal
determination applicable to such qualifying pesticide
chemical residue.
(B) PETITION REQUIREMENTS.—Any petition under sub-
paragraph (A) shall—
(i) satisfy any requirements prescribed, by rule, by
the Administrator; and
(ii) be supported by scientific data about the pes-
ticide chemical residue that is the subject of the peti-
tion or about chemically related pesticide chemical res-
idues, data on the consumption within such State of
food bearing the pesticide chemical residue, and data
on exposure of humans within such State to the pes-
ticide chemical residue.
(C) AUTHORIZATION.—The Administrator may, by
order, grant the authorization described in subparagraph
(A) if the Administrator determines that the proposed
State regulatory limit—
(i) is justified by compelling local conditions; and
(ii) would not cause any food to be a violation of
Federal law.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
83
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(D) TREATMENT.—In lieu of any action authorized
under subparagraph (C), the Administrator may treat a
petition under this paragraph as a petition under sub-
section (d) to modify or revoke a tolerance or an exemp-
tion. If the Administrator determines to treat a petition
under this paragraph as a petition under subsection (d),
the Administrator shall thereafter act on the petition pur-
suant to subsection (d).
(E) REVIEW.—Any order of the Administrator granting
or denying the authorization described in subparagraph
(A) shall be subject to review in the manner described in
subsections (g) and (h).
(6) URGENT PETITION PROCEDURE.—Any State petition to
the Administrator pursuant to paragraph (5) that dem-
onstrates that consumption of a food containing such pesticide
residue level during the period of the food’s likely availability
in the State will pose a significant public health threat from
acute exposure shall be considered an urgent petition. If an
order by the Administrator to grant or deny the requested au-
thorization in an urgent petition is not made within 30 days
of receipt of the petition, the petitioning State may establish
and enforce a temporary regulatory limit on a qualifying pes-
ticide chemical residue in or on the food. The temporary regu-
latory limit shall be validated or terminated by the Adminis-
trator’s final order on the petition.
(7) RESIDUES FROM LAWFUL APPLICATION.—No State or po-
litical subdivision may enforce any regulatory limit on the level
of a pesticide chemical residue that may appear in or on any
food if, at the time of the application of the pesticide that re-
sulted in such residue, the sale of such food with such residue
level was lawful under this section and under the law of such
State, unless the State demonstrates that consumption of the
food containing such pesticide residue level during the period
of the food’s likely availability in the State will pose an unrea-
sonable dietary risk to the health of persons within such State.
(8) SAVINGS.—Nothing in this Act preempts the authority
of any State or political subdivision to require that a food con-
taining a pesticide chemical residue bear or be the subject of
a warning or other statement relating to the presence of the
pesticide chemical residue in or on such food.
(o) CONSUMER RIGHT TO KNOW.—Not later than 2 years after
the date of the enactment of the Food Quality Protection Act of
1996, and annually thereafter, the Administrator shall, in consulta-
tion with the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of Health
and Human Services, publish in a format understandable to a lay
person, and distribute to large retail grocers for public display (in
a manner determined by the grocer), the following information, at
a minimum:
(1) A discussion of the risks and benefits of pesticide chem-
ical residues in or on food purchased by consumers.
(2) A listing of actions taken under subparagraph (B) of
subsection (b)(2) that may result in pesticide chemical residues
in or on food that present a yearly or lifetime risk above the
risk allowed under subparagraph (A) of such subsection, and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
84
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 So in original, probably should be flush without being indented.
2 So in original. The word ‘‘Authorization’’ was left out.
the food on which the pesticide chemicals producing the resi-
dues are used.
(3) Recommendations to consumers for reducing dietary ex-
posure to pesticide chemical residues in a manner consistent
with maintaining a healthy diet, including a list of food that
may reasonably substitute for food listed under paragraph (2).
Nothing 1 in this subsection shall prevent retail grocers from
providing additional information.
(p) ESTROGENIC SUBSTANCES SCREENING PROGRAM.—
(1) DEVELOPMENT.—Not later than 2 years after the date
of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall in con-
sultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services de-
velop a screening program, using appropriate validated test
systems and other scientifically relevant information, to deter-
mine whether certain substances may have an effect in hu-
mans that is similar to an effect produced by a naturally occur-
ring estrogen, or such other endocrine effect as the Adminis-
trator may designate.
(2) IMPLEMENTATION.—Not later than 3 years after the
date of enactment of this section, after obtaining public com-
ment and review of the screening program described in para-
graph (1) by the scientific advisory panel established under
section 25(d) of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and
Rodenticide Act or the science advisory board established by
section 8 of the Environmental Research, Development, and
Demonstration 2 Act of 1978 (42 U.S.C. 4365), the Adminis-
trator shall implement the program.
(3) SUBSTANCES.—In carrying out the screening program
described in paragraph (1), the Administrator—
(A) shall provide for the testing of all pesticide chemi-
cals; and
(B) may provide for the testing of any other substance
that may have an effect that is cumulative to an effect of
a pesticide chemical if the Administrator determines that
a substantial population may be exposed to such sub-
stance.
(4) EXEMPTION.—Notwithstanding paragraph (3), the Ad-
ministrator may, by order, exempt from the requirements of
this section a biologic substance or other substance if the Ad-
ministrator determines that the substance is anticipated not to
produce any effect in humans similar to an effect produced by
a naturally occurring estrogen.
(5) COLLECTION OF INFORMATION.—
(A) IN
GENERAL.—The Administrator shall issue an
order to a registrant of a substance for which testing is re-
quired under this subsection, or to a person who manufac-
tures or imports a substance for which testing is required
under this subsection, to conduct testing in accordance
with the screening program described in paragraph (1),
and submit information obtained from the testing to the
Administrator, within a reasonable time period that the
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
85
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
Administrator determines is sufficient for the generation of
the information.
(B) PROCEDURES.—To the extent practicable the Ad-
ministrator shall minimize duplicative testing of the same
substance for the same endocrine effect, develop, as appro-
priate, procedures for fair and equitable sharing of test
costs, and develop, as necessary, procedures for handling of
confidential business information.
(C) FAILURE
OF
REGISTRANTS
TO
SUBMIT
INFORMA-
TION.—
(i) SUSPENSION.—If a registrant of a substance re-
ferred to in paragraph (3)(A) fails to comply with an
order under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, the
Administrator shall issue a notice of intent to suspend
the sale or distribution of the substance by the reg-
istrant. Any suspension proposed under this para-
graph shall become final at the end of the 30-day pe-
riod beginning on the date that the registrant receives
the notice of intent to suspend, unless during that pe-
riod a person adversely affected by the notice requests
a hearing or the Administrator determines that the
registrant has complied fully with this paragraph.
(ii) HEARING.—If a person requests a hearing
under clause (i), the hearing shall be conducted in ac-
cordance with section 554 of title 5, United States
Code. The only matter for resolution at the hearing
shall be whether the registrant has failed to comply
with an order under subparagraph (A) of this para-
graph. A decision by the Administrator after comple-
tion of a hearing shall be considered to be a final
agency action.
(iii) TERMINATION OF SUSPENSIONS.—The Adminis-
trator shall terminate a suspension under this sub-
paragraph issued with respect to a registrant if the
Administrator determines that the registrant has com-
plied fully with this paragraph.
(D) NONCOMPLIANCE BY OTHER PERSONS.—Any person
(other than a registrant) who fails to comply with an order
under subparagraph (A) shall be liable for the same pen-
alties and sanctions as are provided under section 16 of
the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. 2601 and fol-
lowing) in the case of a violation referred to in that sec-
tion. Such penalties and sanctions shall be assessed and
imposed in the same manner as provided in such section
16.
(6) AGENCY ACTION.—In the case of any substance that is
found, as a result of testing and evaluation under this section,
to have an endocrine effect on humans, the Administrator
shall, as appropriate, take action under such statutory author-
ity as is available to the Administrator, including consideration
under other sections of this Act, as is necessary to ensure the
protection of public health.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
86
Sec. 408
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 So in original; probably should be ‘‘subsection’’.
(7) REPORT TO CONGRESS.—Not later than 4 years after the
date of enactment of this section, the Administrator shall pre-
pare and submit to Congress a report containing—
(A) the findings of the Administrator resulting from
the screening program described in paragraph (1);
(B) recommendations for further testing needed to
evaluate the impact on human health of the substances
tested under the screening program; and
(C) recommendations for any further actions (includ-
ing any action described in paragraph (6)) that the Admin-
istrator determines are appropriate based on the findings.
(q) SCHEDULE FOR REVIEW.—
(1) IN
GENERAL.—The Administrator shall review toler-
ances and exemptions for pesticide chemical residues in effect
on the day before the date of the enactment of the Food Qual-
ity Protection Act of 1996, as expeditiously as practicable, as-
suring that—
(A) 33 percent of such tolerances and exemptions are
reviewed within 3 years of the date of enactment of such
Act;
(B) 66 percent of such tolerances and exemptions are
reviewed within 6 years of the date of enactment of such
Act; and
(C) 100 percent of such tolerances and exemptions are
reviewed within 10 years of the date of enactment of such
Act.
In conducting a review of a tolerance or exemption, the Admin-
istrator shall determine whether the tolerance or exemption
meets the requirements of subsections 1 (b)(2) or (c)(2) and
shall, by the deadline for the review of the tolerance or exemp-
tion, issue a regulation under subsection (d)(4) or (e)(1) to mod-
ify or revoke the tolerance or exemption if the tolerance or ex-
emption does not meet such requirements.
(2) PRIORITIES.—In determining priorities for reviewing
tolerances and exemptions under paragraph (1), the Adminis-
trator shall give priority to the review of the tolerances or ex-
emptions that appear to pose the greatest risk to public health.
(3) PUBLICATION OF SCHEDULE.—Not later than 12 months
after the date of the enactment of the Food Quality Protection
Act of 1996, the Administrator shall publish a schedule for re-
view of tolerances and exemptions established prior to the date
of the enactment of the Food Quality Protection Act of 1996.
The determination of priorities for the review of tolerances and
exemptions pursuant to this subsection is not a rulemaking
and shall not be subject to judicial review, except that failure
to take final action pursuant to the schedule established by
this paragraph shall be subject to judicial review.
(r) TEMPORARY TOLERANCE OR EXEMPTION.—The Administrator
may, upon the request of any person who has obtained an experi-
mental permit for a pesticide chemical under the Federal Insecti-
cide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act or upon the Administrator’s
own initiative, establish a temporary tolerance or exemption for the
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
87
Sec. 409
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
pesticide chemical residue for the uses covered by the permit. Sub-
sections (b)(2), (c)(2), (d), and (e) shall apply to actions taken under
this subsection.
(s) SAVINGS CLAUSE.—Nothing in this section shall be con-
strued to amend or modify the provisions of the Toxic Substances
Control Act or the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide
Act.
FOOD ADDITIVES
Unsafe Food Additives
SEC. 409. ø21 U.S.C. 348¿ (a) A food additive shall, with re-
spect to any particular use or intended use of such additives, be
deemed to be unsafe for the purposes of the application of clause
(2)(C) of section 402(a), unless—
(1) it and its use or intended use conform to the terms of
an exemption which is in effect pursuant to subsection (j) of
this section;
(2) there is in effect, and it and its use or intended use are
in conformity with, a regulation issued under this section pre-
scribing the conditions under which such additive may be safe-
ly used; or
(3) in the case of a food additive as defined in this Act that
is a food contact substance, there is—
(A) in effect, and such substance and the use of such
substance are in conformity with, a regulation issued
under this section prescribing the conditions under which
such additive may be safely used; or
(B) a notification submitted under subsection (h) that
is effective.
While such a regulation relating to a food additive, or such a notifi-
cation under subsection (h)(1) relating to a food additive that is a
food contact substance, is in effect, and has not been revoked pur-
suant to subsection (i), a food shall not, by reason of bearing or con-
taining such a food additive in accordance with the regulation or
notification, be considered adulterated under section 402(a)(1).
Petition To Establish Safety
(b)(1) Any person may, with respect to any intended use of a
food additive, file with the Secretary a petition proposing the
issuance of a regulation prescribing the conditions under which
such additive may be safely used.
(2) Such petition shall, in addition to any explanatory or sup-
porting data, contain—
(A) the name and all pertinent information concerning
such food additive, including, where available, its chemical
identity and composition;
(B) a statement of the conditions of the proposed use of
such additive, including all directions, recommendations, and
suggestions proposed for the use of such additive, and includ-
ing specimens of its proposed labeling;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
88
Sec. 409
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(C) all relevant data bearing on the physical or other tech-
nical effect such additive is intended to produce, and the quan-
tity of such additive required to produce such effect;
(D) a description of practicable methods for determining
the quantity of such additive in or on food, and any substance
formed in or on food, because of its use; and
(E) full reports of investigations made with respect to the
safety for use of such additive, including full information as to
the methods and controls used in conducting such investiga-
tions.
(3) Upon request of the Secretary, the petitioner shall furnish
(or, if the petitioner is not the manufacturer of such additive, the
petitioner shall have the manufacturer of such additive furnish,
without disclosure to the petitioner), a full description of the meth-
ods used in, and the facilities and controls used for, the production
of such additive.
(4) Upon request of the Secretary, the petitioner shall furnish
samples of the food additive involved, or articles used as compo-
nents thereof, and of the food in or on which the additive is pro-
posed to be used.
(5) Notice of the regulation proposed by the petitioner shall be
published in general terms by the Secretary within thirty days
after filing.
Action on the Petition
(c)(1) The Secretary shall—
(A) by order establish a regulation (whether or not in ac-
cord with that proposed by the petitioner) prescribing, with re-
spect to one or more proposed uses of the food additive in-
volved, the conditions under which such additive may be safely
used (including, but not limited to, specifications as to the par-
ticular food or classes of food in or on which such additive may
be used, the maximum quantity which may be used or per-
mitted to remain in or on such food, the manner in which such
additive may be added to or used in or on such food, and any
directions or other labeling or packaging requirements for such
additive deemed necessary by him to assure the safety of such
use), and shall notify the petitioner of such order and the rea-
sons for such action; or
(B) by order deny the petition, and shall notify the peti-
tioner of such order and of the reasons for such action.
(2) The order required by paragraph (1) (A) or (B) of this sub-
section shall be issued within ninety days after the date of filing
of the petition, except that the Secretary may (prior to such nine-
tieth day), by written notice to the petitioner, extend such ninety-
day period to such time (not more than one hundred and eighty
days after the date of filing of the petition) as the Secretary deems
necessary to enable him to study and investigate the petition.
(3) No such regulation shall issue if a fair evaluation of the
data before the Secretary—
(A) fails to establish that the proposed use of the food addi-
tive, under the conditions of use to be specified in the regula-
tion, will be safe: Provided, That no additive shall be deemed
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
89
Sec. 409
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
to be safe if it is found to induce cancer when ingested by man
or animal, or if it is found, after tests which are appropriate
for the evaluation of the safety of food additives, to induce can-
cer in man or animal, except that this proviso shall not apply
with respect to the use of a substance as an ingredient of feed
for animals which are raised for food production, if the Sec-
retary finds (i) that, under the conditions of use and feeding
specified in proposed labeling and reasonably certain to be fol-
lowed in practice, such additive will not adversely affect the
animals for which such feed is intended, and (ii) that no res-
idue of the additive will be found (by methods of examination
prescribed or approved by the Secretary by regulations, which
regulations shall not be subject to subsections (f) and (g)) in
any edible portion of such animal after slaughter or in any food
yielded by or derived from the living animal; or
(B) shows that the proposed use of the additive would pro-
mote deception of the consumer in violation of this Act or
would otherwise result in adulteration or in misbranding of
food within the meaning of this Act.
(4) If, in the judgment of the Secretary, based upon a fair eval-
uation of the data before him, a tolerance limitation is required in
order to assure that the proposed use of an additive will be safe,
the Secretary—
(A) shall not fix such tolerance limitation at a level higher
than he finds to be reasonably required to accomplish the
physical or other technical effect for which such additive is in-
tended; and
(B) shall not establish a regulation for such proposed use
if he finds upon a fair evaluation of the data before him that
such data do not establish that such use would accomplish the
intended physical or other technical effect.
(5) In determining, for the purposes of this section, whether a
proposed use of a food additive is safe, the Secretary shall consider
among other relevant factors—
(A) the probable consumption of the additive and of any
substance formed in or on food because of the use of the addi-
tive;
(B) the cumulative effect of such additive in the diet of
man or animals, taking into account any chemically or phar-
macologically related substance or substances in such diet; and
(C) safety factors which in the opinion of experts qualified
by scientific training and experience to evaluate the safety of
food additives are generally recognized as appropriate for the
use of animal experimentation data.
Regulation Issued on Secretary’s Initiative
(d) The Secretary may at any time, upon his own initiative,
propose the issuance of a regulation prescribing, with respect to
any particular use of a food additive, the conditions under which
such additive may be safely used, and the reasons therefor. After
the thirtieth day following publication of such a proposal, the Sec-
retary may by order establish a regulation based upon the pro-
posal.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
90
Sec. 409
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
Publication and Effective Date of Orders
(e) Any order, including any regulation established by such
order, issued under subsection (c) or (d) of this section, shall be
published and shall be effective upon publication, but the Secretary
may stay such effectiveness if, after issuance of such order, a hear-
ing is sought with respect to such order pursuant to subsection (f).
Objections and Public Hearing
(f)(1) Within thirty days after publication of an order made
pursuant to subsection (c) or (d) of this section, any person ad-
versely affected by such an order may file objections thereto with
the Secretary, specifying with particularity the provisions of the
order deemed objectionable, stating reasonable grounds therefor,
and requesting a public hearing upon such objections. The Sec-
retary shall, after due notice, as promptly as possible hold such
public hearing for the purpose of receiving evidence relevant and
material to the issues raised by such objections. As soon as prac-
ticable after completion of the hearing, the Secretary shall by order
act upon such objections and make such order public.
(2) Such order shall be based upon a fair evaluation of the en-
tire record at such hearing, and shall include a statement setting
forth in detail the findings and conclusions upon which the order
is based.
(3) The Secretary shall specify in the order the date on which
it shall take effect, except that it shall not be made to take effect
prior to the ninetieth day after its publication, unless the Secretary
finds that emergency conditions exist necessitating an earlier effec-
tive date, in which event the Secretary shall specify in the order
his findings as to such conditions.
Judicial Review
(g)(1) In a case of actual controversy as to the validity of any
order issued under subsection (f), including any order thereunder
with respect to amendment or repeal of a regulation issued under
this section, any person who will be adversely affected by such
order may obtain judicial review by filing in the United States
Court of Appeals for the circuit wherein such person resides or has
his principal place of business, or in the United States Court of Ap-
peals for the District of Columbia Circuit, within sixty days after
the entry of such order, a petition praying that the order be set
aside in whole or in part.
(2) A copy of such petition shall be forthwith transmitted by
the clerk of the court to the Secretary, or any officer designated by
him for that purpose, and thereupon the Secretary shall file in the
court the record of the proceedings on which he based his order, as
provided in section 2112 of title 28, United States Code. Upon the
filing of such petition the court shall have jurisdiction, which upon
the filing of the record with it shall be exclusive, to affirm or set
aside the order complained of in whole or in part. Until the filing
of the record the Secretary may modify or set aside his order. The
findings of the Secretary with respect to questions of fact shall be
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
91
Sec. 409
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
sustained if based upon a fair evaluation of the entire record at
such hearing.
(3) The court, on such judicial review, shall not sustain the
order of the Secretary if he failed to comply with any requirement
imposed on him by subsection (f)(2) of this section.
(4) If application is made to the court for leave to adduce addi-
tional evidence, the court may order such additional evidence to be
taken before the Secretary and to be adduced upon the hearing in
such manner and upon such terms and conditions as to the court
may seem proper, if such evidence is material and there were rea-
sonable grounds for failure to adduce such evidence in the pro-
ceedings below. The Secretary may modify his findings as to the
facts and order by reason of the additional evidence so taken, and
shall file with the court such modified findings and order.
(5) The judgment of the court affirming or setting aside, in
whole or in part, any order under this section shall be final, subject
to review by the Supreme Court of the United States upon certio-
rari or certification as provided in section 1254 of title 28 of the
United States Code. The commencement of proceedings under this
section shall not, unless specifically ordered by the court to the con-
trary, operate as a stay of an order.
Notification Relating to a Food Contact Substance
(h)(1) Subject to such regulations as may be promulgated
under paragraph (3), a manufacturer or supplier of a food contact
substance may, at least 120 days prior to the introduction or deliv-
ery for introduction into interstate commerce of the food contact
substance, notify the Secretary of the identity and intended use of
the food contact substance, and of the determination of the manu-
facturer or supplier that the intended use of such food contact sub-
stance is safe under the standard described in subsection (c)(3)(A).
The notification shall contain the information that forms the basis
of the determination and all information required to be submitted
by regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
(2)(A) A notification submitted under paragraph (1) shall be-
come effective 120 days after the date of receipt by the Secretary
and the food contact substance may be introduced or delivered for
introduction into interstate commerce, unless the Secretary makes
a determination within the 120-day period that, based on the data
and information before the Secretary, such use of the food contact
substance has not been shown to be safe under the standard de-
scribed in subsection (c)(3)(A), and informs the manufacturer or
supplier of such determination.
(B) A decision by the Secretary to object to a notification shall
constitute final agency action subject to judicial review.
(C) In this paragraph, the term ‘‘food contact substance’’ means
the substance that is the subject of a notification submitted under
paragraph (1), and does not include a similar or identical substance
manufactured or prepared by a person other than the manufac-
turer identified in the notification.
(3)(A) The process in this subsection shall be utilized for au-
thorizing the marketing of a food contact substance except where
the Secretary determines that submission and review of a petition
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
92
Sec. 409
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
under subsection (b) is necessary to provide adequate assurance of
safety, or where the Secretary and any manufacturer or supplier
agree that such manufacturer or supplier may submit a petition
under subsection (b).
(B) The Secretary is authorized to promulgate regulations to
identify the circumstances in which a petition shall be filed under
subsection (b), and shall consider criteria such as the probable con-
sumption of such food contact substance and potential toxicity of
the food contact substance in determining the circumstances in
which a petition shall be filed under subsection (b).
(4) The Secretary shall keep confidential any information pro-
vided in a notification under paragraph (1) for 120 days after re-
ceipt by the Secretary of the notification. After the expiration of
such 120 days, the information shall be available to any interested
party except for any matter in the notification that is a trade secret
or confidential commercial information.
(5)(A)(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), the notification pro-
gram established under this subsection shall not operate in any fis-
cal year unless—
(I) an appropriation equal to or exceeding the applicable
amount under clause (iv) is made for such fiscal year for car-
rying out such program in such fiscal year; and
(II) the Secretary certifies that the amount appropriated
for such fiscal year for the Center for Food Safety and Applied
Nutrition of the Food and Drug Administration (exclusive of
the appropriation referred to in subclause (I)) equals or exceeds
the amount appropriated for the Center for fiscal year 1997,
excluding any amount appropriated for new programs.
(ii) The Secretary shall, not later than April 1, 1999, begin ac-
cepting and reviewing notifications submitted under the notifica-
tion program established under this subsection if—
(I) an appropriation equal to or exceeding the applicable
amount under clause (iii) is made for the last six months of fis-
cal year 1999 for carrying out such program during such pe-
riod; and
(II) the Secretary certifies that the amount appropriated
for such period for the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nu-
trition of the Food and Drug Administration (exclusive of the
appropriation referred to in subclause (I)) equals or exceeds an
amount equivalent to one-half the amount appropriated for the
Center for fiscal year 1997, excluding any amount appropriated
for new programs.
(iii) For the last six months of fiscal year 1999, the applicable
amount under this clause is $1,500,000, or the amount specified in
the budget request of the President for the six-month period in-
volved for carrying out the notification program in fiscal year 1999,
whichever is less.
(iv) For fiscal year 2000 and subsequent fiscal years, the appli-
cable amount under this clause is $3,000,000, or the amount speci-
fied in the budget request of the President for the fiscal year in-
volved for carrying out the notification program under this sub-
section, whichever is less.
(B) For purposes of carrying out the notification program under
this subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
93
Sec. 410
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1999 through fiscal
year 2003, except that such authorization of appropriations is not
effective for a fiscal year for any amount that is less than the appli-
cable amount under clause (iii) or (iv) of subparagraph (A), which-
ever is applicable.
(C) Not later than April 1 of fiscal year 1998 and February 1
of each subsequent fiscal year, the Secretary shall submit a report
to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representa-
tives and the Senate, the Committee on Commerce of the House of
Representatives, and the Committee on Labor and Human Re-
sources of the Senate that provides an estimate of the Secretary of
the costs of carrying out the notification program established under
this subsection for the next fiscal year.
(6) In this section, the term ‘‘food contact substance’’ means
any substance intended for use as a component of materials used
in manufacturing, packing, packaging, transporting, or holding food
if such use is not intended to have any technical effect in such food.
Amendment or Repeal of Regulations
(i) The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe the procedure by
which regulations under the foregoing provisions of this section
may be amended or repealed, and such procedure shall conform to
the procedure provided in this section for the promulgation of such
regulations. The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe the proce-
dure by which the Secretary may deem a notification under sub-
section (h) to no longer be effective.
Exemptions for Investigational Use
(j) Without regard to subsections (b) to (i), inclusive, of this sec-
tion, the Secretary shall by regulation provide for exempting from
the requirements of this section any food additive, and any food
bearing or containing such additive, intended solely for investiga-
tional use by qualified experts when in his opinion such exemption
is consistent with the public health.
BOTTLED DRINKING WATER STANDARDS
SEC. 410. ø21 U.S.C. 349¿ (a) Except as provided in subsection
(b), whenever the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency prescribes interim or revised national primary drinking
water regulations under section 1412 of the Public Health Service
Act, the Secretary shall consult with the Administrator and within
180 days after the promulgation of such drinking water regulations
either promulgate amendments to regulations under this chapter
applicable to bottled drinking water or publish in the Federal Reg-
ister his reasons for not making such amendments.
(b)(1) Not later than 180 days before the effective date of a na-
tional primary drinking water regulation promulgated by the Ad-
ministrator of the Environmental Protection Agency for a contami-
nant under section 1412 of the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 U.S.C.
300g–1), the Secretary shall promulgate a standard of quality regu-
lation under this subsection for that contaminant in bottled water
or make a finding that such a regulation is not necessary to protect
the public health because the contaminant is contained in water in
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
94
Sec. 410
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
public water systems (as defined under section 1401(4) of such Act
(42 U.S.C. 300f(4))) but not in water used for bottled drinking
water. The effective date for any such standard of quality regula-
tion shall be the same as the effective date for such national pri-
mary drinking water regulation, except for any standard of quality
of regulation promulgated by the Secretary before the date of en-
actment of the Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996 for
which (as of such date of enactment) an effective date had not been
established. In the case of a standard of quality regulation to which
such exception applies, the Secretary shall promulgate monitoring
requirements for the contaminants covered by the regulation not
later than 2 years after such date of enactment.
(2) A regulation issued by the Secretary as provided in this
subsection shall include any monitoring requirements that the Sec-
retary determines appropriate for bottled water.
(3) A regulation issued by the Secretary as provided in this
subsection shall require the following:
(A) In the case of contaminants for which a maximum con-
taminant level is established in a national primary drinking
water regulation under section 1412 of the Safe Drinking
Water Act (42 U.S.C. 300g–1), the regulation under this sub-
section shall establish a maximum contaminant level for the
contaminant in bottled water which is no less stringent than
the maximum contaminant level provided in the national pri-
mary drinking water regulation.
(B) In the case of contaminants for which a treatment
technique is established in a national primary drinking water
regulation under section 1412 of the Safe Drinking Water Act
(42 U.S.C. 300g–1), the regulation under this subsection shall
require that bottled water be subject to requirements no less
protective of the public health than those applicable to water
provided by public water systems using the treatment tech-
nique required by the national primary drinking water regula-
tion.
(4)(A) If the Secretary does not promulgate a regulation under
this subsection within the period described in paragraph (1), the
national primary drinking water regulation referred to in para-
graph (1) shall be considered, as of the date on which the Secretary
is required to establish a regulation under paragraph (1), as the
regulation applicable under this subsection to bottled water.
(B) In the case of a national primary drinking water regulation
that pursuant to subparagraph (A) is considered to be a standard
of quality regulation, the Secretary shall, not later than the appli-
cable date referred to in such subparagraph, publish in the Federal
Register a notice—
(i) specifying the contents of such regulation, including
monitoring requirements; and
(ii) providing that for purposes of this paragraph the effec-
tive date for such regulation is the same as the effective date
for the regulation for purposes of the Safe Drinking Water Act
(or, if the exception under paragraph (1) applies to the regula-
tion, that the effective date for the regulation is not later than
2 years and 180 days after the date of enactment of the Safe
Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
95
Sec. 411
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should be ‘‘paragraph’’.
VITAMINS AND MINERALS
SEC. 411. ø21 U.S.C. 350¿ (a)(1) Except as provided in para-
graph (2)—
(A) the Secretary may not establish, under section 201(n),
401, or 403, maximum limits on the potency of any synthetic
or natural vitamin or mineral within a food to which this sec-
tion applies;
(B) the Secretary may not classify any natural or synthetic
vitamin or mineral (or combination thereof) as a drug solely
because it exceeds the level of potency which the Secretary de-
termines is nutritionally rational or useful;
(C) the Secretary may not limit, under section 201(n), 401,
or 403, the combination or number of any synthetic or
natural—
(i) vitamin,
(ii) mineral, or
(iii) other ingredient of food,
within a food to which this section applies.
(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply in the case of a vitamin, min-
eral, other ingredient of food, or food, which is represented for use
by individuals in the treatment or management of specific diseases
or disorders, by children, or by pregnant or lactating women. For
purposes of this subparagraph 1, the term ‘‘children’’ means individ-
uals who are under the age of twelve years.
(b)(1) A food to which this section applies shall not be deemed
under section 403 to be misbranded solely because its label bears,
in accordance with section 403(i)(2), all the ingredients in the food
or its advertising contains references to ingredients in the food
which are not vitamins or minerals.
(2) The labeling for any food to which this section applies may
not list its ingredients which are not dietary supplement ingredi-
ents described in section 201(ff) (i) except as a part of a list of all
the ingredients of such food, and (ii) unless such ingredients are
listed in accordance with applicable regulations under section 403.
To the extent that compliance with clause (i) of this subparagraph
is impracticable or results in deception or unfair competition, ex-
emptions shall be established by regulations promulgated by the
Secretary.
(c)(1) For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘food to which this
section applies’’ means a food for humans which is a food for spe-
cial dietary use—
(A) which is or contains any natural or synthetic vitamin
or mineral, and
(B) which—
(i) is intended for ingestion in tablet, capsule, powder,
softgel, gelcap, or liquid form, or
(ii) if not intended for ingestion in such a form, is not
represented as conventional food and is not represented for
use as a sole item of a meal or of the diet.
(2) For purposes of paragraph (1)(B)(i), a food shall be consid-
ered as intended for ingestion in liquid form only if it is formulated
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
96
Sec. 412
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
in a fluid carrier and it is intended for ingestion in daily quantities
measured in drops or similar small units of measure.
(3) For purposes of paragraph (1) and of section 403 (j) insofar
as that section is applicable to food to which this section applies,
the term ‘‘special dietary use’’ as applied to food used by man
means a particular use for which a food purports or is represented
to be used, including but not limited to the following:
(A) Supplying a special dietary need that exists by reason
of a physical, physiological, pathological, or other condition, in-
cluding but not limited to the condition of disease, convales-
cence, pregnancy, lactation, infancy, allergic hypersensitivity to
food, underweight, overweight, or the need to control the in-
take of sodium.
(B) Supplying a vitamin, mineral, or other ingredient for
use by man to supplement his diet by increasing the total die-
tary intake.
(C) Supplying a special dietary need by reason of being a
food for use as the sole item of the diet.
REQUIREMENTS FOR INFANT FORMULAS
SEC. 412. ø21 U.S.C. 350a¿ (a) An infant formula, including an
infant formula powder, shall be deemed to be adulterated if—
(1) such infant formula does not provide nutrients as re-
quired by subsection (i),
(2) such infant formula does not meet the quality factor re-
quirements prescribed by the Secretary under subsection (b)(1),
or
(3) the processing of such infant formula is not in compli-
ance with the good manufacturing practices and the quality
control procedures prescribed by the Secretary under sub-
section (b)(2).
(b)(1) The Secretary shall by regulation establish requirements
for quality factors for infant formulas to the extent possible con-
sistent with current scientific knowledge, including quality factor
requirements for the nutrients required by subsection (i).
(2)(A) The Secretary shall by regulation establish good manu-
facturing practices for infant formulas, including quality control
procedures that the Secretary determines are necessary to assure
that an infant formula provides nutrients in accordance with this
subsection and subsection (i) and is manufactured in a manner de-
signed to prevent adulteration of the infant formula.
(B) The good manufacturing practices and quality control pro-
cedures prescribed by the Secretary under subparagraph (A) shall
include requirements for—
(i) the testing, in accordance with paragraph (3) and by the
manufacturer of an infant formula or an agent of such manu-
facturer, of each batch of infant formula for each nutrient re-
quired by subsection (i) before the distribution of such batch,
(ii) regularly scheduled testing, by the manufacturer of an
infant formula or an agent of such manufacturer, of samples
of infant formulas during the shelf life of such formulas to en-
sure that such formulas are in compliance with this section,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
97
Sec. 412
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(iii) in-process controls including, where necessary, testing
required by good manufacturing practices designed to prevent
adulteration of each batch of infant formula, and
(iv) the conduct by the manufacturer of an infant formula
or an agent of such manufacturer of regularly scheduled audits
to determine that such manufacturer has complied with the
regulations prescribed under subparagraph (A).
In prescribing requirements for audits under clause (iv), the Sec-
retary shall provide that such audits be conducted by appropriately
trained individuals who do not have any direct responsibility for
the manufacture or production of infant formula.
(3)(A) At the final product stage, each batch of infant formula
shall be tested for vitamin A, vitamin B1, vitamin C, and vitamin
E to ensure that such infant formula is in compliance with the re-
quirements of this subsection and subsection (i) relating to such vi-
tamins.
(B) Each nutrient premix used in the manufacture of an infant
formula shall be tested for each relied upon nutrient required by
subsection (i) which is contained in such premix to ensure that
such premix is in compliance with its specifications or certifications
by a premix supplier.
(C) During the manufacturing process or at the final product
stage and before distribution of an infant formula, an infant for-
mula shall be tested for all nutrients required to be included in
such formula by subsection (i) for which testing has not been con-
ducted pursuant to subparagraph (A) or (B). Testing under this
subparagraph shall be conducted to—
(i) ensure that each batch of such infant formula is in com-
pliance with the requirements of subsection (i) relating to such
nutrients, and
(ii) confirm that nutrients contained in any nutrient pre-
mix used in such infant formula are present in each batch of
such infant formula in the proper concentration.
(D) If the Secretary adds a nutrient to the list of nutrients in
the table in subsection (i), the Secretary shall by regulation require
that the manufacturer of an infant formula test each batch of such
formula for such new nutrient in accordance with subparagraph
(A), (B), or (C).
(E) For purposes of this paragraph, the term ‘‘final product
stage’’ means the point in the manufacturing process, before dis-
tribution of an infant formula, at which an infant formula is ho-
mogenous and is not subject to further degradation.
(4)(A) The Secretary shall by regulation establish requirements
respecting the retention of records. Such requirements shall pro-
vide for—
(i) the retention of all records necessary to demonstrate
compliance with the good manufacturing practices and quality
control procedures prescribed by the Secretary under para-
graph (2), including records containing the results of all testing
required under paragraph (2)(B),
(ii) the retention of all certifications or guarantees of anal-
ysis by premix suppliers,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
98
Sec. 412
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(iii) the retention by a premix supplier of all records nec-
essary to confirm the accuracy of all premix certifications and
guarantees of analysis,
(iv) the retention of—
(I) all records pertaining to the microbiological quality
and purity of raw materials used in infant formula powder
and in finished infant formula, and
(II) all records pertaining to food packaging materials
which show that such materials do not cause an infant for-
mula to be adulterated within the meaning of section
402(a)(2)(C),
(v) the retention of all records of the results of regularly
scheduled audits conducted pursuant to the requirements pre-
scribed by the Secretary under paragraph (2)(B)(iv), and
(vi) the retention of all complaints and the maintenance of
files with respect to, and the review of, complaints concerning
infant formulas which may reveal the possible existence of a
hazard to health.
(B)(i) Records required under subparagraph (A) with respect to
an infant formula shall be retained for at least one year after the
expiration of the shelf life of such infant formula. Except as pro-
vided in clause (ii), such records shall be made available to the Sec-
retary for review and duplication upon request of the Secretary.
(ii) A manufacturer need only provide written assurances to
the Secretary that the regularly scheduled audits required by para-
graph (2)(B)(iv) are being conducted by the manufacturer, and need
not make available to the Secretary the actual written reports of
such audits.
(c)(1) No person shall introduce or deliver for introduction into
interstate commerce any new infant formula unless—
(A) such person has, before introducing such new infant
formula, or delivering such new infant formula for introduc-
tion, into interstate commerce, registered with the Secretary
the name of such person, the place of business of such person,
and all establishments at which such person intends to manu-
facture such new infant formula, and
(B) such person has at least 90 days before marketing such
new infant formula, made the submission to the Secretary re-
quired by subsection (c)(1).
(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term ‘‘new infant for-
mula’’ includes—
(A) an infant formula manufactured by a person which has
not previously manufactured an infant formula, and
(B) an infant formula manufactured by a person which has
previously manufactured infant formula and in which there is
a major change, in processing or formulation, from a current
or any previous formulation produced by such manufacturer.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term ‘‘major change’’ has the
meaning given to such term in section 106.30(c)(2) of title 21, Code
of Federal Regulations (as in effect on August 1, 1986), and guide-
lines issued thereunder.
(d)(1) A person shall, with respect to any infant formula sub-
ject to subsection (c), make a submission to the Secretary which
shall include—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
99
Sec. 412
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(A) the quantitative formulation of the infant formula,
(B) a description of any reformulation of the formula or
change in processing of the infant formula,
(C) assurances that the infant formula will not be mar-
keted unless it meets the requirements of subsections (b)(1)
and (i), as demonstrated by the testing required under sub-
section (b)(3), and
(D) assurances that the processing of the infant formula
complies with subsection (b)(2).
(2) After the first production of an infant formula subject to
subsection (c), and before the introduction into interstate commerce
of such formula, the manufacturer of such formula shall submit to
the Secretary, in such form as may be prescribed by the Secretary,
a written verification which summarizes test results and records
demonstrating that such formula complies with the requirements of
subsections (b)(1), (b)(2)(A), (b)(2)(B)(i), (b)(2)(B)(iii), (b)(3)(A),
(b)(3)(C), and (i).
(3) If the manufacturer of an infant formula for commercial or
charitable distribution for human consumption determines that a
change in the formulation of the formula or a change in the proc-
essing of the formula may affect whether the formula is adulter-
ated under subsection (a), the manufacturer shall, before the first
processing of such formula, make the submission to the Secretary
required by paragraph (1).
(e)(1) If the manufacturer of an infant formula has knowledge
which reasonably supports the conclusion that an infant formula
which has been processed by the manufacturer and which has left
an establishment subject to the control of the manufacturer—
(A) may not provide the nutrients required by subsection
(i), or
(B) may be otherwise adulterated or misbranded,
the manufacturer shall promptly notify the Secretary of such
knowledge. If the Secretary determines that the infant formula pre-
sents a risk to human health, the manufacturer shall immediately
take all actions necessary to recall shipments of such infant for-
mula from all wholesale and retail establishments, consistent with
recall regulations and guidelines issued by the Secretary.
(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term ‘‘knowledge’’ as ap-
plied to a manufacturer means (A) the actual knowledge that the
manufacturer had, or (B) the knowledge which a reasonable person
would have had under like circumstances or which would have
been obtained upon the exercise of due care.
(f)(1) If a recall of infant formula is begun by a manufacturer,
the recall shall be carried out in accordance with such require-
ments as the Secretary shall prescribe under paragraph (2) and—
(A) the Secretary shall, not later than the 15th day after
the beginning of such recall and at least once every 15 days
thereafter until the recall is terminated, review the actions
taken under the recall to determine whether the recall meets
the requirements prescribed under paragraph (2), and
(B) the manufacturer shall, not later than the 14th day
after the beginning of such recall and at least once every 14
days thereafter until the recall is terminated, report to the Sec-
retary the actions taken to implement the recall.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
100
Sec. 412
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(2) The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe the scope and
extent of recalls of infant formulas necessary and appropriate for
the degree of risks to human health presented by the formula sub-
ject to the recall.
(3) The Secretary shall by regulation require each manufac-
turer of an infant formula who begins a recall of such formula be-
cause of a risk to human health to request each retail establish-
ment at which such formula is sold or available for sale to post at
the point of purchase of such formula a notice of such recall at such
establishment for such time that the Secretary determines nec-
essary to inform the public of such recall.
(g)(1) Each manufacturer of an infant formula shall make and
retain such records respecting the distribution of the infant for-
mula through any establishment owned or operated by such manu-
facturer as may be necessary to effect and monitor recalls of the
formula. Such records shall be retained for at least one year after
the expiration of the shelf life of the infant formula.
(2) To the extent that the Secretary determines that records
are not being made or maintained in accordance with paragraph
(1), the Secretary may by regulation prescribe the records required
to be made under paragraph (1) and requirements respecting the
retention of such records under such paragraph. Such regulations
shall take effect on such date as the Secretary prescribes but not
sooner than the 180th day after the date such regulations are pro-
mulgated. Such regulations shall apply only with respect to dis-
tributions of infant formulas made after such effective date.
(h)(1) Any infant formula which is represented and labeled for
use by an infant—
(A) who has an inborn error of metabolism or a low birth
weight, or
(B) who otherwise has an unusual medical or dietary prob-
lem,
is exempt from the requirements of subsections (a), (b), and (c). The
manufacturer of an infant formula exempt under this paragraph
shall, in the case of the exempt formula, be required to provide the
notice required by subsection (e)(1) only with respect to adultera-
tion or misbranding described in subsection (e)(1)(B) and to comply
with the regulations prescribed by the Secretary under paragraph
(2).
(2) The Secretary may by regulation establish terms and condi-
tions for the exemption of an infant formula from the requirements
of subsections (a), (b), and (c). An exemption of an infant formula
under paragraph (1) may be withdrawn by the Secretary if such
formula is not in compliance with applicable terms and conditions
prescribed under this paragraph.
(i)(1) An infant formula shall contain nutrients in accordance
with the table set out in this subsection or, if revised by the Sec-
retary under paragraph (2), as so revised.
(2) The Secretary may by regulation—
(A) revise the list of nutrients in the table in this sub-
section, and
(B) revise the required level for any nutrient required by
the table.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
101
Sec. 413
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
NUTRIENTS
Nutrient
Minimum1
Maximum1
Protein (gm) ..................................
1.82 ......................................
4.5.
Fat:
gm ...........................................
3.3 ........................................
6.0.
percent cal ..............................
30.0 ......................................
54.0.
Essential fatty acids (linoleate):
percent cal ..............................
2.7 ........................................
mg ...........................................
300.0 ....................................
Vitamins:
A (IU) .....................................
250.0 (75 µg)3 ......................
750.0 (225 µg).3
D (IU) .....................................
40.0 ......................................
100.0.
K (µg) ......................................
4.0 ........................................
E (IU) .....................................
0.7 (with 0.7 IU/gm linoleic
acid).
C (ascorbic acid) (mg) ............
8.0 ........................................
B1 (thiamine) (µg) ..................
40.0 ......................................
B2 (riboflavin) (µg) .................
60.0 ......................................
B6 (pyridoxine) (µg) ...............
35.0 (with 15 µg/gm of pro-
tein in formula).
B12 (µg) ...................................
0.15 ......................................
Niacin (µg) .............................
250.0 ....................................
Folic acid (µg) ........................
4.0 ........................................
Pantothenic acid (µg) ............
300.0 ....................................
Biotin (µg) ..............................
1.54 ......................................
Choline (mg) ..........................
7.04 ......................................
Inositol (mg) ...........................
4.04 .......................................
Minerals:
Calcium (mg) .........................
50.05 ....................................
Phosphorus (mg) ....................
25.05 ....................................
Magnesium (mg) ....................
6.0 ........................................
Iron (mg) ................................
0.15 ......................................
Iodine (µg) ..............................
5.0 ........................................
Zinc (mg) ................................
0.5 ........................................
Copper (µg) ............................
60.0 ......................................
Manganese (µg) .....................
5.0 ........................................
Sodium (mg) ...........................
20.0 ......................................
60.0.
Potassium (mg) ......................
80.0 ......................................
200.0.
Chloride (mg) .........................
55.0 ......................................
150.0.
1 Stated per 100 kilocalories.
2 The source of protein shall be at least nutritionally equivalent to casein.
3 Retinol equivalents.
4 Required to be included in this amount only in formulas which are not milk-based.
5 Calcium to phosphorus ratio must be no less than 1.1 nor more than 2.0.
NEW DIETARY INGREDIENTS
SEC. 413. ø21 U.S.C. 350b¿ (a) IN GENERAL.—A dietary supple-
ment which contains a new dietary ingredient shall be deemed
adulterated under section 402(f) unless it meets one of the fol-
lowing requirements:
(1) The dietary supplement contains only dietary ingredi-
ents which have been present in the food supply as an article
used for food in a form in which the food has not been chemi-
cally altered.
(2) There is a history of use or other evidence of safety es-
tablishing that the dietary ingredient when used under the
conditions recommended or suggested in the labeling of the di-
etary supplement will reasonably be expected to be safe and,
at least 75 days before being introduced or delivered for intro-
duction into interstate commerce, the manufacturer or dis-
tributor of the dietary ingredient or dietary supplement pro-
vides the Secretary with information, including any citation to
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
102
Sec. 414
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
published articles, which is the basis on which the manufac-
turer or distributor has concluded that a dietary supplement
containing such dietary ingredient will reasonably be expected
to be safe.
The Secretary shall keep confidential any information provided
under paragraph (2) for 90 days following its receipt. After the ex-
piration of such 90 days, the Secretary shall place such information
on public display, except matters in the information which are
trade secrets or otherwise confidential, commercial information.
(b) PETITION.—Any person may file with the Secretary a peti-
tion proposing the issuance of an order prescribing the conditions
under which a new dietary ingredient under its intended conditions
of use will reasonably be expected to be safe. The Secretary shall
make a decision on such petition within 180 days of the date the
petition is filed with the Secretary. For purposes of chapter 7 of
title 5, United States Code, the decision of the Secretary shall be
considered final agency action.
(c) DEFINITION.—For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘new di-
etary ingredient’’ means a dietary ingredient that was not mar-
keted in the United States before October 15, 1994 and does not
include any dietary ingredient which was marketed in the United
States before October 15, 1994.
SEC. 414. ø21 U.S.C. 350c¿ MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF
RECORDS.
(a) RECORDS INSPECTION.—If the Secretary has a reasonable
belief that an article of food is adulterated and presents a threat
of serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or ani-
mals, each person (excluding farms and restaurants) who manufac-
tures, processes, packs, distributes, receives, holds, or imports such
article shall, at the request of an officer or employee duly des-
ignated by the Secretary, permit such officer or employee, upon
presentation of appropriate credentials and a written notice to such
person, at reasonable times and within reasonable limits and in a
reasonable manner, to have access to and copy all records relating
to such article that are needed to assist the Secretary in deter-
mining whether the food is adulterated and presents a threat of se-
rious adverse health consequences or death to humans or animals.
The requirement under the preceding sentence applies to all
records relating to the manufacture, processing, packing, distribu-
tion, receipt, holding, or importation of such article maintained by
or on behalf of such person in any format (including paper and
electronic formats) and at any location.
(b) REGULATIONS
CONCERNING
RECORDKEEPING.—The Sec-
retary, in consultation and coordination, as appropriate, with other
Federal departments and agencies with responsibilities for regu-
lating food safety, may by regulation establish requirements re-
garding the establishment and maintenance, for not longer than
two years, of records by persons (excluding farms and restaurants)
who manufacture, process, pack, transport, distribute, receive,
hold, or import food, which records are needed by the Secretary for
inspection to allow the Secretary to identify the immediate pre-
vious sources and the immediate subsequent recipients of food, in-
cluding its packaging, in order to address credible threats of seri-
ous adverse health consequences or death to humans or animals.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
103
Sec. 415
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
The Secretary shall take into account the size of a business in pro-
mulgating regulations under this section.
(c) PROTECTION
OF SENSITIVE INFORMATION.—The Secretary
shall take appropriate measures to ensure that there are in effect
effective procedures to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of any
trade secret or confidential information that is obtained by the Sec-
retary pursuant to this section.
(d) LIMITATIONS.—This section shall not be construed—
(1) to limit the authority of the Secretary to inspect
records or to require establishment and maintenance of records
under any other provision of this Act;
(2) to authorize the Secretary to impose any requirements
with respect to a food to the extent that it is within the exclu-
sive jurisdiction of the Secretary of Agriculture pursuant to the
Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), the Poul-
try Products Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 451 et seq.), or the Egg
Products Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 1031 et seq.);
(3) to have any legal effect on section 552 of title 5, United
States Code, or section 1905 of title 18, United States Code; or
(4) to extend to recipes for food, financial data, pricing
data, personnel data, research data, or sales data (other than
shipment data regarding sales).
SEC. 415. ø21 U.S.C. 350d¿ REGISTRATION OF FOOD FACILITIES.
(a) REGISTRATION.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall by regulation require
that any facility engaged in manufacturing, processing, pack-
ing, or holding food for consumption in the United States be
registered with the Secretary. To be registered—
(A) for a domestic facility, the owner, operator, or
agent in charge of the facility shall submit a registration
to the Secretary; and
(B) for a foreign facility, the owner, operator, or agent
in charge of the facility shall submit a registration to the
Secretary and shall include with the registration the name
of the United States agent for the facility.
(2) REGISTRATION.—An entity (referred to in this section as
the ‘‘registrant’’) shall submit a registration under paragraph
(1) to the Secretary containing information necessary to notify
the Secretary of the name and address of each facility at
which, and all trade names under which, the registrant con-
ducts business and, when determined necessary by the Sec-
retary through guidance, the general food category (as identi-
fied under section 170.3 of title 21, Code of Federal Regula-
tions) of any food manufactured, processed, packed, or held at
such facility. The registrant shall notify the Secretary in a
timely manner of changes to such information.
(3) PROCEDURE.—Upon receipt of a completed registration
described in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall notify the reg-
istrant of the receipt of such registration and assign a registra-
tion number to each registered facility.
(4) LIST.—The Secretary shall compile and maintain an
up-to-date list of facilities that are registered under this sec-
tion. Such list and any registration documents submitted pur-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
104
Sec. 415
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
suant to this subsection shall not be subject to disclosure under
section 552 of title 5, United States Code. Information derived
from such list or registration documents shall not be subject to
disclosure under section 552 of title 5, United States Code, to
the extent that it discloses the identity or location of a specific
registered person.
(b) FACILITY.—For purposes of this section:
(1) The term ‘‘facility’’ includes any factory, warehouse, or
establishment (including a factory, warehouse, or establish-
ment of an importer) that manufactures, processes, packs, or
holds food. Such term does not include farms; restaurants;
other retail food establishments; nonprofit food establishments
in which food is prepared for or served directly to the con-
sumer; or fishing vessels (except such vessels engaged in proc-
essing as defined in section 123.3(k) of title 21, Code of Federal
Regulations).
(2) The term ‘‘domestic facility’’ means a facility located in
any of the States or Territories.
(3)(A) The term ‘‘foreign facility’’ means a facility that
manufacturers, processes, packs, or holds food, but only if food
from such facility is exported to the United States without fur-
ther processing or packaging outside the United States.
(B) A food may not be considered to have undergone fur-
ther processing or packaging for purposes of subparagraph (A)
solely on the basis that labeling was added or that any similar
activity of a de minimis nature was carried out with respect to
the food.
(c) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in this section shall be
construed to authorize the Secretary to require an application, re-
view, or licensing process.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.004
December 19, 2002 
105
CHAPTER V—DRUGS AND DEVICES
SUBCHAPTER A—DRUGS AND DEVICES
ADULTERATED DRUGS AND DEVICES
SEC. 501. ø21 U.S.C. 351¿ A drug or device shall be deemed
to be adulterated—
(a)(1) If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or
decomposed substance; or (2)(A) if it has been prepared, packed, or
held under insanitary conditions whereby it may have been con-
taminated with filth, or whereby it may have been rendered inju-
rious to health; or (B) if it is a drug and the methods used in, or
the facilities or controls used for, its manufacture, processing, pack-
ing, or holding do not conform to or are not operated or adminis-
tered in conformity with current good manufacturing practice to as-
sure that such drug meets the requirements of this Act as to safety
and has the identity and strength, and meets the quality and pu-
rity characteristics, which it purports or is represented to possess;
or (C) if it is a compounded positron emission tomography drug and
the methods used in, or the facilities and controls used for, its
compounding, processing, packing, or holding do not conform to or
are not operated or administered in conformity with the positron
emission tomography compounding standards and the official
monographs of the United States Pharmacopoeia to assure that
such drug meets the requirements of this Act as to safety and has
the identity and strength, and meets the quality and purity charac-
teristics, that it purports or is represented to possess; or (3) if its
container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poisonous or del-
eterious substance which may render the contents injurious to
health; or (4) if (A) it bears or contains, for purposes of coloring
only, a color additive which is unsafe within the meaning of section
721(a), or (B) it is a color additive the intended use of which in or
on drugs or devices is for purposes of coloring only and is unsafe
within the meaning of section 721(a); or (5) if it is a new animal
drug which is unsafe within the meaning of section 512; or (6) if
it is an animal feed bearing or containing a new animal drug, and
such animal feed is unsafe within the meaning of section 512.
(b) If it purports to be or is represented as a drug the name
of which is recognized in an official compendium, and its strength
differs from, or its quality or purity falls below, the standards set
forth in such compendium. Such determination as to strength,
quality, or purity shall be made in accordance with the tests or
methods of assay set forth in such compendium, except that when-
ever tests or methods of assay have not been prescribed in such
compendium, or such tests or methods of assay as are prescribed
are, in the judgment of the Secretary, insufficient for the making
of such determination, the Secretary shall bring such fact to the at-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
106
Sec. 501
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
tention of the appropriate body charged with the revision of such
compendium, and if such body fails within a reasonable time to
prescribe tests or methods of assay which, in the judgment of the
Secretary, are sufficient for purposes of this paragraph, then the
Secretary shall promulgate regulations prescribing appropriate
tests or methods of assay in accordance with which such deter-
mination as to strength, quality, or purity shall be made. No drug
defined in an official compendium shall be deemed to be adulter-
ated under this paragraph because it differs from the standard of
strength, quality, or purity therefor set forth in such compendium,
if its difference in strength, quality, or purity from such standards
is plainly stated on its label. Whenever a drug is recognized in both
the United States Pharmacopeia and the Homeopathic Pharma-
copeia of the United States it shall be subject to the requirements
of the United States Pharmacopeia unless it is labeled and offered
for sale as a homeopathic drug, in which case it shall be subject
to the provisions of the Homeopathic Pharmacopeia of the United
States and not to those of the United States Pharmacopeia.
(c) If it is not subject to the provisions of paragraph (b) of this
section and its strength differs from, or its purity or quality falls
below, that which it purports or is represented to possess.
(d) If it is a drug and any substance has been (1) mixed or
packed therewith so as to reduce its quality or strength or (2) sub-
stituted wholly or in part therefor.
(e)(1) If it is, or purports to be or is represented as, a device
which is subject to a performance standard established under sec-
tion 514, unless such device is in all respects in conformity with
such standard.
(2) If it is declared to be, purports to be, or is represented as,
a device that is in conformity with any standard recognized under
section 514(c) unless such device is in all respects in conformity
with such standard.
(f)(1) If it is a class III device—
(A)(i) which is required by a regulation promulgated under
subsection (b) of section 515 to have an approval under such
section of an application for premarket approval and which is
not exempt from section 515 under section 520(g), and
(ii)(I) for which an application for premarket approval or
a notice of completion of a product development protocol was
not filed with the Secretary within the ninety-day period begin-
ning on the date of the promulgation of such regulation, or
(II) for which such an application was filed and approval
of the application has been denied, suspended, or withdrawn,
or such a notice was filed and has been declared not completed
or the approval of the device under the protocol has been with-
drawn;
(B)(i) which was classified under section 513(f) into class
III, which under section 515(a) is required to have in effect an
approved application for premarket approval, and which is not
exempt from section 515 under section 520(g), and
(ii) which has an application which has been suspended or
is otherwise not in effect; or
(C) which was classified under section 520(l) into class III,
which under such section is required to have in effect an ap-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
107
Sec. 502
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should be ‘‘subparagraph’’.
proved application under section 515, and which has an appli-
cation which has been suspended or is otherwise not in effect.
(2)(A) In the case of a device classified under section 513(f) into
class III and intended solely for investigational use, paragraph 1
(1)(B) shall not apply with respect to such device during the period
ending on the ninetieth day after the date of the promulgation of
the regulations prescribing the procedures and conditions required
by section 520(g)(2).
(B) In the case of a device subject to a regulation promulgated
under subsection (b) of section 515, paragraph (1) shall not apply
with respect to such device during the period ending—
(i) on the last day of the thirtieth calendar month begin-
ning after the month in which the classification of the device
in class III became effective under section 513, or
(ii) on the ninetieth day after the date of the promulgation
of such regulation,
whichever occurs later.
(g) If it is a banned device.
(h) If it is a device and the methods used in, or the facilities
or controls used for, its manufacture, packing, storage, or installa-
tion are not in conformity with applicable requirements under sec-
tion 520(f)(1) or an applicable condition prescribed by an order
under section 520(f)(2).
(i) If it is a device for which an exemption has been granted
under section 520(g) for investigational use and the person who
was granted such exemption or any investigator who uses such de-
vice under such exemption fails to comply with a requirement pre-
scribed by or under such section.
MISBRANDED DRUGS AND DEVICES
SEC. 502. ø21 U.S.C. 352¿ A drug or device shall be deemed
to be misbranded—
(a) If its labeling is false or misleading in any particular.
Health care economic information provided to a formulary com-
mittee, or other similar entity, in the course of the committee or
the entity carrying out its responsibilities for the selection of drugs
for managed care or other similar organizations, shall not be con-
sidered to be false or misleading under this paragraph if the health
care economic information directly relates to an indication ap-
proved under section 505 or under section 351(a) of the Public
Health Service Act for such drug and is based on competent and
reliable scientific evidence. The requirements set forth in section
505(a) or in section 351(a) of the Public Health Service Act shall
not apply to health care economic information provided to such a
committee or entity in accordance with this paragraph. Information
that is relevant to the substantiation of the health care economic
information presented pursuant to this paragraph shall be made
available to the Secretary upon request. In this paragraph, the
term ‘‘health care economic information’’ means any analysis that
identifies, measures, or compares the economic consequences, in-
cluding the costs of the represented health outcomes, of the use of
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
108
Sec. 502
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
a drug to the use of another drug, to another health care interven-
tion, or to no intervention.
(b) If in a package form unless it bears a label containing (1)
the name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or dis-
tributor; and (2) an accurate statement of the quantity of the con-
tents in terms of weight, measure, or numerical count: Provided,
That under clause (2) of this paragraph reasonable variations shall
be permitted, and exemptions as to small packages shall be estab-
lished, by regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
(c) If any word, statement, or other information required by or
under authority of this Act to appear on the label or labeling is not
prominently placed thereon with such conspicuousness (as com-
pared with other words, statements, designs, or devices, in the la-
beling) and in such terms as to render it likely to be read and un-
derstood by the ordinary individual under customary conditions of
purchase and use.
ø(d) Repealed by Pub. L. 105–115, November 21, 1997.¿
(e)(1)(A) If it is a drug, unless its label bears, to the exclusion
of any other nonproprietary name (except the applicable systematic
chemical name or the chemical formula)—
(i) the established name (as defined in subparagraph (3))
of the drug, if there is such a name;
(ii) the established name and quantity or, if determined to
be appropriate by the Secretary, the proportion of each active
ingredient, including the quantity, kind, and proportion of any
alcohol, and also including whether active or not the estab-
lished name and quantity or if determined to be appropriate by
the Secretary, the proportion of any bromides, ether, chloro-
form, acetanilide, acetophenetidin, amidopyrine, antipyrine, at-
ropine, hyoscine, hyoscyamine, arsenic, digitalis, digitalis
glucosides, mercury, ouabain, strophanthin, strychnine, thy-
roid, or any derivative or preparation of any such substances,
contained therein, except that the requirement for stating the
quantity of the active ingredients, other than the quantity of
those specifically named in this subclause, shall not apply to
nonprescription drugs not intended for human use; and
(iii) the established name of each inactive ingredient listed
in alphabetical order on the outside container of the retail
package and, if determined to be appropriate by the Secretary,
on the immediate container, as prescribed in regulation pro-
mulgated by the Secretary, except that nothing in this sub-
clause shall be deemed to require that any trade secret be di-
vulged, and except that the requirements of this subclause
with respect to alphabetical order shall apply only to non-
prescription drugs that are not also cosmetics and that this
subclause shall not apply to nonprescription drugs not in-
tended for human use.
(B) For any prescription drug the established name of such
drug or ingredient, as the case may be, on such label (and on any
labeling on which a name for such drug or ingredient is used) shall
be printed prominently and in type at least half as large as that
used thereon for any proprietary name or designation for such drug
or ingredient, except that to the extent that compliance with the
requirements of subclause (ii) or (iii) of clause (A) or this clause is
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
109
Sec. 502
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
impracticable, exemptions shall be established by regulations pro-
mulgated by the Secretary.
(2) If it is a device and it has an established name, unless its
label bears, to the exclusion of any other nonproprietary name, its
established name (as defined in subparagraph (4)) prominently
printed in type at least half as large as that used thereon for any
proprietary name or designation for such device, except that to the
extent compliance with the requirements of this subparagraph is
impracticable, exemptions shall be established by regulations pro-
mulgated by the Secretary.
(3) As used in subparagraph (1), the term ‘‘established name’’,
with respect to a drug or ingredient thereof, means (A) the applica-
ble official name designated pursuant to section 508, or (B) if there
is no such name and such drug, or such ingredient, is an article
recognized in an official compendium, then the official title thereof
in such compendium, or (C) if neither clause (A) nor clause (B) of
this subparagraph applies, then the common or usual name, if any,
of such drug or of such ingredient, except that where clause (B) of
this subparagraph applies to an article recognized in the United
States Pharmacopeia and in the Homeopathic Pharmacopeia under
different official titles, the official title used in the United States
Pharmacopeia shall apply unless it is labeled and offered for sale
as a homeopathic drug, in which case the official title used in the
Homeopathic Pharmacopeia shall apply.
(4) As used in subparagraph (2), the term ‘‘established name’’
with respect to a device means (A) the applicable official name of
the device designated pursuant to section 508, (B) if there is no
such name and such device is an article recognized in an official
compendium, then the official title thereof in such compendium, or
(C) if neither clause (A) nor clause (B) of this subparagraph ap-
plies, then any common or usual name of such device.
(f) Unless its labeling bears (1) adequate directions for use; and
(2) such adequate warnings against use in those pathological condi-
tions or by children where its use may be dangerous to health, or
against unsafe dosage or methods or duration of administration or
application, in such manner and form, as are necessary for the pro-
tection of users, except that where any requirement of clause (1)
of this paragraph, as applied to any drug or device, is not necessary
for the protection of the public health, the Secretary shall promul-
gate regulations exempting such drug or device from such require-
ment. Required labeling for prescription devices intended for use in
health care facilities may be made available solely by electronic
means provided that the labeling complies with all applicable re-
quirements of law and, that the manufacturer affords health care
facilities the opportunity to request the labeling in paper form, and
after such request, promptly provides the health care facility the
requested information without additional cost.
(g) If it purports to be a drug the name of which is recognized
in an official compendium, unless it is packaged and labeled as pre-
scribed therein. The method of packing may be modified with the
consent of the Secretary. Whenever a drug is recognized in both the
United States Pharmacopeia and the Homeopathic Pharmacopeia
of the United States, it shall be subject to the requirements of the
United States Pharmacopeia with respect to packaging, and label-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
110
Sec. 502
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should be ‘‘paragraph (e)’’.
ing unless it is labeled and offered for sale as a homeopathic drug,
in which case it shall be subject to the provisions of the Homeo-
pathic Pharmacopeia of the United States, and not to those of the
United States Pharmacopeia, except that in the event of inconsist-
ency between the requirements of this paragraph and those of
paragraph (e) as to the name by which the drug or its ingredients
shall be designated, the requirements of paragraph (e) shall pre-
vail.
(h) If it has been found by the Secretary to be a drug liable
to deterioration, unless it is packaged in such form and manner,
and its label bears a statement of such precautions, as the Sec-
retary shall by regulations require as necessary for the protection
of the public health. No such regulation shall be established for any
drug recognized in an official compendium until the Secretary shall
have informed the appropriate body charged with the revision of
such compendium of the need for such packaging or labeling re-
quirements and such body shall have failed within a reasonable
time to prescribe such requirements.
(i)(1) If it is a drug and its container is so made, formed, or
filled as to be misleading; or (2) if it is an imitation of another
drug; or (3) if it is offered for sale under the name of another drug.
(j) If it is dangerous to health when used in the dosage or man-
ner; or with the frequency or duration prescribed, recommended, or
suggested in the labeling thereof.
ø(k) Repealed by Pub. L. 105–115, November 21, 1997.¿
ø(l) Repealed by Pub. L. 105–115, November 21, 1997.¿
(m) If it is a color additive the intended use of which is for the
purpose of coloring only, unless its packaging and labeling are in
conformity with such packaging and labeling requirements applica-
ble to such color additive, as may be contained in regulations
issued under section 721.
(n) In the case of any prescription drug distributed or offered
for sale in any State, unless the manufacturer, packer, or dis-
tributor thereof includes in all advertisements and other descrip-
tive printed matter issued or caused to be issued by the manufac-
turer, packer, or distributor with respect to that drug a true state-
ment of (1) the established name as defined in section 502(e) 1,
printed prominently and in type at least half as large as that used
for any trade or brand name thereof, (2) the formula showing quan-
titatively each ingredient of such drug to the extent required for la-
bels under section 502(e) 1, and (3) such other information in brief
summary relating to side effects, contraindications, and effective-
ness as shall be required in regulations which shall be issued by
the Secretary in accordance with the procedure specified in section
701(e) of this Act, except that (A) except in extraordinary cir-
cumstances, no regulation issued under this paragraph shall re-
quire prior approval by the Secretary of the content of any adver-
tisement, and (B) no advertisement of a prescription drug, pub-
lished after the effective date of regulations issued under this para-
graph applicable to advertisements of prescription drugs, shall,
with respect to the matters specified in this paragraph or covered
by such regulations, be subject to the provisions of sections 12
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
111
Sec. 502
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
2 Probably should be ‘‘This paragraph’’.
1 This sentence takes effect on the date the Convention on Psychotropic Substances, signed
at Vienna, Austria on February 21, 1971, enters into force in respect to the United States. See,
section 112 of P.L. 95–633.
through 17 of the Federal Trade Commission Act, as amended (15
U.S.C. 52–57). This paragraph (n) 2 shall not be applicable to any
printed matter which the Secretary determines to be labeling as
defined in section 201(m) of this Act. Nothing in the Convention on
Psychotropic Substances, signed at Vienna, Austria, on February
21, 1971, shall be construed to prevent drug price communications
to consumers. 1
(o) If it was manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded,
or processed in an establishment in any State not duly registered
under section 510, if it was not included in a list required by sec-
tion 510(j), if a notice or other information respecting it was not
provided as required by such section or section 510(k), or if it does
not bear such symbols from the uniform system for identification
of devices prescribed under section 510(e) as the Secretary by regu-
lation requires.
(p) If it is a drug and its packaging or labeling is in violation
of an applicable regulation issued pursuant to section 3 or 4 of the
Poison Prevention Packaging Act of 1970.
(q) In the case of any restricted device distributed or offered for
sale in any State, if (1) its advertising is false or misleading in any
particular, or (2) it is sold, distributed, or used in violation of regu-
lations prescribed under section 520(e).
(r) In the case of any restricted device distributed or offered for
sale in any State, unless the manufacturer, packer, or distributor
thereof includes in all advertisements and other descriptive printed
matter issued or caused to be issued by the manufacturer, packer,
or distributor with respect to that device (1) a true statement of the
device’s established name as defined in section 502(e), printed
prominently and in type at least half as large as that used for any
trade or brand name thereof, and (2) a brief statement of the in-
tended uses of the device and relevant warnings, precautions, side
effects, and contraindications and, in the case of specific devices
made subject to a finding by the Secretary after notice and oppor-
tunity for comment that such action is necessary to protect the
public health, a full description of the components of such device
or the formula showing quantitatively each ingredient of such de-
vice to the extent required in regulations which shall be issued by
the Secretary after an opportunity for a hearing. Except in extraor-
dinary circumstances, no regulation issued under this paragraph
shall require prior approval by the Secretary of the content of any
advertisement and no advertisement of a restricted device, pub-
lished after the effective date of this paragraph shall, with respect
to the matters specified in this paragraph or covered by regulations
issued hereunder, be subject to the provisions of sections 12
through 15 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 52–55).
This paragraph shall not be applicable to any printed matter which
the Secretary determines to be labeling as defined in section
201(m).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
112
Sec. 503
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 This subsection was added by section 301(a) of Public Law 107–250 (116 Stat. 1616). Sub-
section (b) of such section provides:
(b) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendment made by subsection (a) takes effect 18 months after
the date of the enactment [Oct. 26, 2002] of this Act, and only applies to devices introduced or
delivered for introduction into interstate commerce after such effective date.
2 This subsection was added by section 302(a)(1) of Public Law 107–250 (116 Stat. 1616). Para-
graph (2) of such subsection provides:
(2) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendment made by paragraph (1) takes effect 15 months
after the date of the enactment [Oct. 26, 2002] of this Act, and only applies to devices intro-
duced or delivered for introduction into interstate commerce after such effective date.
(s) If it is a device subject to a performance standard estab-
lished under section 514, unless it bears such labeling as may be
prescribed in such performance standard.
(t) If it is a device and there was a failure or refusal (1) to com-
ply with any requirement prescribed under section 518 respecting
the device, (2) to furnish any material or information required by
or under section 519 respecting the device, or (3) to comply with
a requirement under section 522.
(u) 1 If it is a device, unless it, or an attachment thereto,
prominently and conspicuously bears the name of the manufacturer
of the device, a generally recognized abbreviation of such name, or
a unique and generally recognized symbol identifying such manu-
facturer, except that the Secretary may waive any requirement
under this paragraph for the device if the Secretary determines
that compliance with the requirement is not feasible for the device
or would compromise the provision of reasonable assurance of the
safety or effectiveness of the device.
(v) 2 If it is a reprocessed single-use device, unless all labeling
of the device prominently and conspicuously bears the statement
‘‘Reprocessed device for single use. Reprocessed by   .’’ The name
of the manufacturer of the reprocessed device shall be placed in the
space identifying the person responsible for reprocessing.
EXEMPTIONS AND CONSIDERATION FOR CERTAIN DRUGS, DEVICES, AND
BIOLOGICAL PRODUCTS
SEC. 503. ø21 U.S.C. 353¿ (a) The Secretary is hereby directed
to promulgate regulations exempting from any labeling or pack-
aging requirement of this Act drugs and devices which are, in ac-
cordance with the practice of the trade, to be processed, labeled, or
repacked in substantial quantities at establishments other than
those where originally processed or packed, on condition that such
drugs and devices are not adulterated or misbranded, under the
provisions of this Act upon removal from such processing, labeling,
or repacking establishment.
(b)(1) A drug intended for use by man which—
(A) because of its toxicity or other potentiality for harmful
effect, or the method of its use, or the collateral measures nec-
essary to its use, is not safe for use except under the super-
vision of a practitioner licensed by law to administer such
drug; or
(B) is limited by an approved application under section 505
to use under the professional supervision of a practitioner li-
censed by law to administer such drug;
shall be dispensed only (i) upon a written prescription of a practi-
tioner licensed by law to administer such drug, or (ii) upon an oral
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
113
Sec. 503
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
prescription of such practitioner which is reduced promptly to writ-
ing and filed by the pharmacist, or (iii) by refilling any such writ-
ten or oral prescription if such refilling is authorized by the pre-
scriber either in the original prescription or by oral order which is
reduced promptly to writing and filed by the pharmacist. The act
of dispensing a drug contrary to the provisions of this paragraph
shall be deemed to be an act which results in the drug being mis-
branded while held for sale.
(2) Any drug dispensed by filling or refilling a written or oral
prescription of a practitioner licensed by law to administer such
drug shall be exempt from the requirements of section 502, except
paragraphs (a), (i) (2) and (3), (k), and (l), and the packaging re-
quirements of paragraphs (g), (h), and (p), if the drug bears a label
containing the name and address of the dispenser, the serial num-
ber and date of the prescription or of its filling, the name of the
prescriber, and, if stated in the prescription, the name of the pa-
tient, and the directions for use and cautionary statements, if any,
contained in such prescription. This exemption shall not apply to
any drug dispensed in the course of the conduct of a business of
dispensing drugs pursuant to diagnosis by mail, or to a drug dis-
pensed in violation of paragraph (1) of this subsection.
(3) The Secretary may by regulation remove drugs subject to
section 505 from the requirements of paragraph (1) of this sub-
section when such requirements are not necessary for the protec-
tion of the public health.
(4)(A) A drug that is subject to paragraph (1) shall be deemed
to be misbranded if at any time prior to dispensing the label of the
drug fails to bear, at a minimum, the symbol ‘‘Rx only’’.
(B) A drug to which paragraph (1) does not apply shall be
deemed to be misbranded if at any time prior to dispensing the
label of the drug bears the symbol described in subparagraph (A).
(5) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to relieve any
person from any requirement prescribed by or under authority of
law with respect to drugs now included or which may hereafter be
included within the classifications stated in section 3220 of the In-
ternal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C. 3220), or to marihuana as defined
in section 3238(b) of the Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C.
3238(b)).
(c)(1) No person may sell, purchase, or trade or offer to sell,
purchase, or trade any drug sample. For purposes of this para-
graph and subsection (d), the term ‘‘drug sample’’ means a unit of
a drug, subject to subsection (b), which is not intended to be sold
and is intended to promote the sale of the drug. Nothing in this
paragraph shall subject an officer or executive of a drug manufac-
turer or distributor to criminal liability solely because of a sale,
purchase, trade, or offer to sell, purchase, or trade in violation of
this paragraph by other employees of the manufacturer or dis-
tributor.
(2) No person may sell, purchase, or trade, offer to sell, pur-
chase, or trade, or counterfeit any coupon. For purposes of this
paragraph, the term ‘‘coupon’’ means a form which may be re-
deemed, at no cost or at a reduced cost, for a drug which is pre-
scribed in accordance with subsection (b).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
114
Sec. 503
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(3)(A) No person may sell, purchase, or trade, or offer to sell,
purchase, or trade, any drug—
(i) which is subject to subsection (b), and
(ii)(I) which was purchased by a public or private hospital
or other health care entity, or
(II) which was donated or supplied at a reduced price to
a charitable organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
(B) Subparagraph (A) does not apply to—
(i) the purchase or other acquisition by a hospital or other
health care entity which is a member of a group purchasing or-
ganization of a drug for its own use from the group purchasing
organization or from other hospitals or health care entities
which are members of such organization,
(ii) the sale, purchase, or trade of a drug or an offer to sell,
purchase, or trade a drug by an organization described in sub-
paragraph (A)(ii)(II) to a nonprofit affiliate of the organization
to the extent otherwise permitted by law,
(iii) a sale, purchase, or trade of a drug or an offer to sell,
purchase, or trade a drug among hospitals or other health care
entities which are under common control,
(iv) a sale, purchase, or trade of a drug or an offer to sell,
purchase, or trade a drug for emergency medical reasons, or
(v) a sale, purchase, or trade of a drug, an offer to sell,
purchase, or trade a drug, or the dispensing of a drug pursuant
to a prescription executed in accordance with subsection (b).
For purposes of this paragraph, the term ‘‘entity’’ does not include
a wholesale distributor of drugs or a retail pharmacy licensed
under State law and the term ‘‘emergency medical reasons’’ in-
cludes transfers of a drug between health care entities or from a
health care entity to a retail pharmacy undertaken to alleviate
temporary shortages of the drug arising from delays in or interrup-
tions of regular distribution schedules.
(d)(1) Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), no person
may distribute any drug sample. For purposes of this subsection,
the term ‘‘distribute’’ does not include the providing of a drug sam-
ple to a patient by a—
(A) practitioner licensed to prescribe such drug,
(B) health care professional acting at the direction and
under the supervision of such a practitioner, or
(C) pharmacy of a hospital or of another health care entity
that is acting at the direction of such a practitioner and that
received such sample pursuant to paragraph (2) or (3).
(2)(A) The manufacturer or authorized distributor of record of
a drug subject to subsection (b) may, in accordance with this para-
graph, distribute drug samples by mail or common carrier to prac-
titioners licensed to prescribe such drugs or, at the request of a li-
censed practitioner, to pharmacies of hospitals or other health care
entities. Such a distribution of drug samples may only be made—
(i) in response to a written request for drug samples made
on a form which meets the requirements of subparagraph (B),
and
(ii) under a system which requires the recipient of the
drug sample to execute a written receipt for the drug sample
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
115
Sec. 503
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
upon its delivery and the return of the receipt to the manufac-
turer or authorized distributor of record.
(B) A written request for a drug sample required by subpara-
graph (A)(i) shall contain—
(i) the name, address, professional designation, and signa-
ture of the practitioner making the request,
(ii) the identity of the drug sample requested and the
quantity requested,
(iii) the name of the manufacturer of the drug sample re-
quested, and
(iv) the date of the request.
(C) Each drug manufacturer or authorized distributor of record
which makes distributions by mail or common carrier under this
paragraph shall maintain, for a period of 3 years, the request forms
submitted for such distributions and the receipts submitted for
such distributions and shall maintain a record of distributions of
drug samples which identifies the drugs distributed and the recipi-
ents of the distributions. Forms, receipts, and records required to
be maintained under this subparagraph shall be made available by
the drug manufacturer or authorized distributor of record to Fed-
eral and State officials engaged in the regulation of drugs and in
the enforcement of laws applicable to drugs.
(3) The manufacturer or authorized distributor of record of a
drug subject to subsection (b) may, by means other than mail or
common carrier, distribute drug samples only if the manufacturer
or authorized distributor of record makes the distributions in ac-
cordance with subparagraph (A) and carries out the activities de-
scribed in subparagraphs (B) through (F) as follows:
(A) Drug samples may only be distributed—
(i) to practitioners licensed to prescribe such drugs if
they make a written request for the drug samples, or
(ii) at the written request of such a licensed practi-
tioner, to pharmacies of hospitals or other health care enti-
ties.
A written request for drug samples shall be made on a form
which contains the practitioner’s name, address, and profes-
sional designation, the identity of the drug sample requested,
the quantity of drug samples requested, the name of the manu-
facturer or authorized distributor of record of the drug sample,
the date of the request and signature of the practitioner mak-
ing the request.
(B) Drug manufacturers or authorized distributors of
record shall store drug samples under conditions that will
maintain their stability, integrity, and effectiveness and will
assure that the drug samples will be free of contamination, de-
terioration, and adulteration.
(C) Drug manufacturers or authorized distributors of
record shall conduct, at least annually, a complete and accu-
rate inventory of all drug samples in the possession of rep-
resentatives of the manufacturer or authorized distributor of
record. Drug manufacturers or authorized distributors of
record shall maintain lists of the names and address of each
of their representatives who distribute drug samples and of the
sites where drug samples are stored. Drug manufacturers or
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
116
Sec. 503
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
authorized distributors of record shall maintain records for at
least 3 years of all drug samples distributed, destroyed, or re-
turned to the manufacturer or authorized distributor of record,
of all inventories maintained under this subparagraph, of all
thefts or significant losses of drug samples, and of all requests
made under subparagraph (A) for drug samples. Records and
lists maintained under this subparagraph shall be made avail-
able by the drug manufacturer or authorized distributor of
record to the Secretary upon request.
(D) Drug manufacturers or authorized distributors of
record shall notify the Secretary of any significant loss of drug
samples and any known theft of drug samples.
(E) Drug manufacturers or authorized distributors of
record shall report to the Secretary any conviction of their rep-
resentatives for violations of subsection (c)(1) or a State law be-
cause of the sale, purchase, or trade of a drug sample or the
offer to sell, purchase, or trade a drug sample.
(F) Drug manufacturers or authorized distributors of
record shall provide to the Secretary the name and telephone
number of the individual responsible for responding to a re-
quest for information respecting drug samples.
(e)(1)(A) Each person who is engaged in the wholesale distribu-
tion of a drug subject to subsection (b) and who is not the manufac-
turer or an authorized distributor of record of such drug shall, be-
fore each wholesale distribution of such drug (including each dis-
tribution to an authorized distributor of record or to a retail phar-
macy), provide to the person who receives the drug a statement (in
such form and containing such information as the Secretary may
require) identifying each prior sale, purchase, or trade of such drug
(including the date of the transaction and the names and addresses
of all parties to the transaction).
(B) Each manufacturer of a drug subject to subsection (b) shall
maintain at its corporate offices a current list of the authorized dis-
tributors of record of such drug.
(2)(A) No person may engage in the wholesale distribution in
interstate commerce of drugs subject to subsection (b) in a State
unless such person is licensed by the State in accordance with the
guidelines issued under subparagraph (B).
(B) The Secretary shall by regulation issue guidelines estab-
lishing minimum standards, terms, and conditions for the licensing
of persons to make wholesale distributions in interstate commerce
of drugs subject to subsection (b). Such guidelines shall prescribe
requirements for the storage and handling of such drugs and for
the establishment and maintenance of records of the distributions
of such drugs.
(3) For the purposes of this subsection and subsection (d)—
(A) the term ‘‘authorized distributors of record’’ means
those distributors with whom a manufacturer has established
an ongoing relationship to distribute such manufacturer’s prod-
ucts, and
(B) the term ‘‘wholesale distribution’’ means distribution of
drugs subject to subsection (b) to other than the consumer or
patient but does not include intracompany sales and does not
include distributions of drugs described in subsection (c)(3)(B).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
117
Sec. 503
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(f)(1)(A) A drug intended for use by animals other than man,
other than a veterinary feed directive drug intended for use in ani-
mal feed or an animal feed bearing or containing a veterinary feed
directive drug, which—
(i) because of its toxicity or other potentiality for harmful
effect, or the method of its use, or the collateral measures nec-
essary for its use, is not safe for animal use except under the
professional supervision of a licensed veterinarian, or
(ii) is limited by an approved application under subsection
(b) of section 512 to use under the professional supervision of
a licensed veterinarian,
shall be dispensed only by or upon the lawful written or oral order
of a licensed veterinarian in the course of the veterinarian’s profes-
sional practice.
(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), an order is lawful if the
order—
(i) is a prescription or other order authorized by law,
(ii) is, if an oral order, promptly reduced to writing by the
person lawfully filling the order, and filed by that person, and
(iii) is refilled only if authorized in the original order or in
a subsequent oral order promptly reduced to writing by the
person lawfully filling the order, and filed by that person.
(C) The act of dispensing a drug contrary to the provisions of
this paragraph shall be deemed to be an act which results in the
drug being misbranded while held for sale.
(2) Any drug when dispensed in accordance with paragraph (1)
of this subsection—
(A) Shall be exempt from the requirements of section 502,
except subsections (a), (g), (h), (i)(2), (i)(3), and (p) of such sec-
tion, and
(B) shall be exempt from the packaging requirements of
subsections (g), (h), and (p) of such section, if—
(i) when dispensed by a licensed veterinarian, the drug
bears a label containing the name and address of the prac-
titioner and any directions for use and cautionary state-
ments specified by the practitioner, or
(ii) when dispensed by filling the lawful order of a li-
censed veterinarian, the drug bears a label containing the
name and address of the dispenser, the serial number and
date of the order or of its filing, the name of the licensed
veterinarian, and the directions for use and cautionary
statements, if any, contained in such order.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to any drug dispensed in
the course of the conduct of a business of dispensing drugs pursu-
ant to diagnosis by mail.
(3) The Secretary may by regulation exempt drugs for animals
other than man subject to section 512 from the requirements of
paragraph (1) when such requirements are not necessary for the
protection of the public health.
(4) A drug which is subject to paragraph (1) shall be deemed
to be misbranded if at any time prior to dispensing its label fails
to bear the statement ‘‘Caution: Federal law restricts this drug to
use by or on the order of a licensed veterinarian.’’. A drug to which
paragraph (1) does not apply shall be deemed to be misbranded if
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
118
Sec. 503
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘1 year after the date of enactment of this subsection’’ and insert
‘‘November 28, 1991’’.
at any time prior to dispensing its label bears the statement speci-
fied in the preceding sentence.
(g)(1) The Secretary shall in accordance with this subsection
assign an agency center to regulate products that constitute a com-
bination of a drug, device, or biological product. The Secretary shall
determine the primary mode of action of the combination product.
If the Secretary determines that the primary mode of action is that
of—
(A) a drug (other than a biological product), the agency
center charged with premarket review of drugs shall have pri-
mary jurisdiction,
(B) a device, the agency center charged with premarket re-
view of devices shall have primary jurisdiction, or
(C) a biological product, the agency center charged with
premarket review of biological products shall have primary ju-
risdiction.
(2) Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the Secretary from
using any agency resources of the Food and Drug Administration
necessary to ensure adequate review of the safety, effectiveness, or
substantial equivalence of an article.
(3) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to implement
market clearance procedures in accordance with paragraphs (1) and
(2) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this sub-
section. 1
(4)(A) Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment
of this paragraph, the Secretary shall establish within the Office of
the Commissioner of Food and Drugs an office to ensure the
prompt assignment of combination products to agency centers, the
timely and effective premarket review of such products, and con-
sistent and appropriate postmarket regulation of like products sub-
ject to the same statutory requirements to the extent permitted by
law. Additionally, the office shall, in determining whether a prod-
uct is to be designated a combination product, consult with the
component within the Office of the Commissioner of Food and
Drugs that is responsible for such determinations. Such office (re-
ferred to in this paragraph as the ‘‘Office’’) shall have appropriate
scientific and medical expertise, and shall be headed by a director.
(B) In carrying out this subsection, the Office shall, for each
combination product, promptly assign an agency center with pri-
mary jurisdiction in accordance with paragraph (1) for the pre-
market review of such product.
(C)(i) In carrying out this subsection, the Office shall ensure
timely and effective premarket reviews by overseeing the timeli-
ness of and coordinating reviews involving more than one agency
center.
(ii) In order to ensure the timeliness of the premarket review
of a combination product, the agency center with primary jurisdic-
tion for the product, and the consulting agency center, shall be re-
sponsible to the Office with respect to the timeliness of the pre-
market review.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
119
Sec. 503
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(D) In carrying out this subsection, the Office shall ensure the
consistency and appropriateness of postmarket regulation of like
products subject to the same statutory requirements to the extent
permitted by law.
(E)(i) Any dispute regarding the timeliness of the premarket
review of a combination product may be presented to the Office for
resolution, unless the dispute is clearly premature.
(ii) During the review process, any dispute regarding the sub-
stance of the premarket review may be presented to the Commis-
sioner of Food and Drugs after first being considered by the agency
center with primary jurisdiction of the premarket review, under the
scientific dispute resolution procedures for such center. The Com-
missioner of Food and Drugs shall consult with the Director of the
Office in resolving the substantive dispute.
(F) The Secretary, acting through the Office, shall review each
agreement, guidance, or practice of the Secretary that is specific to
the assignment of combination products to agency centers and shall
determine whether the agreement, guidance, or practice is con-
sistent with the requirements of this subsection. In carrying out
such review, the Secretary shall consult with stakeholders and the
directors of the agency centers. After such consultation, the Sec-
retary shall determine whether to continue in effect, modify, revise,
or eliminate such agreement, guidance, or practice, and shall pub-
lish in the Federal Register a notice of the availability of such
modified or revised agreement, guidance or practice. Nothing in
this paragraph shall be construed as preventing the Secretary from
following each agreement, guidance, or practice until continued,
modified, revised, or eliminated.
(G) Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of
this paragraph and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall report
to the appropriate committees of Congress on the activities and im-
pact of the Office. The report shall include provisions—
(i) describing the numbers and types of combination prod-
ucts under review and the timeliness in days of such assign-
ments, reviews, and dispute resolutions;
(ii) identifying the number of premarket reviews of such
products that involved a consulting agency center; and
(iii) describing improvements in the consistency of
postmarket regulation of combination products.
(H) Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to limit the
regulatory authority of any agency center.
(5) As used in this subsection:
A) The term ‘‘agency center’’ means a center or alternative
organizational component of the Food and Drug Administra-
tion.
(B) The term ‘‘biological product’’ has the meaning given
the term in section 351(i) of the Public Health Service Act (42
U.S.C. 262(i)).
(C) The term ‘‘market clearance’’ includes—
(i) approval of an application under section 505, 507,
515, or 520(g),
(ii) a finding of substantial equivalence under this sub-
chapter, and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
120
Sec. 503A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(iii) approval of a biologics license application under
subsection (a) of section 351 of the Public Health Service
Act (42 U.S.C. 262).
SEC. 503A. ø21 U.S.C. 353a¿ PHARMACY COMPOUNDING.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Sections 501(a)(2)(B), 502(f)(1), and 505 shall
not apply to a drug product if the drug product is compounded for
an identified individual patient based on the unsolicited receipt of
a valid prescription order or a notation, approved by the pre-
scribing practitioner, on the prescription order that a compounded
product is necessary for the identified patient, if the drug product
meets the requirements of this section, and if the compounding—
(1) is by—
(A) a licensed pharmacist in a State licensed phar-
macy or a Federal facility, or
(B) a licensed physician,
on the prescription order for such individual patient made by
a licensed physician or other licensed practitioner authorized
by State law to prescribe drugs; or
(2)(A) is by a licensed pharmacist or licensed physician in
limited quantities before the receipt of a valid prescription
order for such individual patient; and
(B) is based on a history of the licensed pharmacist or li-
censed physician receiving valid prescription orders for the
compounding of the drug product, which orders have been gen-
erated solely within an established relationship between—
(i) the licensed pharmacist or licensed physician; and
(ii)(I) such individual patient for whom the prescrip-
tion order will be provided; or
(II) the physician or other licensed practitioner who
will write such prescription order.
(b) COMPOUNDED DRUG.—
(1) LICENSED
PHARMACIST
AND
LICENSED
PHYSICIAN.—A
drug product may be compounded under subsection (a) if the
licensed pharmacist or licensed physician—
(A) compounds the drug product using bulk drug sub-
stances, as defined in regulations of the Secretary pub-
lished at section 207.3(a)(4) of title 21 of the Code of Fed-
eral Regulations—
(i) that—
(I) comply with the standards of an applicable
United States Pharmacopoeia or National For-
mulary monograph, if a monograph exists, and the
United States Pharmacopoeia chapter on phar-
macy compounding;
(II) if such a monograph does not exist, are
drug substances that are components of drugs ap-
proved by the Secretary; or
(III) if such a monograph does not exist and
the drug substance is not a component of a drug
approved by the Secretary, that appear on a list
developed by the Secretary through regulations
issued by the Secretary under subsection (d);
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
121
Sec. 503A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(ii) that are manufactured by an establishment
that is registered under section 510 (including a for-
eign establishment that is registered under section
510(i)); and
(iii) that are accompanied by valid certificates of
analysis for each bulk drug substance;
(B) compounds the drug product using ingredients
(other than bulk drug substances) that comply with the
standards of an applicable United States Pharmacopoeia
or National Formulary monograph, if a monograph exists,
and the United States Pharmacopoeia chapter on phar-
macy compounding;
(C) does not compound a drug product that appears on
a list published by the Secretary in the Federal Register
of drug products that have been withdrawn or removed
from the market because such drug products or compo-
nents of such drug products have been found to be unsafe
or not effective; and
(D) does not compound regularly or in inordinate
amounts (as defined by the Secretary) any drug products
that are essentially copies of a commercially available drug
product.
(2) DEFINITION.—For purposes of paragraph (1)(D), the
term ‘‘essentially a copy of a commercially available drug prod-
uct’’ does not include a drug product in which there is a
change, made for an identified individual patient, which pro-
duces for that patient a significant difference, as determined by
the prescribing practitioner, between the compounded drug and
the comparable commercially available drug product.
(3) DRUG PRODUCT.—A drug product may be compounded
under subsection (a) only if—
(A) such drug product is not a drug product identified
by the Secretary by regulation as a drug product that pre-
sents demonstrable difficulties for compounding that rea-
sonably demonstrate an adverse effect on the safety or ef-
fectiveness of that drug product; and
(B) such drug product is compounded in a State—
(i) that has entered into a memorandum of under-
standing with the Secretary which addresses the dis-
tribution of inordinate amounts of compounded drug
products interstate and provides for appropriate inves-
tigation by a State agency of complaints relating to
compounded drug products distributed outside such
State; or
(ii) that has not entered into the memorandum of
understanding described in clause (i) and the licensed
pharmacist, licensed pharmacy, or licensed physician
distributes (or causes to be distributed) compounded
drug products out of the State in which they are com-
pounded in quantities that do not exceed 5 percent of
the total prescription orders dispensed or distributed
by such pharmacy or physician.
The Secretary shall, in consultation with the National Associa-
tion of Boards of Pharmacy, develop a standard memorandum
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
122
Sec. 504
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
of understanding for use by the States in complying with sub-
paragraph (B)(i).
(c) ADVERTISING AND PROMOTION.—A drug may be compounded
under subsection (a) only if the pharmacy, licensed pharmacist, or
licensed physician does not advertise or promote the compounding
of any particular drug, class of drug, or type of drug. The phar-
macy, licensed pharmacist, or licensed physician may advertise and
promote the compounding service provided by the licensed phar-
macist or licensed physician.
(d) REGULATIONS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall issue regulations to
implement this section. Before issuing regulations to imple-
ment subsections (b)(1)(A)(i)(III), (b)(1)(C), or (b)(3)(A), the Sec-
retary shall convene and consult an advisory committee on
compounding unless the Secretary determines that the
issuance of such regulations before consultation is necessary to
protect the public health. The advisory committee shall include
representatives from the National Association of Boards of
Pharmacy, the United States Pharmacopoeia, pharmacy, physi-
cian, and consumer organizations, and other experts selected
by the Secretary.
(2) LIMITING COMPOUNDING.—The Secretary, in consulta-
tion with the United States Pharmacopoeia Convention, Incor-
porated, shall promulgate regulations identifying drug sub-
stances that may be used in compounding under subsection
(b)(1)(A)(i)(III) for which a monograph does not exist or which
are not components of drug products approved by the Sec-
retary. The Secretary shall include in the regulation the cri-
teria for such substances, which shall include historical use, re-
ports in peer reviewed medical literature, or other criteria the
Secretary may identify.
(e) APPLICATION.—This section shall not apply to—
(1) compounded positron emission tomography drugs as de-
fined in section 201(ii); or
(2) radiopharmaceuticals.
(f) 
DEFINITION.—As 
used 
in 
this 
section, 
the 
term
‘‘compounding’’ does not include mixing, reconstituting, or other
such acts that are performed in accordance with directions con-
tained in approved labeling provided by the product’s manufacturer
and other manufacturer directions consistent with that labeling.
VETERINARY FEED DIRECTIVE DRUGS
SEC. 504. ø21 U.S.C. 354¿ (a)(1) A drug intended for use in or
on animal feed which is limited by an approved application filed
pursuant to section 512(b) to use under the professional super-
vision of a licensed veterinarian is a veterinary feed directive drug.
Any animal feed bearing or containing a veterinary feed directive
drug shall be fed to animals only by or upon a lawful veterinary
feed directive issued by a licensed veterinarian in the course of the
veterinarian’s professional practice. When labeled, distributed,
held, and used in accordance with this section, a veterinary feed di-
rective drug and any animal feed bearing or containing a veteri-
nary feed directive drug shall be exempt from section 502(f).
(2) A veterinary feed directive is lawful if it—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
123
Sec. 504
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(A) contains such information as the Secretary may by
general regulation or by order require; and
(B) is in compliance with the conditions and indications for
use of the drug set forth in the notice published pursuant to
section 512(i).
(3)(A) Any persons involved in the distribution or use of animal
feed bearing or containing a veterinary feed directive drug and the
licensed veterinarian issuing the veterinary feed directive shall
maintain a copy of the veterinary feed directive applicable to each
such feed, except in the case of a person distributing such feed to
another person for further distribution. Such person distributing
the feed shall maintain a written acknowledgment from the person
to whom the feed is shipped stating that that person shall not ship
or move such feed to an animal production facility without a veteri-
nary feed directive or ship such feed to another person for further
distribution unless that person has provided the same written ac-
knowledgment to its immediate supplier.
(B) Every person required under subparagraph (A) to maintain
records, and every person in charge or custody thereof, shall, upon
request of an officer or employee designated by the Secretary, per-
mit such officer or employee at all reasonable times to have access
to and copy and verify such records.
(C) Any person who distributes animal feed bearing or con-
taining a veterinary feed directive drug shall upon first engaging
in such distribution notify the Secretary of that person’s name and
place of business. The failure to provide such notification shall be
deemed to be an act which results in the drug being misbranded.
(b) A veterinary feed directive drug and any feed bearing or
containing a veterinary feed directive drug shall be deemed to be
misbranded if their labeling fails to bear such cautionary statement
and such other information as the Secretary may by general regu-
lation or by order prescribe, or their advertising fails to conform to
the conditions and indications for use published pursuant to section
512(i) or fails to contain the general cautionary statement pre-
scribed by the Secretary.
(c) Neither a drug subject to this section, nor animal feed bear-
ing or containing such a drug, shall be deemed to be a prescription
article under any Federal or State law.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
124
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 The application of this section as amended by the Drug Amendments of 1962 (P.L. 87–781)
is stated as follows by sec. 107(c) of that Act:
øSec. 107¿ (c)(1) As used in this subsection the term ‘‘enactment date’’ means the date of en-
actment of this Act øOctober 10, 1962¿; and the term ‘‘basic Act’’ means the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act.
(2) An application filed pursuant to section 505(b) of the basic Act which was ‘‘effective’’ within
the meaning of that Act on the day immediately preceding the enactment date shall be deemed,
as of the enactment date, to be an application ‘‘approved’’ by the Secretary within the meaning
of the basic Act as amended by this Act.
(3) In the case of any drug with respect to which an application filed under section 505(b)
of the basic Act is deemed to be an approved application on the enactment date by virtue of
paragraph (2) of this subsection—
(A) the amendments made by this Act to section 201(p), and to subsections (b) and (d)
of section 505, of the basic Act, insofar as such amendments relate to the effectiveness of
drugs, shall not, so long as approval of such application is not withdrawn or suspended pur-
suant to section 505(e) of that Act, apply to such drug when intended solely for use under
conditions prescribed, recommended, or suggested in labeling covered by such approved ap-
plication, but shall apply to any changed use, or conditions of use, prescribed, recommended,
or suggested in its labeling, including such conditions of use as are the subject of an amend-
ment or supplement to such application pending on, or filed after, the enactment date; and
(B) clause (3) of the first sentence of section 505(e) of the basic Act, as amended by this
Act, shall not apply to such drug when intended solely for use under conditions prescribed,
recommended, or suggested in labeling covered by such approved application (except with
respect to such use, or conditions of use, as are the subject of an amendment or supplement
to such approved application, which amendment or supplement has been approved after the
enactment date under section 505 of the basic Act as amended by this Act) until whichever
of the following first occurs: (i) the expiration of the two-year period beginning with the en-
actment date; (ii) the effective date of an order under section 505(e) of the basic Act, other
than clause (3) of the first sentence of such section 505(e), withdrawing or suspending the
approval of such application.
(4) In the case of any drug which, on the day immediately preceding the enactment date, (A)
was commercially used or sold in the United States, (B) was not a new drug as defined by sec-
tion 201(p) of the basic Act as then in force, and (C) was not covered by an effective application
under section 505 of that Act, the amendments to section 201(p) made by this Act shall not
apply to such drug when intended solely for use under conditions prescribed, recommended, or
suggested in labeling with respect to such drug on that day.
NEW DRUGS
SEC. 505. 1 ø21 U.S.C. 355¿ (a) No person shall introduce or de-
liver for introduction into interstate commerce any new drug, un-
less an approval of an application filed pursuant to subsection (b)
or (j) is effective with respect to such drug.
(b)(1) Any person may file with the Secretary an application
with respect to any drug subject to the provisions of subsection (a).
Such persons shall submit to the Secretary as a part of the applica-
tion (A) full reports of investigations which have been made to
show whether or not such drug is safe for use and whether such
drug is effective in use; (B) a full list of the articles used as compo-
nents of such drug; (C) a full statement of the composition of such
drug; (D) a full description of the methods used in, and the facili-
ties and controls used for, the manufacture, processing, and pack-
ing of such drug; (E) such samples of such drug and of the articles
used as components thereof as the Secretary may require; and (F)
specimens of the labeling proposed to be used for such drug. The
applicant shall file with the application the patent number and the
expiration date of any patent which claims the drug for which the
applicant submitted the application or which claims a method of
using such drug and with respect to which a claim of patent in-
fringement could reasonably be asserted if a person not licensed by
the owner engaged in the manufacture use, or sale of the drug. If
an application is filed under this subsection for a drug and a patent
which claims such drug or a method of using such drug is issued
after the filing date but before approval of the application, the ap-
plicant shall amend the application to include the information re-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
125
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
quired by the preceding sentence. Upon approval of the application,
the Secretary shall publish information submitted under the two
preceding sentences. The Secretary shall, in consultation with the
Director of the National Institutes of Health and with representa-
tives of the drug manufacturing industry, review and develop guid-
ance, as appropriate, on the inclusion of women and minorities in
clinical trials required by clause (A).
(2) An application submitted under paragraph (1) for a drug for
which the investigations described in clause (A) of such paragraph
and relied upon by the applicant for approval of the application
were not conducted by or for the applicant and for which the appli-
cant has not obtained a right of reference or use from the person
by or for whom the investigations were conducted shall also
include—
(A) a certification, in the opinion of the applicant and to
the best of his knowledge, with respect to each patent which
claims the drug for which such investigations were conducted
or which claims a use for such drug for which the applicant is
seeking approval under this subsection and for which informa-
tion is required to be filed under paragraph (1) or subsection
(c)—
(i) that such patent information has not been filed,
(ii) that such patent has expired,
(iii) of the date on which such patent will expire, or
(iv) that such patent is invalid or will not be infringed
by the manufacture, use, or sale of the new drug for which
the application is submitted; and
(B) if with respect to the drug for which investigations de-
scribed in paragraph (1)(A) were conducted information was
filed under paragraph (1) or subsection (c) for a method of use
patent which does not claim a use for which the applicant is
seeking approval under this subsection, a statement that the
method of use patent does not claim such a use.
(3)(A) An applicant who makes a certification described in
paragraph (2)(A)(iv) shall include in the application a statement
that the applicant will give the notice required by subparagraph
(B) to—
(i) each owner of the patent which is the subject of the cer-
tification or the representative of such owner designated to re-
ceive such notice, and
(ii) the holder of the approved application under subsection
(b) for the drug which is claimed by the patent or a use of
which is claimed by the patent or the representative of such
holder designated to receive such notice.
(B) The notice referred to in subparagraph (A) shall state that
an application has been submitted under this subsection for the
drug with respect to which the certification is made to obtain ap-
proval to engage in the commercial manufacture, use, or sale of the
drug before the expiration of the patent referred to in the certifi-
cation. Such notice shall include a detailed statement of the factual
and legal basis of the applicant’s opinion that the patent is not
valid or will not be infringed.
(C) If an application is amended to include a certification de-
scribed in paragraph (2)(A)(iv), the notice required by subpara-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
126
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
graph (B) shall be given when the amended application is sub-
mitted.
(4)(A) The Secretary shall issue guidance for the individuals
who review applications submitted under paragraph (1) or under
section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, which shall relate to
promptness in conducting the review, technical excellence, lack of
bias and conflict of interest, and knowledge of regulatory and sci-
entific standards, and which shall apply equally to all individuals
who review such applications.
(B) The Secretary shall meet with a sponsor of an investigation
or an applicant for approval for a drug under this subsection or sec-
tion 351 of the Public Health Service Act if the sponsor or applicant
makes a reasonable written request for a meeting for the purpose
of reaching agreement on the design and size of clinical trials in-
tended to form the primary basis of an effectiveness claim. The
sponsor or applicant shall provide information necessary for discus-
sion and agreement on the design and size of the clinical trials.
Minutes of any such meeting shall be prepared by the Secretary
and made available to the sponsor or applicant upon request.
(C) Any agreement regarding the parameters of the design and
size of clinical trials of a new drug under this paragraph that is
reached between the Secretary and a sponsor or applicant shall be
reduced to writing and made part of the administrative record by
the Secretary. Such agreement shall not be changed after the test-
ing begins, except—
(i) with the written agreement of the sponsor or applicant;
or
(ii) pursuant to a decision, made in accordance with sub-
paragraph (D) by the director of the reviewing division, that a
substantial scientific issue essential to determining the safety
or effectiveness of the drug has been identified after the testing
has begun.
(D) A decision under subparagraph (C)(ii) by the director shall
be in writing and the Secretary shall provide to the sponsor or ap-
plicant an opportunity for a meeting at which the director and the
sponsor or applicant will be present and at which the director will
document the scientific issue involved.
(E) The written decisions of the reviewing division shall be
binding upon, and may not directly or indirectly be changed by, the
field or compliance division personnel unless such field or compli-
ance division personnel demonstrate to the reviewing division why
such decision should be modified.
(F) No action by the reviewing division may be delayed because
of the unavailability of information from or action by field per-
sonnel unless the reviewing division determines that a delay is nec-
essary to assure the marketing of a safe and effective drug.
(G) For purposes of this paragraph, the reviewing division is
the division responsible for the review of an application for ap-
proval of a drug under this subsection or section 351 of the Public
Health Service Act (including all scientific and medical matters,
chemistry, manufacturing, and controls).
(c)(1) Within one hundred and eighty days after the filing of an
application under subsection (b), or such additional period as may
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
127
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘the date of the enactment of this sentence’’ and insert ‘‘Sep-
tember 24, 1984’’.
be agreed upon by the Secretary and the applicant, the Secretary
shall either—
(A) approve the application if he then finds that none of
the grounds for denying approval specified in subsection (d) ap-
plies, or
(B) give the applicant notice of an opportunity for a hear-
ing before the Secretary under subsection (d) on the question
whether such application is approvable. If the applicant elects
to accept the opportunity for hearing by written request within
thirty days after such notice, such hearing shall commence not
more than ninety days after the expiration of such thirty days
unless the Secretary and the applicant otherwise agree. Any
such hearing shall thereafter be conducted on an expedited
basis and the Secretary’s order thereon shall be issued within
ninety days after the date fixed by the Secretary for filing final
briefs.
(2) If the patent information described in subsection (b) could
not be filed with the submission of an application under subsection
(b) because the application was filed before the patent information
was required under subsection (b) or a patent was issued after the
application was approved under such subsection, the holder of an
approved application shall file with the Secretary, the patent num-
ber and the expiration date of any patent which claims the drug
for which the application was submitted or which claims a method
of using such drug and with respect to which a claim of patent in-
fringement could reasonably be asserted if a person not licensed by
the owner engaged in the manufacture, use, or sale of the drug. If
the holder of an approved application could not file patent informa-
tion under subsection (b) because it was not required at the time
the application was approved, the holder shall file such information
under this subsection not later than thirty days after the date of
the enactment of this sentence 1, and if the holder of an approved
application could not file patent information under subsection (b)
because no patent had been issued when an application was filed
or approved, the holder shall file such information under this sub-
section not later than thirty days after after the date the patent
involved is issued. Upon the submission of patent information
under this subsection, the Secretary shall publish it.
(3) The approval of an application filed under subsection (b)
which contains a certification required by paragraph (2) of such
subsection shall be made effective on the last applicable date deter-
mined under the following:
(A) If the applicant only made a certification described in
clause (i) or (ii) of subsection (b)(2)(A) or in both such clauses,
the approval may be made effective immediately.
(B) If the applicant made a certification described in clause
(iii) of subsection (b)(2)(A), the approval may be made effective
on the date certified under clause (iii).
(C) If the applicant made a certification described in clause
(iv) of subsection (b)(2)(A), the approval shall be made effective
immediately unless an action is brought for infringement of a
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
128
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘the date of the enactment of this subsection’’ and insert ‘‘Sep-
tember 24, 1984’’.
patent which is the subject of the certification before the expi-
ration of forty-five days from the date the notice provided
under paragraph (3)(B) is received. If such an action is brought
before the expiration of such days, the approval may be made
effective upon the expiration of the thirty-month period begin-
ning on the date of the receipt of the notice provided under
paragraph (3)(B) or such shorter or longer period as the court
may order because either party to the action failed to reason-
ably cooperate in expediting the action, except that—
(i) if before the expiration of such period the court de-
cides that such patent is invalid or not infringed, the ap-
proval may be made effective on the date of the court deci-
sion,
(ii) if before the expiration of such period, the court de-
cides that such patent has been infringed, the approval
may be made effective on such date as the court orders
under section 271(e)(4)(A) of title 35, United States Code,
or
(iii) if before the expiration of such period the court
grants a preliminary injunction prohibiting the applicant
from engaging in the commercial manufacture or sale of
the drug until the court decides the issues of patent valid-
ity and infringement and if the court decides that such
patent is invalid or not infringed, the approval shall be
made effective on the date of such court decision.
In such an action, each of the parties shall reasonably cooper-
ate in expediting the action. Until the expiration of forty-five
days from the date the notice made under paragraph (3)(B) is
received, no action may be brought under section 2201 of title
28, United States Code, for a declaratory judgment with re-
spect to the patent. Any action brought under such section
2201 shall be brought in the judicial district where the defend-
ant has its principal place of business or a regular and estab-
lished place of business.
(D)(i) If an application (other than an abbreviated new
drug application) submitted under subsection (b) for a drug, no
active ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active in-
gredient) of which has been approved in any other application
under subsection (b), was approved during the period begin-
ning January 1, 1982, and ending on the date of the enactment
of this subsection 1, the Secretary may not make the approval
of another application for a drug for which the investigations
described in clause (A) of subsection (b)(1) and relied upon by
the applicant for approval of the application were not con-
ducted by or for the applicant and for which the applicant has
not obtained a right of reference or use from the person by or
for whom the investigations were conducted effective before the
expiration of ten years from the date of the approval of the ap-
plication previously approved under subsection (b).
(ii) If an application submitted under subsection (b) for a
drug, no active ingredient (including any ester or salt of the ac-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
129
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
tive ingredient) of which has been approved in any other appli-
cation under subsection (b), is approved after the date of the
enactment of this clause, no application which refers to the
drug for which the subsection (b) application was submitted
and for which the investigations described in clause (A) of sub-
section (b)(1) and relied upon by the applicant for approval of
the application were not conducted by or for the applicant and
for which the applicant has not obtained a right of reference
or use from the person by or for whom the investigations were
conducted may be submitted under subsection (b) before the
expiration of five years from the date of the approval of the ap-
plication under subsection (b), except that such an application
may be submitted under subsection (b) after the expiration of
four years from the date of the approval of the subsection (b)
application if it contains a certification of patent invalidity or
noninfringement described in clause (iv) of subsection (b)(2)(A).
The approval of such an application shall be made effective in
accordance with this paragraph except that, if an action for
patent infringement is commenced during the one-year period
beginning forty-eight months after the date of the approval of
the subsection (b) application, the thirty-month period referred
to in subparagraph (C) shall be extended by such amount of
time (if any) which is required for seven and one-half years to
have elapsed from the date of approval of the subsection (b) ap-
plication.
(iii) If an application submitted under subsection (b) for a
drug, which includes an active ingredient (including any ester
or salt of the active ingredient) that has been approved in an-
other application approved under subsection (b), is approved
after the date of the enactment of this clause and if such appli-
cation contains reports of new clinical investigations (other
than bioavailability studies) essential to the approval of the ap-
plication and conducted or sponsored by the applicant, the Sec-
retary may not make the approval of an application submitted
under subsection (b) for the conditions of approval of such drug
in the approved subsection (b) application effective before the
expiration of three years from the date of the approval of the
application under subsection (b) if the investigations described
in clause (A) of subsection (b)(1) and relied upon by the appli-
cant for approval of the application were not conducted by or
for the applicant and if the applicant has not obtained a right
of reference or use from the person by or for whom the inves-
tigations were conducted.
(iv) If a supplement to an application approved under sub-
section (b) is approved after the date of enactment of this
clause and the supplement contains reports of new clinical in-
vestigations (other than bioavailability studies) essential to the
approval of the supplement and conducted or sponsored by the
person submitting the supplement, the Secretary may not
make the approval of an application submitted under sub-
section (b) for a change approved in the supplement effective
before the expiration of three years from the date of the ap-
proval of the supplement under subsection (b) if the investiga-
tions described in clause (A) of subsection (b)(1) and relied
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
130
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
upon by the applicant for approval of the application were not
conducted by or for the applicant and if the applicant has not
obtained a right of reference or use from the person by or for
whom the investigations were conducted.
(v) If an application (or supplement to an application) sub-
mitted under subsection (b) for a drug, which includes an ac-
tive ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active ingre-
dient) that has been approved in another application under
subsection (b), was approved during the period beginning Jan-
uary 1, 1982, and ending on the date of the enactment of this
clause, the Secretary may not make the approval of an applica-
tion submitted under this subsection and for which the inves-
tigations described in clause (A) of subsection (b)(1) and relied
upon by the applicant for approval of the application were not
conducted by or for the applicant and for which the applicant
has not obtained a right of reference or use from the person
by or for whom the investigations were conducted and which
refers to the drug for which the subsection (b) application was
submitted effective before the expiration of two years from the
date of enactment of this clause.
(4) A drug manufactured in a pilot or other small facility may
be used to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of the drug and
to obtain approval for the drug prior to manufacture of the drug
in a larger facility, unless the Secretary makes a determination
that a full scale production facility is necessary to ensure the safety
or effectiveness of the drug.
(d) If the Secretary finds, after due notice to the applicant in
accordance with subsection (c) and giving him an opportunity for
a hearing, in accordance with said subsection, that (1) the inves-
tigations, reports of which are required to be submitted to the Sec-
retary pursuant to subsection (b), do not include adequate tests by
all methods reasonably applicable to show whether or not such
drug is safe for use under the conditions prescribed, recommended,
or suggested in the proposed labeling thereof; (2) the results of
such tests show that such drug is unsafe for use under such condi-
tions or do not show that such drug is safe for use under such con-
ditions; (3) the methods used in, and the facilities and controls
used for, the manufacture, processing, and packing of such drug
are inadequate to preserve its identity, strength, quality, and pu-
rity; (4) upon the basis of the information submitted to him as part
of the application, or upon the basis of any other information before
him with respect to such drug, he has insufficient information to
determine whether such drug is safe for use under such conditions;
or (5) evaluated on the basis of the information submitted to him
as part of the application and any other information before him
with respect to such drug, there is a lack of substantial evidence
that the drug will have the effect it purports or is represented to
have under the conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or sug-
gested in the proposed labeling thereof; or (6) the application failed
to contain the patent information prescribed by subsection (b); or
(7) based on a fair evaluation of all material facts, such labeling is
false or misleading in any particular; he shall issue an order refus-
ing to approve the application. If, after such notice and opportunity
for hearing, the Secretary finds that clauses (1) through (6) do not
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
131
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
apply, he shall issue an order approving the application. As used
in this subsection and subsection (e), the term ‘‘substantial evi-
dence’’ means evidence consisting of adequate and well-controlled
investigations, including clinical investigations, by experts qualified
by scientific training and experience to evaluate the effectiveness
of the drug involved, on the basis of which it could fairly and re-
sponsibly be concluded by such experts that the drug will have the
effect it purports or is represented to have under the conditions of
use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the labeling or pro-
posed labeling thereof. If the Secretary determines, based on rel-
evant science, that data from one adequate and well-controlled clin-
ical investigation and confirmatory evidence (obtained prior to or
after such investigation) are sufficient to establish effectiveness,
the Secretary may consider such data and evidence to constitute
substantial evidence for purposes of the preceding sentence.
(e) The Secretary shall, after due notice and opportunity for
hearing to the applicant, withdraw approval of an application with
respect to any drug under this section if the Secretary finds (1)
that clinical or other experience, tests, or other scientific data show
that such drug is unsafe for use under the conditions of use upon
the basis of which the application was approved; (2) that new evi-
dence of clinical experience, not contained in such application or
not available to the Secretary until after such application was ap-
proved, or tests by new methods, or tests by methods not deemed
reasonably applicable when such application was approved, evalu-
ated together with the evidence available to the Secretary when the
application was approved, shows that such drug is not shown to be
safe for use under the conditions of use upon the basis of which the
application was approved; or (3) on the basis of new information
before him with respect to such drug, evaluated together with the
evidence available to him when the application was approved, that
there is a lack of substantial evidence that the drug will have the
effect it purports or is represented to have under the conditions of
use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the labeling thereof;
or (4) the patent information prescribed by subsection (c) was not
filed within thirty days after the receipt of written notice from the
Secretary specifying the failure to file such information; or (5) that
the application contains any untrue statement of a material fact:
Provided, That if the Secretary (or in his absence the officer acting
as Secretary) finds that there is an imminent hazard to the public
health, he may suspend the approval of such application imme-
diately, and give the applicant prompt notice of his action and af-
ford the applicant the opportunity for an expedited hearing under
this subsection; but the authority conferred by this proviso to sus-
pend the approval of an application shall not be delegated. The
Secretary may also, after due notice and opportunity for hearing to
the applicant, withdraw the approval of an application submitted
under subsection (b) or (j) with respect to any drug under this sec-
tion if the Secretary finds (1) that the applicant has failed to estab-
lish a system for maintaining required records, or has repeatedly
or deliberately failed to maintain such records or to make required
reports, in accordance with a regulation or order under subsection
(k) or to comply with the notice requirements of section 510(k)(2),
or the applicant has refused to permit access to, or copying or
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
132
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 This amendment shall not apply to any appeal taken prior to the date of enactment of the
Drug Amendments of 1962, enacted Oct. 10, 1962.
verification of, such records as required by paragraph (2) of such
subsection; or (2) that on the basis of new information before him,
evaluated together with the evidence before him when the applica-
tion was approved, the methods used in, or the facilities and con-
trols used for, the manufacture, processing, and packing of such
drug are inadequate to assure and preserve its identity, strength,
quality, and purity and were not made adequate within a reason-
able time after receipt of written notice from the Secretary speci-
fying the matter complained of; or (3) that on the basis of new in-
formation before him, evaluated together with the evidence before
him when the application was approved, the labeling of such drug,
based on a fair evaluation of all material facts, is false or mis-
leading in any particular and was not corrected within a reason-
able time after receipt of written notice from the Secretary speci-
fying the matter complained of. Any order under this subsection
shall state the findings upon which it is based.
(f) Whenever the Secretary finds that the facts so require, he
shall revoke any previous order under subsection (d) or (e) refusing,
withdrawing, or suspending approval of an application and shall
approve such application or reinstate such approval, as may be ap-
propriate.
(g) Orders of the Secretary issued under this section shall be
served (1) in person by any officer or employee of the Department
designated by the Secretary or (2) by mailing the order by reg-
istered mail or by certified mail addressed to the applicant or re-
spondent at his last-known address in the records of the Secretary.
(h) 1 An appeal may be taken by the applicant from an order
of the Secretary refusing or withdrawing approval of an application
under this section. Such appeal shall be taken by filing in the
United States court of appeals for the circuit wherein such appli-
cant resides or has his principal place of business, or in the United
States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, within
sixty days after the entry of such order, a written petition praying
that the order of the Secretary be set aside. A copy of such petition
shall be forthwith transmitted by the clerk of the court to the Sec-
retary, or any officer designated by him for that purpose, and
thereupon the Secretary shall certify and file in the court the
record upon which the order complained of was entered, as pro-
vided in section 2112 of title 28, United States Code. Upon the fil-
ing of such petition such court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to
affirm or set aside such order, except that until the filing of the
record the Secretary may modify or set aside his order. No objec-
tion to the order of the Secretary shall be considered by the court
unless such objection shall have been urged before the Secretary or
unless there were reasonable grounds for failure so to do. The find-
ing of the Secretary as to the facts, if supported by substantial evi-
dence, shall be conclusive. If any person shall apply to the court
for leave to adduce additional evidence, and shall show to the satis-
faction of the court that such additional evidence is material and
that there were reasonable grounds for failure to adduce such evi-
dence in the proceeding before the Secretary, the court may order
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
133
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Margin so in law.
such additional evidence to be taken before the Secretary and to be
adduced upon the hearing in such manner and upon such terms
and conditions as to the court may seem proper. The Secretary may
modify his findings as to the facts by reason of the additional evi-
dence so taken, and he shall file with the court such modified find-
ings which, if supported by substantial evidence, shall be conclu-
sive, and his recommendation, if any, for the setting aside of the
original order. The judgment of the court affirming or setting aside
any such order of the Secretary shall be final, subject to review by
the Supreme Court of the United States upon certiorari or certifi-
cation as provided in section 1254 of title 28 of the United States
Code. The commencement of proceedings under this subsection
shall not, unless specifically ordered by the court to the contrary,
operate as a stay of the Secretary’s order.
(i)(1) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations for exempting
from the operation of the foregoing subsections of this section drugs
intended solely for investigational use by experts qualified by sci-
entific training and experience to investigate the safety and effec-
tiveness of drugs. Such regulations may, within the discretion of
the Secretary, among other conditions relating to the protection of
the public health, provide for conditioning such exemption upon—
(A) the submission to the Secretary, before any clinical
testing of a new drug is undertaken, of reports, by the manu-
facturer or the sponsor of the investigation of such drug, or
preclinical tests (including tests on animals) of such drug ade-
quate to justify the proposed clinical testing;
(B) the manufacturer or the sponsor of the investigation of
a new drug proposed to be distributed to investigators for clin-
ical testing obtaining a signed agreement from each of such in-
vestigators that patients to whom the drug is administered will
be under his personal supervision, or under the supervision of
investigators responsible to him, and that he will not supply
such drug to any other investigator, or to clinics, for adminis-
tration to human beings;
(C) the establishment and maintenance of such records,
and the making of such reports to the Secretary, by the manu-
facturer or the sponsor of the investigation of such drug, of
data (including but not limited to analytical reports by inves-
tigators) obtained as the result of such investigational use of
such drug, as the Secretary finds will enable him to evaluate
the safety and effectiveness of such drug in the event of the fil-
ing of an application pursuant to subsection (b); and
(D) 1 the submission to the Secretary by the manufac-
turer or the sponsor of the investigation of a new drug of
a statement of intent regarding whether the manufacturer
or sponsor has plans for assessing pediatric safety and effi-
cacy.
(2) Subject to paragraph (3), a clinical investigation of a new
drug may begin 30 days after the Secretary has received from the
manufacturer or sponsor of the investigation a submission con-
taining such information about the drug and the clinical investiga-
tion, including—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
134
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(A) information on design of the investigation and ade-
quate reports of basic information, certified by the applicant to
be accurate reports, necessary to assess the safety of the drug
for use in clinical investigation; and
(B) adequate information on the chemistry and manufac-
turing of the drug, controls available for the drug, and primary
data tabulations from animal or human studies.
(3)(A) At any time, the Secretary may prohibit the sponsor of
an investigation from conducting the investigation (referred to in
this paragraph as a ‘‘clinical hold’’) if the Secretary makes a deter-
mination described in subparagraph (B). The Secretary shall speci-
fy the basis for the clinical hold, including the specific information
available to the Secretary which served as the basis for such clin-
ical hold, and confirm such determination in writing.
(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), a determination de-
scribed in this subparagraph with respect to a clinical hold is
that—
(i) the drug involved represents an unreasonable risk to
the safety of the persons who are the subjects of the clinical
investigation, taking into account the qualifications of the clin-
ical investigators, information about the drug, the design of the
clinical investigation, the condition for which the drug is to be
investigated, and the health status of the subjects involved; or
(ii) the clinical hold should be issued for such other rea-
sons as the Secretary may by regulation establish (including
reasons established by regulation before the date of the enact-
ment of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act
of 1997).
(C) Any written request to the Secretary from the sponsor of
an investigation that a clinical hold be removed shall receive a de-
cision, in writing and specifying the reasons therefor, within 30
days after receipt of such request. Any such request shall include
sufficient information to support the removal of such clinical hold.
(4) Regulations under paragraph (1) shall provide that such ex-
emption shall be conditioned upon the manufacturer, or the spon-
sor of the investigation, requiring that experts using such drugs for
investigational purposes certify to such manufacturer or sponsor
that they will inform any human beings to whom such drugs, or
any controls used in connection therewith, are being administered,
or their representatives, that such drugs are being used for inves-
tigational purposes and will obtain the consent of such human
beings or their representatives, except where it is not feasible or
it is contrary to the best interests of such human beings. Nothing
in this subsection shall be construed to require any clinical investi-
gator to submit directly to the Secretary reports on the investiga-
tional use of drugs.
(j)(1) Any person may file with the Secretary an abbreviated
application for the approval of a new drug.
(2)(A) An abbreviated application for a new drug shall
contain—
(i) information to show that the conditions of use pre-
scribed, recommended, or suggested in the labeling proposed
for the new drug have been previously approved for a drug list-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
135
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ed under paragraph (7) (hereinafter in this subsection referred
to as a ‘‘listed drug’’);
(ii)(I) if the listed drug referred to in clause (i) has only
one active ingredient, information to show that the active in-
gredient of the new drug is the same as that of the listed drug;
(II) if the listed drug referred to in clause (i) has more
than one active ingredient, information to show that the active
ingredients of the new drug are the same as those of the listed
drug, or
(III) if the listed drug referred to in clause (i) has more
than one active ingredient and if one of the active ingredients
of the new drug is different and the application is filed pursu-
ant to the approval of a petition filed under subparagraph (C),
information to show that the other active ingredients of the
new drug are the same as the active ingredients of the listed
drug, information to show that the different active ingredient
is an active ingredient of a listed drug or of a drug which does
not meet the requirements of section 201(p), and such other in-
formation respecting the different active ingredient with re-
spect to which the petition was filed as the Secretary may re-
quire;
(iii) information to show that the route of administration,
the dosage form, and the strength of the new drug are the
same as those of the listed drug referred to in clause (i), or, if
the route of administration, the dosage form, or the strength
of the new drug is different and the application is filed pursu-
ant to the approval of a petition filed under subparagraph (C),
such information respecting the route of administration, dosage
form, or strength with respect to which the petition was filed
as the Secretary may require;
(iv) information to show that the new drug is bioequivalent
to the listed drug referred to in clause (i), except that if the ap-
plication is filed pursuant to the approval of a petition filed
under subparagraph (C), information to show that the active
ingredients of the new drug are of the same pharmacological
or therapeutic class as those of the listed drug referred to in
clause (i) and the new drug can be expected to have the same
therapeutic effect as the listed drug when administered to pa-
tients for a condition of use referred to in clause (i);
(v) information to show that the labeling proposed for the
new drug is the same as the labeling approved for the listed
drug referred to in clause (i) except for changes required be-
cause of differences approved under a petition filed under sub-
paragraph (C) or because the new drug and the listed drug are
produced or distributed by different manufacturers;
(vi) the items specified in clauses (B) through (F) of sub-
section (b)(1);
(vii) a certification, the opinion of the applicant and to the
best of his knowledge, with respect to each patent which claims
the listed drug referred to in clause (i) or which claims a use
for such listed drug for which the applicant is seeking approval
under this subsection and for which information is required to
be filed under subsection (b) or (c)—
(I) that such patent information has not been filed,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
136
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(II) that such patent has expired,
(III) of the date on which such patent will expire, or
(IV) that such patent is invalid or will not be infringed
by the manufacture, use, or sale of the new drug for which
the application is submitted; and
(viii) if with respect to the listed drug referred to in clause
(i) information was filed under subsection (b) or (c) for a meth-
od of use patent which does not claim a use for which the ap-
plicant is seeking approval under this subsection, a statement
that the method of use patent does not claim such a use.
The Secretary may not require that an abbreviated application con-
tain information in addition to that required by clauses (i) through
(viii).
(B)(i) An applicant who makes a certification described in sub-
paragraph (A)(vii)(IV) shall include in the application a statement
that the applicant will give the notice required by clause (ii) to—
(I) each owner of the patent which is the subject of the cer-
tification or the representative of such owner designated to re-
ceive such notice, and
(II) the holder of the approved application under sub-
section (b) for the drug which is claimed by the patent or a use
of which is claimed by the patent or the representative of such
holder designated to receive such notice.
(ii) The notice referred to in clause (i) shall state that an appli-
cation, which contains data from bioavailability or bioequivalence
studies, has been submitted under this subsection for the drug with
respect to which the certification is made to obtain approval to en-
gage in the commercial manufacture, use, or sale of such drug be-
fore the expiration of the patent referred to in the certification.
Such notice shall include a detailed statement of the factual and
legal basis of the applicant’s opinion that the patent is not valid
or will not be infringed.
(iii) If an application is amended to include a certification de-
scribed in subparagraph (A)(vii)(IV), the notice required by clause
(ii) shall be given when the amended application is submitted.
(C) If a person wants to submit an abbreviated application for
a new drug which has a different active ingredient or whose route
of administration, dosage form, or strength differ from that of a
listed drug, such person shall submit a petition to the Secretary
seeking permission to file such an application. The Secretary shall
approve or disapprove a petition submitted under this subpara-
graph within ninety days of the date the petition is submitted. The
Secretary shall approve such a petition unless the Secretary
finds—
(i) that investigations must be conducted to show the safe-
ty and effectiveness of the drug or of any of its active ingredi-
ents, the route of administration, the dosage form, or strength
which differ from the listed drug; or
(ii) that any drug with a different active ingredient may
not be adequately evaluated for approval as safe and effective
on the basis of the information required to be submitted in an
abbreviated application.
(3)(A) The Secretary shall issue guidance for the individuals
who review applications submitted under paragraph (1), which
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
137
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
shall relate to promptness in conducting the review, technical ex-
cellence, lack of bias and conflict of interest, and knowledge of reg-
ulatory and scientific standards, and which shall apply equally to
all individuals who review such applications.
(B) The Secretary shall meet with a sponsor of an investigation
or an applicant for approval for a drug under this subsection if the
sponsor or applicant makes a reasonable written request for a
meeting for the purpose of reaching agreement on the design and
size of bioavailability and bioequivalence studies needed for ap-
proval of such application. The sponsor or applicant shall provide
information necessary for discussion and agreement on the design
and size of such studies. Minutes of any such meeting shall be pre-
pared by the Secretary and made available to the sponsor or appli-
cant.
(C) Any agreement regarding the parameters of design and
size of bioavailability and bioequivalence studies of a drug under
this paragraph that is reached between the Secretary and a spon-
sor or applicant shall be reduced to writing and made part of the
administrative record by the Secretary. Such agreement shall not
be changed after the testing begins, except—
(i) with the written agreement of the sponsor or applicant;
or
(ii) pursuant to a decision, made in accordance with sub-
paragraph (D) by the director of the reviewing division, that a
substantial scientific issue essential to determining the safety
or effectiveness of the drug has been identified after the testing
has begun.
(D) A decision under subparagraph (C)(ii) by the director shall
be in writing and the Secretary shall provide to the sponsor or ap-
plicant an opportunity for a meeting at which the director and the
sponsor or applicant will be present and at which the director will
document the scientific issue involved.
(E) The written decisions of the reviewing division shall be
binding upon, and may not directly or indirectly be changed by, the
field or compliance office personnel unless such field or compliance
office personnel demonstrate to the reviewing division why such de-
cision should be modified.
(F) No action by the reviewing division may be delayed because
of the unavailability of information from or action by field per-
sonnel unless the reviewing division determines that a delay is nec-
essary to assure the marketing of a safe and effective drug.
(G) For purposes of this paragraph, the reviewing division is
the division responsible for the review of an application for ap-
proval of a drug under this subsection (including scientific matters,
chemistry, manufacturing, and controls).
(4) Subject to paragraph (5), the Secretary shall approve an ap-
plication for a drug unless the Secretary finds—
(A) the methods used in, or the facilities and controls used
for, the manufacture, processing, and packing of the drug are
inadequate to assure and preserve its identity, strength, qual-
ity, and purity;
(B) information submitted with the application is insuffi-
cient to show that each of the proposed conditions of use have
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
138
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
been previously approved for the listed drug referred to in the
application;
(C)(i) if the listed drug has only one active ingredient, in-
formation submitted with the application is insufficient to
show that the active ingredient is the same as that of the list-
ed drug;
(ii) if the listed drug has more than one active ingredient,
information submitted with the application is insufficient to
show that the active ingredients are the same as the active in-
gredients of the listed drug, or
(iii) if the listed drug has more than one active ingredient
and if the application is for a drug which has an active ingre-
dient different from the listed drug, information submitted
with the application is insufficient to show—
(I) that the other active ingredients are the same as
the active ingredients of the listed drug, or
(II) that the different active ingredient is an active in-
gredient of a listed drug or a drug which does not meet the
requirements of section 201(p).
or no petition to file an application for the drug with the dif-
ferent ingredient was approved under paragraph (2)(C);
(D)(i) if the application is for a drug whose route of admin-
istration, dosage form, or strength of the drug is the same as
the route of administration, dosage form, or strength of the
listed drug referred to in the application, information sub-
mitted in the application is insufficient to show that the route
of administration, dosage form, or strength is the same as that
of the listed drug, or
(ii) if the application is for a drug whose route of adminis-
tration, dosage form, or strength of the drug is different from
that of the listed drug referred to in the application, no peti-
tion to file an application for the drug with the different route
of administration, dosage form, or strength was approved
under paragraph (2)(C);
(E) if the application was filed pursuant to the approval of
a petition under paragraph (2)(C), the application did not con-
tain the information required by the Secretary respecting the
active ingredient, route of administration, dosage form, or
strength which is not the same;
(F) information submitted in the application is insufficient
to show that the drug is bioequivalent to the listed drug re-
ferred to in the application or, if the application was filed pur-
suant to a petition approved under paragraph (2)(C) informa-
tion submitted in the application is insufficient to show that
the active ingredients of the new drug are of the same pharma-
cological or therapeutic class as those of the listed drug re-
ferred to in paragraph (2)(A)(i) and that the new drug can be
expected to have the same therapeutic effect as the listed drug
when administered to patients for a condition of use referred
to in such paragraph;
(G) information submitted in the application is insufficient
to show that the labeling proposed for the drug is the same as
the labeling approved for the listed drug referred to in the ap-
plication except for changes required because of differences ap-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
139
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
proved under a petition filed under paragraph (2)(C) or because
the drug and the listed drug are produced or distributed by dif-
ferent manufacturers;
(H) information submitted in the application or any other
information available to the Secretary shows that (i) the inac-
tive ingredients of the drug are unsafe for use under the condi-
tions prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the labeling
proposed for the drug, or (ii) the composition of the drug is un-
safe under such conditions because of the type or quantity of
inactive ingredients included or the manner in which the inac-
tive ingredients are included;
(I) the approval under subsection (c) of the listed drug re-
ferred to in the application under this subsection has been
withdrawn or suspended for grounds described in the first sen-
tence of subsection (e), the Secretary has published a notice of
opportunity for hearing to withdraw approval of the listed drug
under subsection (c) for grounds described in the first sentence
of subsection (e), the approval under this subsection of the list-
ed drug referred to in the application under this subsection has
been withdrawn or suspended under paragraph (6), or the Sec-
retary has determined that the listed drug has been withdrawn
from sale for safety or effectiveness reasons;
(J) the application does not meet any other requirement of
paragraph (2)(A); or
(K) the application contains an untrue statement of mate-
rial fact.
(5)(A) Within one hundred and eighty days of the initial receipt
of an application under paragraph (2) or within such additional pe-
riod as may be agreed upon by the Secretary and the applicant, the
Secretary shall approve or disapprove the application.
(B) The approval of an application submitted under paragraph
(2) shall be made effective on the last applicable date determined
under the following:
(i) If the applicant only made a certification described in
subclause (I) or (II) of paragraph (2)(A)(vii) or in both such sub-
clauses, the approval may be made effective immediately.
(ii) If the applicant made a certification described in sub-
clause (III) of paragraph (2)(A)(vii), the approval may be made
effective on the date certified under subclause (III).
(iii) If the applicant made a certification described in sub-
clause (IV) of paragraph (2)(A)(vii), the approval shall be made
effective immediately unless an action is brought for infringe-
ment of a patent which is the subject of the certification before
the expiration of forty-five days from the date the notice pro-
vided under paragraph (2)(B)(i) is received. If such an action
is brought before the expiration of such days, the approval
shall be made effective upon the expiration of the thirty-month
period beginning on the date of the receipt of the notice pro-
vided under paragraph (2)(B)(i) or such shorter or longer pe-
riod as the court may order because either party to the action
failed to reasonably cooperate in expediting the action, except
that—
(I) if before the expiration of such period the court de-
cides that such patent is invalid or not infringed, the ap-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
140
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
proval shall be made effective on the date of the court deci-
sion.
(II) if before the expiration of such period the court de-
cides that such patent has been infringed, the approval
shall be made effective on such date as the court orders
under section 271(e)(4)(A) of title 35, United States Code,
or
(III) if before the expiration of such period the court
grants a preliminary injunction prohibiting the applicant
from engaging in the commercial manufacture or sale of
the drug until the court decides the issues of patent valid-
ity and infringement and if the court decides that such
patent is invalid or not infringed, the approval shall be
made effective on the date of such court decision.
In such an action, each of the parties shall reasonably cooper-
ate in expediting the action. Until the expiration of forty-five
days from the date the notice made under paragraph (2)(B)(i)
is received, no action, may be brought under section 2201 of
title 28, United States Code, for a declaratory judgment with
respect to the patent. Any action brought under section 2201
shall be brought in the judicial district where the defendant
has its principal place of business or a regular and established
place of business.
(iv) If the application contains a certification described in
subclause (IV) of paragraph (2)(A)(vii) and is for a drug for
which a previous application has been submitted under this
subsection continuing such a certification, the application shall
be made effective not earlier than one hundred and eighty days
after—
(I) the date the Secretary receives notice from the ap-
plicant under the previous application of the first commer-
cial marketing of the drug under the previous application,
or
(II) the date of a decision of a court in an action de-
scribed in clause (iii) holding the patent which is the sub-
ject of the certification to be invalid or not infringed,
whichever is earlier.
(C) If the Secretary decides to disapprove an application, the
Secretary shall give the applicant notice of an opportunity for a
hearing before the Secretary on the question of whether such appli-
cation is approvable. If the applicant elects to accept the oppor-
tunity for hearing by written request within thirty days after such
notice, such hearing shall commence not more than ninety days
after the expiration of such thirty days unless the Secretary and
the applicant otherwise agree. Any such hearing shall thereafter be
conducted on an expedited basis and the Secretary’s order thereon
shall be issued within ninety days after the date fixed by the Sec-
retary for filing final briefs.
(D)(i) If an application (other than an abbreviated new drug
application) submitted under subsection (b) for a drug, no active in-
gredient (including any ester or salt of the active ingredient) of
which has been approved in any other application under subsection
(b), was approved during the period beginning January 1, 1982,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
141
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘the date of the enactment of this subsection’’ and insert ‘‘Sep-
tember 24, 1984’’.
and ending on the date of the enactment of this subsection 1, the
Secretary may not make the approval of an application submitted
under this subsection which refers to the drug for which the sub-
section (b) application was submitted effective before the expiration
of ten years from the date of the approval of the application under
subsection (b).
(ii) If an application submitted under subsection (b) for a drug,
no active ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active ingre-
dient) of which has been approved in any other application under
subsection (b), is approved after the date of the enactment of this
subsection, no application may be submitted under this subsection
which refers to the drug for which the subsection (b) application
was submitted before the expiration of five years from the date of
the approval of the application under subsection (b), except that
such an application may be submitted under this subsection after
the expiration of four years from the date of the approval of the
subsection (b) application if it contains a certification of patent in-
validity or noninfringement described in subclause (IV) of para-
graph (2)(A)(vii). The approval of such an application shall be made
effective in accordance with subparagraph (B) except that, if an ac-
tion for patent infringement is commenced during the one-year pe-
riod beginning forty-eight months after the date of the approval of
the subsection (b) application, the thirty-month period referred to
in subparagraph (B)(iii) shall be extended by such amount of time
(if any) which is required for seven and one-half years to have
elapsed from the date of approval of the subsection (b) application.
(iii) If an application submitted under subsection (b) for a drug,
which includes an active ingredient (including any ester or salt of
the active ingredient) that has been approved in another applica-
tion approved under subsection (b), is approved after the date of
enactment of this subsection and if such application contains re-
ports of new clinical investigations (other than bioavailability stud-
ies) essential to the approval of the application and conducted or
sponsored by the applicant, the Secretary may not make the ap-
proval of an application submitted under this subsection for the
conditions of approval of such drug in the subsection (b) application
effective before the expiration of three years from the date of the
approval of the application under subsection (b) for such drug.
(iv) If a supplement to an application approved under sub-
section (b) is approved after the date of enactment of this sub-
section and the supplement contains reports of new clinical inves-
tigations (other than bioavailability studies) essential to the ap-
proval of the supplement and conducted or sponsored by the person
submitting the supplement, the Secretary may not make the ap-
proval of an application submitted under this subsection for a
change approved in the supplement effective before the expiration
of three years from the date of the approval of the supplement
under subsection (b).
(v) If an application (or supplement to an application) sub-
mitted under subsection (b) for a drug, which includes an active in-
gredient (including any ester or salt of the active ingredient) that
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
142
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘the date of the enactment of this subsection’’ and inserting ‘‘Sep-
tember 24, 1984’’.
has been approved in another application under subsection (b), was
approved during the period beginning January 1, 1982, and ending
on the date of the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary may
not make the approval of an application submitted under this sub-
section which refers to the drug for which the subsection (b) appli-
cation was submitted or which refers to a change approved in a
supplement to the subsection (b) application effective before the ex-
piration of two years from the date of enactment of this subsection.
(6) If a drug approved under this subsection refers in its ap-
proved application to a drug the approval of which was withdrawn
or suspended for grounds described in the first sentence of sub-
section (e) or was withdrawn or suspended under this paragraph
or which, as determined by the Secretary, has been withdrawn
from sale for safety or effectiveness reasons, the approval of the
drug under this subsection shall be withdrawn or suspended—
(A) for the same period as the withdrawal or suspension
under subsection (e) or this paragraph, or
(B) if the listed drug has been withdrawn from sale, for the
period of withdrawal from sale or, if earlier, the period ending
on the date the Secretary determines that the withdrawal from
sale is not for safety or effectiveness reasons.
(7)(A)(i) Within sixty days of the date of the enactment of this
subsection 1, the Secretary shall publish and make available to the
public—
(I) a list in alphabetical order of the official and propri-
etary name of each drug which has been approved for safety
and effectiveness under subsection (c) before the date of the en-
actment of this subsection 1;
(II) the date of approval if the drug is approved after 1981
and the number of the application which was approved; and
(III) whether in vitro or in vivo bioequivalence studies, or
both such studies, are required for applications filed under this
subsection which will refer to the drug published.
(ii) Every thirty days after the publication of the first list
under clause (i) the Secretary shall revise the list to include each
drug which has been approved for safety and effectiveness under
subsection (c) or approved under this subsection during the thirty-
day period.
(iii) When patent information submitted under subsection (b)
or (c) respecting a drug included on the list is to be published by
the Secretary, the Secretary shall, in revisions made under clause
(ii), include such information for such drug.
(B) A drug approved for safety and effectiveness under sub-
section (c) or approved under this subsection shall, for purposes of
this subsection, be considered to have been published under sub-
paragraph (A) on the date of its approval or the date of enactment,
whichever is later.
(C) If the approval of a drug was withdrawn or suspended for
grounds described in the first sentence of subsection (e) or was
withdrawn or suspended under paragraph (6) or if the Secretary
determines that a drug has been withdrawn from sale for safety or
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
143
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
effectiveness reasons, it may not be published in the list under sub-
paragraph (A) or, if the withdrawal or suspension occurred after its
publication in such list, it shall be immediately removed from such
list—
(i) for the same period as the withdrawal or suspension
under subsection (e) or paragraph (6), or
(ii) if the listed drug has been withdrawn from sale, for the
period of withdrawal from sale or, if earlier, the period ending
on the date the Secretary determines that the withdrawal from
sale is not for safety or effectiveness reasons.
A notice of the removal shall be published in the Federal Register.
(8) For purposes of this subsection:
(A) The term ‘‘bioavailability’’ means the rate and extent
to which the active ingredient or therapeutic ingredient is ab-
sorbed from a drug and becomes available at the site of drug
action.
(B) A drug shall be considered to be bioequivalent to a list-
ed drug if—
(i) the rate and extent of absorption of the drug do not
show a significant difference from the rate and extent of
absorption of the listed drug when administered at the
same molar dose of the therapeutic ingredient under simi-
lar experimental conditions in either a single dose or mul-
tiple doses; or
(ii) the extent of absorption of the drug does not show
a significant difference from the extent of absorption of the
listed drug when administered at the same molar dose of
the therapeutic ingredient under similar experimental con-
ditions in either a single dose or multiple doses and the
difference from the listed drug in the rate of absorption of
the drug is intentional, is reflected in its proposed labeling,
is not essential to the attainment of effective body drug
concentrations on chronic use, and is considered medically
insignificant for the drug.
(9) The Secretary shall, with respect to each application sub-
mitted under this subsection, maintain a record of—
(A) the name of the applicant,
(B) the name of the drug covered by the application,
(C) the name of each person to whom the review of the
chemistry of the application was assigned and the date of such
assignment, and
(D) the name of each person to whom the bioequivalence
review for such application was assigned and the date of such
assignment.
The information the Secretary is required to maintain under this
paragraph with respect to an application submitted under this sub-
section shall be made available to the public after the approval of
such application.
(k)(1) In the case of any drug for which an approval of an ap-
plication filed under subsection (b) or (j) is in effect, the applicant
shall establish and maintain such records, and make such reports
to the Secretary, of data relating to clinical experience and other
data or information, received or otherwise obtained by such appli-
cant with respect to such drug, as the Secretary may by general
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
144
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
regulation, or by order with respect to such application, prescribe
on the basis of a finding that such records and reports are nec-
essary in order to enable the Secretary to determine, or facilitate
a determination, whether there is or may be ground for invoking
subsection (e) of this section. Regulations and orders issued under
this subsection and under subsection (i) shall have due regard for
the professional ethics of the medical profession and the interests
of patients and shall provide, where the Secretary deems it to be
appropriate, for the examination, upon request, by the persons to
whom such regulations or orders are applicable, of similar informa-
tion received or otherwise obtained by the Secretary.
(2) Every person required under this section to maintain
records, and every person in charge or custody thereof, shall, upon
request of an officer or employee designated by the Secretary, per-
mit such officer or employee at all reasonable times to have access
to and copy and verify such records.
(l) Safety and effectiveness data and information which has
been submitted in an application under subsection (b) for a drug
and which has not previously been disclosed to the public shall be
made available to the public, upon request, unless extraordinary
circumstances are shown—
(1) if no work is being or will be undertaken to have the
application approved,
(2) if the Secretary has determined that the application is
not approvable and all legal appeals have been exhausted,
(3) if approval of the application under subsection (c) is
withdrawn and all legal appeals have been exhausted,
(4) if the Secretary has determined that such drug is not
a new drug, or
(5) upon the effective date of the approval of the first ap-
plication under subsection (j) which refers to such drug or upon
the date upon which the approval of an application under sub-
section (j) which refers to such drug could be made effective if
such an application had been submitted.
(m) For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘patent’’ means a
patent issued by the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
(n)(1) For the purpose of providing expert scientific advice and
recommendations to the Secretary regarding a clinical investigation
of a drug or the approval for marketing of a drug under section 505
or section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, the Secretary shall
establish panels of experts or use panels of experts established be-
fore the date of enactment of the Food and Drug Administration
Modernization Act of 1997, or both.
(2) The Secretary may delegate the appointment and oversight
authority granted under section 904 to a director of a center or suc-
cessor entity within the Food and Drug Administration.
(3) The Secretary shall make appointments to each panel es-
tablished under paragraph (1) so that each panel shall consist of—
(A) members who are qualified by training and experience
to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the drugs to be re-
ferred to the panel and who, to the extent feasible, possess
skill and experience in the development, manufacture, or utili-
zation of such drugs;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
145
Sec. 505
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(B) members with diverse expertise in such fields as clin-
ical and administrative medicine, pharmacy, pharmacology,
pharmacoeconomics, biological and physical sciences, and other
related professions;
(C) a representative of consumer interests, and a rep-
resentative of interests of the drug manufacturing industry not
directly affected by the matter to be brought before the panel;
and
(D) two or more members who are specialists or have other
expertise in the particular disease or condition for which the
drug under review is proposed to be indicated.
Scientific, trade, and consumer organizations shall be afforded an
opportunity to nominate individuals for appointment to the panels.
No individual who is in the regular full-time employ of the United
States and engaged in the administration of this Act may be a vot-
ing member of any panel. The Secretary shall designate one of the
members of each panel to serve as chairman thereof.
(4) Each member of a panel shall publicly disclose all conflicts
of interest that member may have with the work to be undertaken
by the panel. No member of a panel may vote on any matter where
the member or the immediate family of such member could gain fi-
nancially from the advice given to the Secretary. The Secretary
may grant a waiver of any conflict of interest requirement upon
public disclosure of such conflict of interest if such waiver is nec-
essary to afford the panel essential expertise, except that the Sec-
retary may not grant a waiver for a member of a panel when the
member’s own scientific work is involved.
(5) The Secretary shall, as appropriate, provide education and
training to each new panel member before such member partici-
pates in a panel’s activities, including education regarding require-
ments under this Act and related regulations of the Secretary, and
the administrative processes and procedures related to panel meet-
ings.
(6) Panel members (other than officers or employees of the
United States), while attending meetings or conferences of a panel
or otherwise engaged in its business, shall be entitled to receive
compensation for each day so engaged, including traveltime, at
rates to be fixed by the Secretary, but not to exceed the daily
equivalent of the rate in effect for positions classified above grade
GS–15 of the General Schedule. While serving away from their
homes or regular places of business, panel members may be al-
lowed travel expenses (including per diem in lieu of subsistence) as
authorized by section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, for per-
sons in the Government service employed intermittently.
(7) The Secretary shall ensure that scientific advisory panels
meet regularly and at appropriate intervals so that any matter to
be reviewed by such a panel can be presented to the panel not
more than 60 days after the matter is ready for such review. Meet-
ings of the panel may be held using electronic communication to
convene the meetings.
(8) Within 90 days after a scientific advisory panel makes rec-
ommendations on any matter under its review, the Food and Drug
Administration official responsible for the matter shall review the
conclusions and recommendations of the panel, and notify the af-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
146
Sec. 505A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
fected persons of the final decision on the matter, or of the reasons
that no such decision has been reached. Each such final decision
shall be documented including the rationale for the decision.
SEC. 505A. ø21 U.S.C. 355a¿ PEDIATRIC STUDIES OF DRUGS.
(a) DEFINITIONS.—As used in this section, the term ‘‘pediatric
studies’’ or ‘‘studies’’ means at least one clinical investigation (that,
at the Secretary’s discretion, may include pharmacokinetic studies)
in pediatric age groups (including neonates in appropriate cases) in
which a drug is anticipated to be used.
(b) MARKET EXCLUSIVITY FOR NEW DRUGS.—If, prior to ap-
proval of an application that is submitted under section 505(b)(1),
the Secretary determines that information relating to the use of a
new drug in the pediatric population may produce health benefits
in that population, the Secretary makes a written request for pedi-
atric studies (which shall include a timeframe for completing such
studies), and such studies are completed within any such time-
frame and the reports thereof submitted in accordance with sub-
section (d)(2) or accepted in accordance with subsection (d)(3)—
(1)(A)(i) the period referred to in subsection (c)(3)(D)(ii) of
section 505, and in subsection (j)(5)(D)(ii) of such section, is
deemed to be five years and six months rather than five years,
and the references in subsections (c)(3)(D)(ii) and (j)(5)(D)(ii) of
such section to four years, to forty-eight months, and to seven
and one-half years are deemed to be four and one-half years,
fifty-four months, and eight years, respectively; or
(ii) the period referred to in clauses (iii) and (iv) of sub-
section (c)(3)(D) of such section, and in clauses (iii) and (iv) of
subsection (j)(5)(D) of such section, is deemed to be three years
and six months rather than three years; and
(B) if the drug is designated under section 526 for a rare
disease or condition, the period referred to in section 527(a) is
deemed to be seven years and six months rather than seven
years; and
(2)(A) if the drug is the subject of—
(i) a listed patent for which a certification has been
submitted under subsection (b)(2)(A)(ii) or (j)(2)(A)(vii)(II)
of section 505 and for which pediatric studies were sub-
mitted prior to the expiration of the patent (including any
patent extensions); or
(ii) a listed patent for which a certification has been
submitted 
under 
subsections 
(b)(2)(A)(iii) 
or
(j)(2)(A)(vii)(III) of section 505,
the period during which an application may not be approved
under section 505(c)(3) or section 505(j)(4)(B) shall be extended
by a period of six months after the date the patent expires (in-
cluding any patent extensions); or
(B) if the drug is the subject of a listed patent for which
a 
certification 
has 
been 
submitted 
under 
subsection
(b)(2)(A)(iv) or (j)(2)(A)(vii)(IV) of section 505, and in the patent
infringement litigation resulting from the certification the
court determines that the patent is valid and would be in-
fringed, the period during which an application may not be ap-
proved under section 505(c)(3) or section 505(j)(4)(B) shall be
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
147
Sec. 505A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
extended by a period of six months after the date the patent
expires (including any patent extensions).
(c) MARKET EXCLUSIVITY FOR ALREADY-MARKETED DRUGS.—If
the Secretary determines that information relating to the use of an
approved drug in the pediatric population may produce health ben-
efits in that population and makes a written request to the holder
of an approved application under section 505(b)(1) for pediatric
studies (which shall include a timeframe for completing such stud-
ies), the holder agrees to the request, the studies are completed
within any such timeframe, and the reports thereof are submitted
in accordance with subsection (d)(2) or accepted in accordance with
subsection (d)(3)—
(1)(A)(i) the period referred to in subsection (c)(3)(D)(ii) of
section 505, and in subsection (j)(5)(D)(ii) of such section, is
deemed to be five years and six months rather than five years,
and the references in subsections (c)(3)(D)(ii) and (j)(5)(D)(ii) of
such section to four years, to forty-eight months, and to seven
and one-half years are deemed to be four and one-half years,
fifty-four months, and eight years, respectively; or
(ii) the period referred to in clauses (iii) and (iv) of sub-
section (c)(3)(D) of such section, and in clauses (iii) and (iv) of
subsection (j)(5)(D) of such section, is deemed to be three years
and six months rather than three years; and
(B) if the drug is designated under section 526 for a rare
disease or condition, the period referred to in section 527(a) is
deemed to be seven years and six months rather than seven
years; and
(2)(A) if the drug is the subject of—
(i) a listed patent for which a certification has been
submitted under subsection (b)(2)(A)(ii) or (j)(2)(A)(vii)(II)
of section 505 and for which pediatric studies were sub-
mitted prior to the expiration of the patent (including any
patent extensions); or
(ii) a listed patent for which a certification has been
submitted under subsection (b)(2)(A)(iii) or (j)(2)(A)(vii)(III)
of section 505,
the period during which an application may not be approved
under section 505(c)(3) or section 505(j)(4)(B) shall be extended
by a period of six months after the date the patent expires (in-
cluding any patent extensions); or
(B) if the drug is the subject of a listed patent for which
a 
certification 
has 
been 
submitted 
under 
subsection
(b)(2)(A)(iv) or (j)(2)(A)(vii)(IV) of section 505, and in the patent
infringement litigation resulting from the certification the
court determines that the patent is valid and would be in-
fringed, the period during which an application may not be ap-
proved under section 505(c)(3) or section 505(j)(4)(B) shall be
extended by a period of six months after the date the patent
expires (including any patent extensions).
(d) CONDUCT OF PEDIATRIC STUDIES.—
(1) AGREEMENT FOR STUDIES.—The Secretary may, pursu-
ant to a written request from the Secretary under subsection
(b) or (c), after consultation with—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
148
Sec. 505A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(A) the sponsor of an application for an investigational
new drug under section 505(i);
(B) the sponsor of an application for a new drug under
section 505(b)(1); or
(C) the holder of an approved application for a drug
under section 505(b)(1),
agree with the sponsor or holder for the conduct of pediatric
studies for such drug. Such agreement shall be in writing and
shall include a timeframe for such studies.
(2) WRITTEN PROTOCOLS TO MEET THE STUDIES REQUIRE-
MENT.—If the sponsor or holder and the Secretary agree upon
written protocols for the studies, the studies requirement of
subsection (b) or (c) is satisfied upon the completion of the
studies and submission of the reports thereof in accordance
with the original written request and the written agreement
referred to in paragraph (1). In reaching an agreement regard-
ing written protocols, the Secretary shall take into account
adequate representation of children of ethnic and racial mi-
norities. Not later than 60 days after the submission of the re-
port of the studies, the Secretary shall determine if such stud-
ies were or were not conducted in accordance with the original
written request and the written agreement and reported in ac-
cordance with the requirements of the Secretary for filing and
so notify the sponsor or holder.
(3) OTHER METHODS TO MEET THE STUDIES REQUIREMENT.—
If the sponsor or holder and the Secretary have not agreed in
writing on the protocols for the studies, the studies require-
ment of subsection (b) or (c) is satisfied when such studies
have been completed and the reports accepted by the Sec-
retary. Not later than 90 days after the submission of the re-
ports of the studies, the Secretary shall accept or reject such
reports and so notify the sponsor or holder. The Secretary’s
only responsibility in accepting or rejecting the reports shall be
to determine, within the 90 days, whether the studies fairly re-
spond to the written request, have been conducted in accord-
ance with commonly accepted scientific principles and proto-
cols, and have been reported in accordance with the require-
ments of the Secretary for filing.
(4) WRITTEN REQUEST TO HOLDERS OF APPROVED APPLICA-
TIONS FOR DRUGS THAT HAVE MARKET EXCLUSIVITY.—
(A) REQUEST AND RESPONSE.—If the Secretary makes
a written request for pediatric studies (including neonates,
as appropriate) under subsection (c) to the holder of an ap-
plication approved under section 505(b)(1), the holder, not
later than 180 days after receiving the written request,
shall respond to the Secretary as to the intention of the
holder to act on the request by—
(i) indicating when the pediatric studies will be
initiated, if the holder agrees to the request; or
(ii) indicating that the holder does not agree to the
request.
(B) NO AGREEMENT TO REQUEST.—
(i) REFERRAL.—If the holder does not agree to a
written request within the time period specified in
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
149
Sec. 505A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
subparagraph (A), and if the Secretary determines
that there is a continuing need for information relat-
ing to the use of the drug in the pediatric population
(including neonates, as appropriate), the Secretary
shall refer the drug to the Foundation for the National
Institutes of Health established under section 499 of
the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 290b) (re-
ferred to in this paragraph as the ‘‘Foundation’’) for
the conduct of the pediatric studies described in the
written request.
(ii) PUBLIC NOTICE.—The Secretary shall give pub-
lic notice of the name of the drug, the name of the
manufacturer, and the indications to be studied made
in a referral under clause (i).
(C) LACK OF FUNDS.—On referral of a drug under sub-
paragraph (B)(i), the Foundation shall issue a proposal to
award a grant to conduct the requested studies unless the
Foundation certifies to the Secretary, within a timeframe
that the Secretary determines is appropriate through guid-
ance, that the Foundation does not have funds available
under section 499(j)(9)(B)(i) to conduct the requested stud-
ies. If the Foundation so certifies, the Secretary shall refer
the drug for inclusion on the list established under section
409I of the Public Health Service Act for the conduct of the
studies.
(D) EFFECT
OF
SUBSECTION.—Nothing in this sub-
section (including with respect to referrals from the Sec-
retary to the Foundation) alters or amends section 301(j)
of this Act or section 552 of title 5 or section 1905 of title
18, United States Code.
(E) NO REQUIREMENT TO REFER.—Nothing in this sub-
section shall be construed to require that every declined
written request shall be referred to the Foundation.
(F) WRITTEN REQUESTS UNDER SUBSECTION (b).—For
drugs under subsection (b) for which written requests have
not been accepted, if the Secretary determines that there
is a continuing need for information relating to the use of
the drug in the pediatric population (including neonates,
as appropriate), the Secretary shall issue a written request
under subsection (c) after the date of approval of the drug.
(e) DELAY OF EFFECTIVE DATE FOR CERTAIN APPLICATION.—If
the Secretary determines that the acceptance or approval of an ap-
plication under section 505(b)(2) or 505(j) for a new drug may occur
after submission of reports of pediatric studies under this section,
which were submitted prior to the expiration of the patent (includ-
ing any patent extension) or the applicable period under clauses (ii)
through (iv) of section 505(c)(3)(D) or clauses (ii) through (iv) of sec-
tion 505(j)(5)(D), but before the Secretary has determined whether
the requirements of subsection (d) have been satisfied, the Sec-
retary shall delay the acceptance or approval under section
505(b)(2) or 505(j) until the determination under subsection (d) is
made, but any such delay shall not exceed 90 days. In the event
that requirements of this section are satisfied, the applicable six-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
150
Sec. 505A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
month period under subsection (b) or (c) shall be deemed to have
been running during the period of delay.
(f) NOTICE OF DETERMINATIONS ON STUDIES REQUIREMENT.—
The Secretary shall publish a notice of any determination that the
requirements of subsection (d) have been met and that submissions
and approvals under subsection (b)(2) or (j) of section 505 for a
drug will be subject to the provisions of this section.
(g) LIMITATIONS.—A drug to which the six-month period under
subsection (b) or (b) has already been applied—
(1) may receive an additional six-month period under sub-
section (c)(1)(A)(ii) for a supplemental application if all other
requirements under this section are satisfied, except that such
a drug may not receive any additional such period under sub-
section (c)(2); and
(2) may not receive any additional such period under sub-
section (c)(1)(B).
(h) RELATIONSHIP
TO
REGULATIONS.—Notwithstanding any
other provision of law, if any pediatric study is required pursuant
to regulations promulgated by the Secretary and such study meets
the completeness, timeliness, and other requirements of this sec-
tion, such study shall be deemed to satisfy the requirement for
market exclusivity pursuant to this section.
(i) LABELING SUPPLEMENTS.—
(1) PRIORITY
STATUS
FOR
PEDIATRIC
SUPPLEMENTS.—Any
supplement to an application under section 505 proposing a la-
beling change pursuant to a report on a pediatric study under
this section—
(A) shall be considered to be a priority supplement;
and
(B) shall be subject to the performance goals estab-
lished by the Commissioner for priority drugs.
(2) DISPUTE RESOLUTION.—
(A) REQUEST FOR LABELING CHANGE AND FAILURE TO
AGREE.—If the Commissioner determines that an applica-
tion with respect to which a pediatric study is conducted
under this section is approvable and that the only open
issue for final action on the application is the reaching of
an agreement between the sponsor of the application and
the Commissioner on appropriate changes to the labeling
for the drug that is the subject of the application, not later
than 180 days after the date of submission of the
application—
(i) the Commissioner shall request that the spon-
sor of the application make any labeling change that
the Commissioner determines to be appropriate; and
(ii) if the sponsor of the application does not agree
to make a labeling change requested by the Commis-
sioner, the Commissioner shall refer the matter to the
Pediatric Advisory Subcommittee of the Anti-Infective
Drugs Advisory Committee.
(B) ACTION BY THE PEDIATRIC ADVISORY SUBCOMMITTEE
OF THE ANTI-INFECTIVE DRUGS ADVISORY COMMITTEE.—Not
later than 90 days after receiving a referral under sub-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
151
Sec. 505A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
paragraph (A)(ii), the Pediatric Advisory Subcommittee of
the Anti-Infective Drugs Advisory Committee shall—
(i) review the pediatric study reports; and
(ii) make a recommendation to the Commissioner
concerning appropriate labeling changes, if any.
(C) CONSIDERATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS.—The Com-
missioner shall consider the recommendations of the Pedi-
atric Advisory Subcommittee of the Anti-Infective Drugs
Advisory Committee and, if appropriate, not later than 30
days after receiving the recommendation, make a request
to the sponsor of the application to make any labeling
change that the Commissioner determines to be appro-
priate.
(D) MISBRANDING.—If the sponsor of the application,
within 30 days after receiving a request under subpara-
graph (C), does not agree to make a labeling change re-
quested by the Commissioner, the Commissioner may
deem the drug that is the subject of the application to be
misbranded.
(E) NO EFFECT ON AUTHORITY.—Nothing in this sub-
section limits the authority of the United States to bring
an enforcement action under this Act when a drug lacks
appropriate pediatric labeling. Neither course of action
(the Pediatric Advisory Subcommittee of the Anti-Infective
Drugs Advisory Committee process or an enforcement ac-
tion referred to in the preceding sentence) shall preclude,
delay, or serve as the basis to stay the other course of ac-
tion.
(j) DISSEMINATION OF PEDIATRIC INFORMATION.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 180 days after the date of
submission of a report on a pediatric study under this section,
the Commissioner shall make available to the public a sum-
mary of the medical and clinical pharmacology reviews of pedi-
atric studies conducted for the supplement, including by publi-
cation in the Federal Register.
(2) EFFECT OF SUBSECTION.—Nothing in this subsection al-
ters or amends section 301(j) of this Act or section 552 of title
5 or section 1905 of title 18, United States Code.
(k) CLARIFICATION OF INTERACTION OF MARKET EXCLUSIVITY
UNDER THIS SECTION AND MARKET EXCLUSIVITY AWARDED TO AN
APPLICANT FOR APPROVAL OF A DRUG UNDER SECTION 505(j).—If a
180-day period under section 505(j)(5)(B)(iv) overlaps with a 6-
month exclusivity period under this section, so that the applicant
for approval of a drug under section 505(j) entitled to the 180-day
period under that section loses a portion of the 180-day period to
which the applicant is entitled for the drug, the 180-day period
shall be extended from—
(1) the date on which the 180-day period would have ex-
pired by the number of days of the overlap, if the 180-day pe-
riod would, but for the application of this subsection, expire
after the 6-month exclusivity period; or
(2) the date on which the 6-month exclusivity period ex-
pires, by the number of days of the overlap if the 180-day pe-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
152
Sec. 505A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
riod would, but for the application of this subsection, expire
during the six-month exclusivity period.
(l) PROMPT APPROVAL OF DRUGS UNDER SECTION 505(j) WHEN
PEDIATRIC INFORMATION IS ADDED TO LABELING.—
(1) GENERAL RULE.—A drug for which an application has
been submitted or approved under section 505(j) shall not be
considered ineligible for approval under that section or mis-
branded under section 502 on the basis that the labeling of the
drug omits a pediatric indication or any other aspect of label-
ing pertaining to pediatric use when the omitted indication or
other aspect is protected by patent or by exclusivity under
clause (iii) or (iv) of section 505(j)(5)(D).
(2) LABELING.—Notwithstanding clauses (iii) and (iv) of
section 505(j)(5)(D), the Secretary may require that the label-
ing of a drug approved under section 505(j) that omits a pedi-
atric indication or other aspect of labeling as described in para-
graph (1) include—
(A) a statement that, because of marketing exclusivity
for a manufacturer—
(i) the drug is not labeled for pediatric use; or
(ii) in the case of a drug for which there is an ad-
ditional pediatric use not referred to in paragraph (1),
the drug is not labeled for the pediatric use under
paragraph (1); and
(B) a statement of any appropriate pediatric contra-
indications, warnings, or precautions that the Secretary
considers necessary.
(3) PRESERVATION OF PEDIATRIC EXCLUSIVITY AND OTHER
PROVISIONS.—This subsection does not affect—
(A) the availability or scope of exclusivity under this
section;
(B) the availability or scope of exclusivity under sec-
tion 505 for pediatric formulations;
(C) the question of the eligibility for approval of any
application under section 505(j) that omits any other con-
ditions of approval entitled to exclusivity under clause (iii)
or (iv) of section 505(j)(5)(D); or
(D) except as expressly provided in paragraphs (1) and
(2), the operation of section 505.
(m) REPORT.—The Secretary shall conduct a study and report
to Congress not later than January 1, 2001, based on the experi-
ence under the program established under this section. The study
and report shall examine all relevant issues, including—
(1) the effectiveness of the program in improving informa-
tion about important pediatric uses for approved drugs;
(2) the adequacy of the incentive provided under this sec-
tion;
(3) the economic impact of the program on taxpayers and
consumers, including the impact of the lack of lower cost ge-
neric drugs on patients, including on lower income patients;
and
(4) any suggestions for modification that the Secretary de-
termines to be appropriate.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
153
Sec. 506
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Section 8 of the Best Pharmaceuticals for Children Act (P.L. 107–109; 115 Stat. 1414)
amends subsection (j) of section 505A in its entirety. Section 19(2) (115 Stat. 1424) of such pub-
lic law redesignates subsection (j) (without specifying ‘‘as amended by section 8’’) as subsection
(n). Paragraph (4) of section 19 attempts to amend subsection (m) by striking ‘‘subsection (a)
or (c)’’ and inserting ‘‘subsection (b) or (c)’’. The amendment probably should have been made
to subsection (n), ‘‘as amended by section 8 and redesignated by paragraph (2))’’.
(n) SUNSET.—A drug may not receive any 6-month period
under subsection (a) or (c) 1 unless—
(1) on or before October 1, 2007, the Secretary makes a
written request for pediatric studies of the drug;
(2) on or before October 1, 2007, an application for the
drug is accepted for filing under section 505(b); and
(3) all requirements of this section are met.
SEC. 506. ø21 U.S.C. 356¿ FAST TRACK PRODUCTS.
(a) DESIGNATION OF DRUG AS A FAST TRACK PRODUCT.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall, at the request of the
sponsor of a new drug, facilitate the development and expedite
the review of such drug if it is intended for the treatment of
a serious or life-threatening condition and it demonstrates the
potential to address unmet medical needs for such a condition.
(In this section, such a drug is referred to as a ‘‘fast track prod-
uct’’.)
(2) REQUEST
FOR
DESIGNATION.—The sponsor of a new
drug may request the Secretary to designate the drug as a fast
track product. A request for the designation may be made con-
currently with, or at any time after, submission of an applica-
tion for the investigation of the drug under section 505(i) or
section 351(a)(3) of the Public Health Service Act.
(3) DESIGNATION.—Within 60 calendar days after the re-
ceipt of a request under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall de-
termine whether the drug that is the subject of the request
meets the criteria described in paragraph (1). If the Secretary
finds that the drug meets the criteria, the Secretary shall des-
ignate the drug as a fast track product and shall take such ac-
tions as are appropriate to expedite the development and re-
view of the application for approval of such product.
(b) APPROVAL OF APPLICATION FOR A FAST TRACK PRODUCT.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary may approve an applica-
tion for approval of a fast track product under section 505(c)
or section 351 of the Public Health Service Act upon a deter-
mination that the product has an effect on a clinical endpoint
or on a surrogate endpoint that is reasonably likely to predict
clinical benefit.
(2) LIMITATION.—Approval of a fast track product under
this subsection may be subject to the requirements—
(A) that the sponsor conduct appropriate post-approval
studies to validate the surrogate endpoint or otherwise
confirm the effect on the clinical endpoint; and
(B) that the sponsor submit copies of all promotional
materials related to the fast track product during the
preapproval review period and, following approval and for
such period thereafter as the Secretary determines to be
appropriate, at least 30 days prior to dissemination of the
materials.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
154
Sec. 506A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(3) EXPEDITED WITHDRAWAL OF APPROVAL.—The Secretary
may withdraw approval of a fast track product using expedited
procedures (as prescribed by the Secretary in regulations
which shall include an opportunity for an informal hearing)
if—
(A) the sponsor fails to conduct any required post-ap-
proval study of the fast track drug with due diligence;
(B) a post-approval study of the fast track product
fails to verify clinical benefit of the product;
(C) other evidence demonstrates that the fast track
product is not safe or effective under the conditions of use;
or
(D) the sponsor disseminates false or misleading pro-
motional materials with respect to the product.
(c) REVIEW OF INCOMPLETE APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL OF A
FAST TRACK PRODUCT.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—If the Secretary determines, after pre-
liminary evaluation of clinical data submitted by the sponsor,
that a fast track product may be effective, the Secretary shall
evaluate for filing, and may commence review of portions of, an
application for the approval of the product before the sponsor
submits a complete application. The Secretary shall commence
such review only if the applicant—
(A) provides a schedule for submission of information
necessary to make the application complete; and
(B) pays any fee that may be required under section
736.
(2) EXCEPTION.—Any time period for review of human drug
applications that has been agreed to by the Secretary and that
has been set forth in goals identified in letters of the Secretary
(relating to the use of fees collected under section 736 to expe-
dite the drug development process and the review of human
drug applications) shall not apply to an application submitted
under paragraph (1) until the date on which the application is
complete.
(d) AWARENESS EFFORTS.—The Secretary shall—
(1) develop and disseminate to physicians, patient organi-
zations, pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, and
other appropriate persons a description of the provisions of this
section applicable to fast track products; and
(2) establish a program to encourage the development of
surrogate endpoints that are reasonably likely to predict clin-
ical benefit for serious or life-threatening conditions for which
there exist significant unmet medical needs.
SEC. 506A. ø21 U.S.C. 356a¿ MANUFACTURING CHANGES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—With respect to a drug for which there is in
effect an approved application under section 505 or 512 or a license
under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, a change from
the manufacturing process approved pursuant to such application
or license may be made, and the drug as made with the change
may be distributed, if—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
155
Sec. 506A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(1) the holder of the approved application or license (re-
ferred to in this section as a ‘‘holder’’) has validated the effects
of the change in accordance with subsection (b); and
(2)(A) in the case of a major manufacturing change, the
holder has complied with the requirements of subsection (c); or
(B) in the case of a change that is not a major manufac-
turing change, the holder complies with the applicable require-
ments of subsection (d).
(b) VALIDATION OF EFFECTS OF CHANGES.—For purposes of sub-
section (a)(1), a drug made with a manufacturing change (whether
a major manufacturing change or otherwise) may be distributed
only if, before distribution of the drug as so made, the holder in-
volved validates the effects of the change on the identity, strength,
quality, purity, and potency of the drug as the identity, strength,
quality, purity, and potency may relate to the safety or effective-
ness of the drug.
(c) MAJOR MANUFACTURING CHANGES.—
(1) REQUIREMENT
OF
SUPPLEMENTAL
APPLICATION.—For
purposes of subsection (a)(2)(A), a drug made with a major
manufacturing change may be distributed only if, before the
distribution of the drug as so made, the holder involved sub-
mits to the Secretary a supplemental application for such
change and the Secretary approves the application. The appli-
cation shall contain such information as the Secretary deter-
mines to be appropriate, and shall include the information de-
veloped under subsection (b) by the holder in validating the ef-
fects of the change.
(2) CHANGES
QUALIFYING
AS
MAJOR
CHANGES.—For pur-
poses of subsection (a)(2)(A), a major manufacturing change is
a manufacturing change that is determined by the Secretary to
have substantial potential to adversely affect the identity,
strength, quality, purity, or potency of the drug as they may
relate to the safety or effectiveness of a drug. Such a change
includes a change that—
(A) is made in the qualitative or quantitative formula-
tion of the drug involved or in the specifications in the ap-
proved application or license referred to in subsection (a)
for the drug (unless exempted by the Secretary by regula-
tion or guidance from the requirements of this subsection);
(B) is determined by the Secretary by regulation or
guidance to require completion of an appropriate clinical
study demonstrating equivalence of the drug to the drug
as manufactured without the change; or
(C) is another type of change determined by the Sec-
retary by regulation or guidance to have a substantial po-
tential to adversely affect the safety or effectiveness of the
drug.
(d) OTHER MANUFACTURING CHANGES.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—For purposes of subsection (a)(2)(B), the
Secretary may regulate drugs made with manufacturing
changes that are not major manufacturing changes as follows:
(A) The Secretary may in accordance with paragraph
(2) authorize holders to distribute such drugs without sub-
mitting a supplemental application for such changes.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
156
Sec. 506A
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(B) The Secretary may in accordance with paragraph
(3) require that, prior to the distribution of such drugs,
holders submit to the Secretary supplemental applications
for such changes.
(C) The Secretary may establish categories of such
changes and designate categories to which subparagraph
(A) applies and categories to which subparagraph (B) ap-
plies.
(2) CHANGES
NOT
REQUIRING
SUPPLEMENTAL
APPLICA-
TION.—
(A) SUBMISSION OF REPORT.—A holder making a man-
ufacturing change to which paragraph (1)(A) applies shall
submit to the Secretary a report on the change, which
shall contain such information as the Secretary determines
to be appropriate, and which shall include the information
developed under subsection (b) by the holder in validating
the effects of the change. The report shall be submitted by
such date as the Secretary may specify.
(B) AUTHORITY REGARDING ANNUAL REPORTS.—In the
case of a holder that during a single year makes more than
one manufacturing change to which paragraph (1)(A) ap-
plies, the Secretary may in carrying out subparagraph (A)
authorize the holder to comply with such subparagraph by
submitting a single report for the year that provides the
information required in such subparagraph for all the
changes made by the holder during the year.
(3) CHANGES REQUIRING SUPPLEMENTAL APPLICATION.—
(A) SUBMISSION OF SUPPLEMENTAL APPLICATION.—The
supplemental application required under paragraph (1)(B)
for a manufacturing change shall contain such information
as the Secretary determines to be appropriate, which shall
include the information developed under subsection (b) by
the holder in validating the effects of the change.
(B) AUTHORITY FOR DISTRIBUTION.—In the case of a
manufacturing change to which paragraph (1)(B) applies:
(i) The holder involved may commence distribu-
tion of the drug involved 30 days after the Secretary
receives the supplemental application under such
paragraph, unless the Secretary notifies the holder
within such 30-day period that prior approval of the
application is required before distribution may be com-
menced.
(ii) The Secretary may designate a category of
such changes for the purpose of providing that, in the
case of a change that is in such category, the holder
involved may commence distribution of the drug in-
volved upon the receipt by the Secretary of a supple-
mental application for the change.
(iii) If the Secretary disapproves the supplemental
application, the Secretary may order the manufacturer
to cease the distribution of the drugs that have been
made with the manufacturing change.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
157
Sec. 506B
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
SEC. 506B. ø21 U.S.C. 356b¿ REPORTS OF POSTMARKETING STUDIES.
(a) SUBMISSION.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—A sponsor of a drug that has entered into
an agreement with the Secretary to conduct a postmarketing
study of a drug shall submit to the Secretary, within 1 year
after the approval of such drug and annually thereafter until
the study is completed or terminated, a report of the progress
of the study or the reasons for the failure of the sponsor to con-
duct the study. The report shall be submitted in such form as
is prescribed by the Secretary in regulations issued by the Sec-
retary.
(2) AGREEMENTS PRIOR TO EFFECTIVE DATE.—Any agree-
ment entered into between the Secretary and a sponsor of a
drug, prior to the date of enactment of the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration Modernization Act of 1997, to conduct a post-
marketing study of a drug shall be subject to the requirements
of paragraph (1). An initial report for such an agreement shall
be submitted within 6 months after the date of the issuance of
the regulations under paragraph (1).
(b) CONSIDERATION
OF
INFORMATION
AS
PUBLIC
INFORMA-
TION.—Any information pertaining to a report described in sub-
section (a) shall be considered to be public information to the ex-
tent that the information is necessary—
(1) to identify the sponsor; and
(2) to establish the status of a study described in sub-
section (a) and the reasons, if any, for any failure to carry out
the study.
(c) STATUS OF STUDIES AND REPORTS.—The Secretary shall an-
nually develop and publish in the Federal Register a report that
provides information on the status of the postmarketing studies—
(1) that sponsors have entered into agreements to conduct;
and
(2) for which reports have been submitted under sub-
section (a)(1).
(d) DISCLOSURE.—If a sponsor fails to complete an agreed upon
study required by this section by its original or otherwise nego-
tiated deadline, the Secretary shall publish a statement on the
Internet site of the Food and Drug Administration stating that the
study was not completed and, if the reasons for such failure to com-
plete the study were not satisfactory to the Secretary, a statement
that such reasons were not satisfactory to the Secretary.
(e) NOTIFICATION.—With respect to studies of the type required
under section 506(b)(2)(A) or under section 314.510 or 601.41 of
title 21, Code of Federal Regulations, as each of such sections was
in effect on the day before the effective date of this subsection, the
Secretary may require that a sponsor who, for reasons not satisfac-
tory to the Secretary, fails to complete by its deadline a study
under any of such sections of such type for a drug or biological
product (including such a study conducted after such effective date)
notify practitioners who prescribe such drug or biological product
of the failure to complete such study and the questions of clinical
benefit, and, where appropriate, questions of safety, that remain
unanswered as a result of the failure to complete such study. Noth-
ing in this subsection shall be construed as altering the require-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
158
Sec. 506C
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ments of the types of studies required under section 506(b)(2)(A) or
under section 314.510 or 601.41 of title 21, Code of Federal Regula-
tions, as so in effect, or as prohibiting the Secretary from modifying
such sections of title 21 of such Code to provide for studies in addi-
tion to those of such type.
SEC. 506C. ø21 U.S.C. 356c¿ DISCONTINUANCE OF A LIFE SAVING PROD-
UCT.
(a) IN GENERAL.—A manufacturer that is the sole manufac-
turer of a drug—
(1) that is—
(A) life-supporting;
(B) life-sustaining; or
(C) intended for use in the prevention of a debilitating
disease or condition;
(2) for which an application has been approved under sec-
tion 505(b) or 505(j); and
(3) that is not a product that was originally derived from
human tissue and was replaced by a recombinant product,
shall notify the Secretary of a discontinuance of the manufacture
of the drug at least 6 months prior to the date of the discontinu-
ance.
(b) REDUCTION IN NOTIFICATION PERIOD.—The notification pe-
riod required under subsection (a) for a manufacturer may be re-
duced if the manufacturer certifies to the Secretary that good cause
exists for the reduction, such as a situation in which—
(1) a public health problem may result from continuation
of the manufacturing for the 6-month period;
(2) a biomaterials shortage prevents the continuation of
the manufacturing for the 6-month period;
(3) a liability problem may exist for the manufacturer if
the manufacturing is continued for the 6-month period;
(4) continuation of the manufacturing for the 6-month pe-
riod may cause substantial economic hardship for the manufac-
turer;
(5) the manufacturer has filed for bankruptcy under chap-
ter 7 or 11 of title 11, United States Code; or
(6) the manufacturer can continue the distribution of the
drug involved for 6 months.
(c) DISTRIBUTION.—To the maximum extent practicable, the
Secretary shall distribute information on the discontinuation of the
drugs described in subsection (a) to appropriate physician and pa-
tient organizations.
øSection 507 repealed by Pub. L. 105–115, November 21,
1997.¿
AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE OFFICIAL NAMES
SEC. 508. ø21 U.S.C. 358¿ (a) The Secretary may designate an
official name for any drug or device if he determines that such ac-
tion is necessary or desirable in the interest of usefulness and sim-
plicity. Any official name designated under this section for any
drug or device shall be the only official name of that drug or device
used in any official compendium published after such name has
been prescribed or for any other purpose of this Act. In no event,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
159
Sec. 509
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
however, shall the Secretary establish an official name so as to in-
fringe a valid trademark.
(b) Within a reasonable time after the effective date of this sec-
tion, and at such other times as he may deem necessary, the Sec-
retary shall cause a review to be made of the official names by
which drugs are identified in the official United States Pharma-
copeia, the official Homeopathic Pharmacopeia of the United
States, and the official National Formulary, and all supplements
thereto, and at such times as he may deem necessary shall cause
a review to be made of the official names by which devices are
identified in any official compendium (and all supplements thereto)
to determine whether revision of any of those names is necessary
or desirable in the interest of usefulness and simplicity.
(c) Whenever he determines after any such review that (1) any
such official name is unduly complex or is not useful for any other
reason, (2) two or more official names have been applied to a single
drug or device, or to two or more drugs which are identical in
chemical structure and pharmacological action and which are sub-
stantially identical in strength, quality, and purity, or to two or
more devices which are substantially equivalent in design and pur-
pose or (3) no official name has been applied to a medically useful
drug or device, he shall transmit in writing to the compiler of each
official compendium in which that drug or drugs or device are iden-
tified and recognized his request for the recommendation of a sin-
gle official name for such drug or drugs or device which will have
usefulness and simplicity. Whenever such a single official name
has not been recommended within one hundred and eighty days
after such request, or the Secretary determines that any name so
recommended is not useful for any reason, he shall designate a sin-
gle official name for such drug or drugs or device. Whenever he de-
termines that the name so recommended is useful, he shall des-
ignate that name as the official name of such drug or drugs or de-
vice. Such designation shall be made as a regulation upon public
notice and in accordance with the procedure set forth in section 553
of title 5, United States Code.
(d) After each such review, and at such other times as the Sec-
retary may determine to be necessary or desirable, the Secretary
shall cause to be compiled, published, and publicly distributed a
list which shall list all revised official names of drugs or devices
designated under this section and shall contain such descriptive
and explanatory matter as the Secretary may determine to be re-
quired for the effective use of those names.
(e) Upon a request in writing by any compiler of any official
compendium that the Secretary exercise the authority granted to
him under section 508(a), he shall upon public notice and in accord-
ance with the procedure set forth in section 553 of title 5, United
States Code designate the official name of the drug or device for
which the request is made.
NONAPPLICABILITY TO COSMETICS
SEC. 509. ø21 U.S.C. 359¿ This chapter, as amended by the
Drug Amendments of 1962, shall not apply to any cosmetic unless
such cosmetic is also a drug or device or component thereof.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
160
Sec. 510
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 The purpose of section 510 was stated in sec. 301 of P.L. 82–781 as follows:
‘‘SEC. 301. The Congress hereby finds and declares that in order to make regulation of inter-
state commerce in drugs effective, it is necessary to provide for registration and inspection of
all establishments in which drugs are manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded, or
processed; that the products of all such establishments are likely to enter the channels of inter-
state commerce and directly affect such commerce; and that the regulation of interstate com-
merce in drugs without provision for registration and inspection of establishments that may be
engaged only in intrastate commerce in such drugs would discriminate against and depress
interstate commerce in such drugs, and adversely burden, obstruct, and affect such interstate
commerce.’’
REGISTRATION OF PRODUCERS OF DRUGS AND DEVICES 1
SEC. 510. ø21 U.S.C. 360¿ (a) As used in this section—
(1) the term ‘‘manufacture, preparation, propagation,
compounding, or processing’’ shall include repackaging or oth-
erwise changing the container, wrapper, or labeling of any
drug package or device package in furtherance of the distribu-
tion of the drug or device from the original place of manufac-
ture to the person who makes final delivery or sale to the ulti-
mate consumer or user; and
(2) the term ‘‘name’’ shall include in the case of a partner-
ship the name of each partner and, in the case of a corporation,
the name of each corporate officer and director, and the State
of incorporation.
(b) On or before December 31 of each year every person who
owns or operates any establishment in any State engaged in the
manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, or processing
of a drug or drugs or a device or devices shall register with the Sec-
retary his name, places of business, and all such establishments.
(c) Every person upon first engaging in the manufacture, prep-
aration, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or
drugs or a device or devices in any establishment which he owns
or operates in any State shall immediately register with the Sec-
retary his name, place of business, and such establishment.
(d) Every person duly registered in accordance with the fore-
going subsections of this section shall immediately register with
the Secretary any additional establishment which he owns or oper-
ates in any State and in which he begins the manufacture, prepa-
ration, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or drugs
or a device or devices.
(e) The Secretary may assign a registration number to any per-
son or any establishment registered in accordance with this section.
The Secretary may also assign a listing number to each drug or
class of drugs listed under subsection (j). Any number assigned
pursuant to the preceding sentence shall be the same as that as-
signed pursuant to the National Drug Code. The Secretary may by
regulation prescribe a uniform system for the identification of de-
vices intended for human use and may require that persons who
are required to list such devices pursuant to subsection (j) shall list
such devices in accordance with such system.
(f) The Secretary shall make available for inspection, to any
person so requesting, any registration filed pursuant to this sec-
tion; except that any list submitted pursuant to paragraph (3) of
subsection (j) and the information accompanying any list or notice
filed under paragraph (1) or (2) of that subsection shall be exempt
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
161
Sec. 510
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
from such inspection unless the Secretary finds that such an ex-
emption would be inconsistent with protection of the public health.
(g) The foregoing subsections of this section shall not apply
to—
(1) pharmacies which maintain establishments in conform-
ance with any applicable local laws regulating the practice of
pharmacy and medicine and which are regularly engaged in
dispensing prescription drugs or devices, upon prescriptions of
practitioners licensed to administer such drugs or devices to
patients under the care of such practitioners in the course of
their professional practice, and which do not manufacture, pre-
pare, propagate, compound, or process drugs or devices for sale
other than in the regular course of their business of dispensing
or selling drugs or devices at retail;
(2) practitioners licensed by law to prescribe or administer
drugs or devices and who manufacture, prepare, propagate,
compound, or process drugs or devices solely for use in the
course of their professional practice;
(3) persons who manufacture, prepare, propagate, com-
pound, or process drugs or devices solely for use in research,
teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale;
(4) any distributor who acts as a wholesale distributor of
devices, and who does not manufacture, repackage, process, or
relabel a device; or
(5) such other classes of persons as the Secretary may by
regulation exempt from the application of this section upon a
finding that registration by such classes of persons in accord-
ance with this section is not necessary for the protection of the
public health.
In this subsection, the term ‘‘wholesale distributor’’ means any per-
son (other than the manufacturer or the initial importer) who dis-
tributes a device from the original place of manufacture to the per-
son who makes the final delivery or sale of the device to the ulti-
mate consumer or user.
(h) Every establishment in any State registered with the Sec-
retary pursuant to this section shall be subject to inspection pursu-
ant to section 704 and every such establishment engaged in the
manufacture, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or
drugs or of a device or devices classified in class II or III shall be
so inspected by one or more officers or employees duly designated
by the Secretary, or by persons accredited to conduct inspections
under section 704(g), at least once in the 2-year period beginning
with the date of registration of such establishment pursuant to this
section and at least once in every successive 2-year period there-
after.
(i)(1) On or before December 31 of each year, any establish-
ment within any foreign country engaged in the manufacture, prep-
aration, propagation, compounding, or processing of a drug or a de-
vice that is imported or offered for import into the United States
shall, through electronic means in accordance with the criteria of
the Secretary, register with the Secretary the name and place of
business of the establishment, the name of the United States agent
for the establishment, the name of each importer of such drug or
device in the United States that is known to the establishment,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
162
Sec. 510
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
and the name of each person who imports or offers for import such
drug or device to the United States for purposes of importation.
(2) The establishment shall also provide the information re-
quired by subsection (j).
(3) The Secretary is authorized to enter into cooperative ar-
rangements with officials of foreign countries to ensure that ade-
quate and effective means are available for purposes of deter-
mining, from time to time, whether drugs or devices manufactured,
prepared, propagated, compounded, or processed by an establish-
ment described in paragraph (1), if imported or offered for import
into the United States, shall be refused admission on any of the
grounds set forth in section 801(a).
(j)(1) Every person who registers with the Secretary under sub-
section (b), (c), (d), or (i) shall, at the time of registration under any
such subsection, file with the Secretary a list of all drugs and a list
of all devices and a brief statement of the basis for believing that
each device included in the list is a device rather than a drug (with
each drug and device in each list listed by its established name (as
defined in section 502(e)) and by any proprietary name) which are
being manufactured, prepared, propagated, compounded, or proc-
essed by him for commercial distribution and which he has not in-
cluded in any list of drugs or devices filed by him with the Sec-
retary under this paragraph or paragraph (2) before such time of
registration. Such list shall be prepared in such form and manner
as the Secretary may prescribe and shall be accompanied by—
(A) in the case of a drug contained in the applicable list
and subject to section 505 or 512, or a device intended for
human use contained in the applicable list with respect to
which a performance standard has been established under sec-
tion 514 or which is subject to section 515, a reference to the
authority for the marketing of such drug or device and a copy
of all labeling for such drug or device;
(B) in the case of any other drug or device contained in an
applicable list—
(i) which drug is subject to section 503(b)(1), or which
device is a restricted device, a copy of all labeling for such
drug or device, a representative sampling of advertise-
ments for such drug or device, and, upon request made by
the Secretary for good cause, a copy of all advertisements
for a particular drug product or device, or
(ii) which drug is not subject to section 503(b)(1) or
which device is not a restricted device, the label and pack-
age insert for such drug or device and a representative
sampling of any other labeling for such drug or device;
(C) in the case of any drug contained in an applicable list
which is described in subparagraph (B), a quantitative listing
of its active ingredient or ingredients, except that with respect
to a particular drug product the Secretary may require the
submission of a quantitative listing of all ingredients if he
finds that such submission is necessary to carry out the pur-
poses of this Act; and
(D) if the registrant filing a list has determined that a par-
ticular drug product or device contained in such list is not sub-
ject to section 505 or 512, or the particular device contained in
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
163
Sec. 510
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should be strike out ‘‘the effective date of this subsection’’ and insert ‘‘February 1,
1973’’.
such list is not subject to a performance standard established
under section 514 or to section 515 or is not a restricted device,
a brief statement of the basis upon which the registrant made
such determination if the Secretary requests such a statement
with respect to that particular drug product or device.
(2) Each person who registers with the Secretary under this
section shall report to the Secretary once during the month of June
of each year and once during the month of December of each year
the following information:
(A) A list of each drug or device introduced by the reg-
istrant for commercial distribution which has not been in-
cluded in any list previously filed by him with the Secretary
under this subparagraph or paragraph (1) of this subsection. A
list under this subparagraph shall list a drug or device by its
established name (as defined in section 502(e)) and by any pro-
prietary name it may have and shall be accompanied by the
other information required by paragraph (1).
(B) If since the date the registrant last made a report
under this paragraph (or if he has not made a report under
this paragraph, since the effective date of this subsection 1) he
has discontinued the manufacture, preparation, propagation,
compounding, or processing for commercial distribution of a
drug or device included in a list filed by him under subpara-
graph (A) or paragraph (1); notice of such discontinuance, the
date of such discontinuance, and the identity (by established
name (as defined in section 502(e)) and by any proprietary
name) of such drug or device.
(C) If since the date the registrant reported pursuant to
subparagraph (B) a notice of discontinuance he has resumed
the manufacture, preparation, propagation, compounding, or
processing for commercial distribution of the drug or device
with respect to which such notice of discontinuance was re-
ported; notice of such resumption, the date of such resumption,
the identity of such drug or device (by established name (as de-
fined in section 502(e)) and by any proprietary name), and the
other information required by paragraph (1), unless the reg-
istrant has previously reported such resumption to the Sec-
retary pursuant to this subparagraph.
(D) Any material change in any information previously
submitted pursuant to this paragraph or paragraph (1).
(3) The Secretary may also require each registrant under this
section to submit a list of each drug product which (A) the reg-
istrant is manufacturing, preparing, propagating, compounding, or
processing for commercial distribution, and (B) contains a par-
ticular ingredient. The Secretary may not require the submission
of such a list unless he has made a finding that the submission of
such a list is necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(k) Each person who is required to register under this section
and who proposes to begin the introduction or delivery for introduc-
tion into interstate commerce for commercial distribution of a de-
vice intended for human use shall, at least ninety days before mak-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
164
Sec. 510
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ing such introduction or delivery, report to the Secretary or person
who is accredited under section 523(a) (in such form and manner
as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe)—
(1) the class in which the device is classified under section
513 or if such person determines that the device is not classi-
fied under such section, a statement of that determination and
the basis for such person’s determination that the device is or
is not so classified, and
(2) action taken by such person to comply with require-
ments under section 514 or 515 which are applicable to the de-
vice.
(l) A report under subsection (k) is not required for a device in-
tended for human use that is exempted from the requirements of
this subsection under subsection (m) or is within a type that has
been classified into class I under section 513. The exception estab-
lished in the preceding sentence does not apply to any class I de-
vice that is intended for a use which is of substantial importance
in preventing impairment of human health, or to any class I device
that presents a potential unreasonable risk of illness or injury.
(m)(1) Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of
the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997, the
Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a list of each type
of class II device that does not require a report under subsection
(k) to provide reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness.
Each type of class II device identified by the Secretary as not re-
quiring the report shall be exempt from the requirement to provide
a report under subsection (k) as of the date of the publication of
the list in the Federal Register. The Secretary shall publish such
list on the Internet site of the Food and Drug Administration. The
list so published shall be updated not later than 30 days after each
revision of the list by the Secretary.
(2) Beginning on the date that is 1 day after the date of the
publication of a list under this subsection, the Secretary may ex-
empt a class II device from the requirement to submit a report
under subsection (k), upon the Secretary’s own initiative or a peti-
tion of an interested person, if the Secretary determines that such
report is not necessary to assure the safety and effectiveness of the
device. The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register notice
of the intent of the Secretary to exempt the device, or of the peti-
tion, and provide a 30-day period for public comment. Within 120
days after the issuance of the notice in the Federal Register, the
Secretary shall publish an order in the Federal Register that sets
forth the final determination of the Secretary regarding the exemp-
tion of the device that was the subject of the notice. If the Sec-
retary fails to respond to a petition within 180 days of receiving it,
the petition shall be deemed to be granted.
(n) The Secretary shall review the report required in sub-
section (k) and make a determination under section 513(f)(1) not
later than 90 days after receiving the report.
(o)(1) With respect to reprocessed single-use devices for which
reports are required under subsection (k):
(A) The Secretary shall identify such devices or types of
devices for which reports under such subsection must, in order
to ensure that the device is substantially equivalent to a predi-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
165
Sec. 510
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
cate device, include validation data, the types of which shall be
specified by the Secretary, regarding cleaning and sterilization,
and functional performance demonstrating that the single-use
device will remain substantially equivalent to its predicate de-
vice after the maximum number of times the device is reproc-
essed as intended by the person submitting the premarket no-
tification. Within six months after enactment of this sub-
section, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a
list of the types so identified, and shall revise the list as appro-
priate. Reports under subsection (k) for devices or types of de-
vices within a type included on the list are, upon publication
of the list, required to include such validation data.
(B) In the case of each report under subsection (k) that
was submitted to the Secretary before the publication of the
initial list under subparagraph (A), or any revision thereof, and
was for a device or type of device included on such list, the per-
son who submitted the report under subsection (k) shall submit
validation data as described in subparagraph (A) to the Sec-
retary not later than nine months after the publication of the
list. During such nine-month period, the Secretary may not
take any action under this Act against such device solely on
the basis that the validation data for the device have not been
submitted to the Secretary. After the submission of the valida-
tion data to the Secretary, the Secretary may not determine
that the device is misbranded under section 502(o), adulterated
under section 501(f)(1)(B), or take action against the device
under section 301(p) for failure to provide any information re-
quired by subsection (k) until (i) the review is terminated by
withdrawal of the submission of the report under subsection
(k); (ii) the Secretary finds the data to be acceptable and issues
a letter; or (iii) the Secretary determines that the device is not
substantially equivalent to a predicate device. Upon a deter-
mination that a device is not substantially equivalent to a
predicate device, or if such submission is withdrawn, the de-
vice can no longer be legally marketed.
(C) In the case of a report under subsection (k) for a device
identified under subparagraph (A) that is of a type for which
the Secretary has not previously received a report under such
subsection, the Secretary may, in advance of revising the list
under subparagraph (A) to include such type, require that the
report include the validation data specified in subparagraph
(A).
(D) Section 502(o) applies with respect to the failure of a
report under subsection (k) to include validation data required
under subparagraph (A).
(2) With respect to critical or semi-critical reprocessed single-
use devices that, under subsection (l) or (m), are exempt from the
requirement of submitting reports under subsection (k):
(A) The Secretary shall identify such devices or types of
devices for which such exemptions should be terminated in
order to provide a reasonable assurance of the safety and effec-
tiveness of the devices. The Secretary shall publish in the Fed-
eral Register a list of the devices or types of devices so identi-
fied, and shall revise the list as appropriate. The exemption for
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
166
Sec. 511
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Sec. 511 repealed by sec. 701 of P.L. 91–513.
1 Sec. 108 of P.L. 90–399, which added sec. 512, provides the following effective date and rules
of application:
each device or type included on the list is terminated upon the
publication of the list. For each report under subsection (k)
submitted pursuant to this subparagraph the Secretary shall
require the validation data described in paragraph (1)(A).
(B) For each device or type of device included on the list
under subparagraph (A), a report under subsection (k) shall be
submitted to the Secretary not later than 15 months after the
publication of the initial list, or a revision of the list, whichever
terminates the exemption for the device. During such 15-
month period, the Secretary may not take any action under
this Act against such device solely on the basis that such re-
port has not been submitted to the Secretary. After the sub-
mission of the report to the Secretary the Secretary may not
determine that the device is misbranded under section 502(o),
adulterated under section 501(f)(1)(B), or take action against
the device under section 301(p) for failure to provide any infor-
mation required by subsection (k) until (i) the review is termi-
nated by withdrawal of the submission; (ii) the Secretary deter-
mines by order that the device is substantially equivalent to a
predicate device; or (iii) the Secretary determines by order that
the device is not substantially equivalent to a predicate device.
Upon a determination that a device is not substantially equiva-
lent to a predicate device, the device can no longer be legally
marketed.
(C) In the case of semi-critical devices, the initial list
under subparagraph (A) shall be published not later than 18
months after the effective date of this subsection. In the case
of critical devices, the initial list under such subparagraph
shall be published not later than six months after such effec-
tive date.
(D) Section 502(o) applies with respect to the failure to
submit a report under subsection (k) that is required pursuant
to subparagraph (A), including a failure of the report to include
validation data required in such subparagraph.
(E) The termination under subparagraph (A) of an exemp-
tion under subsection (l) or (m) for a critical or semicritical re-
processed single-use device does not terminate the exemption
under subsection (l) or (m) for the original device.
(p) Registrations under subsections (b), (c), (d), and (i) (includ-
ing the submission of updated information) shall be submitted to
the Secretary by electronic means, upon a finding by the Secretary
that the electronic receipt of such registrations is feasible, unless
the Secretary grants a request for waiver of such requirement be-
cause use of electronic means is not reasonable for the person re-
questing such waiver.
SEC. 511. 1 * * *.
NEW ANIMAL DRUGS
SEC. 512. 1 ø21 U.S.C. 360b¿ (a)(1) A new animal drug shall,
with respect to any particular use or intended use of such drug, be
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
167
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
SEC. 108. (a) øEffective date Aug. 1, 1969.¿
(b)(1) As used in this subsection, the term ‘‘effective date’’ means the effective date specified
in subsection (a) of this section; the term ‘‘basic Act’’ means the Federal Food, Drug, and Cos-
metic Act; and other terms used both in this section and the basic Act shall have the same
meaning as they have, or had, at the time referred to in the context, under the basic Act.
(2) Any approval, prior to the effective date, of a new animal drug or of an animal feed bearing
or containing a new animal drug, whether granted by approval of a new-drug application, mas-
ter file, antibiotic regulation, or food additive regulation, shall continue in effect, and shall be
subject to change in accordance with the provisions of the basic Act as amended by this Act.
(3) In the case of any drug (other than a drug subject to section 512(n) of the basic Act as
amended by this Act) intended for use in animals other than man which, on October 9, 1962,
(A) was commercially used or sold in the United States, (B) was not a new drug as defined by
section 201(p) of the basic Act as then in force, and (C) was not covered by an effective applica-
tion under section 505 of that Act, the words ‘‘effectiveness’’ and ‘‘effective’’ contained in section
201 (w) as added by this Act to the basic Act shall not apply to such drug when intended solely
for use under conditions prescribed, recommended, or suggested in labeling with respect to such
drug on that day.
(4) Regulations providing for fees (and advance deposits to cover fees) which on the day pre-
ceding the effective date applicable under subsection (a) of this section were in effect pursuant
to section 507 of the basic Act shall, except as the Secretary may otherwise prescribe, be deemed
to apply also under section 512(n) of the basic Act, and appropriations of fees (and of advance
deposits to cover fees) available for the purposes specified in such section 507 as in effect prior
to the effective date shall also be available for the purposes specified in section 512(n), including
preparatory work or proceedings prior to that date.
2 As amended by P.L. 104–170, section 4, it is now covered by section 402(a)(2)(C)(ii).
deemed unsafe for the purposes of section 501(a)(5) and section
402(a)(2)(D) 2 unless—
(A) there is in effect an approval of an application filed
pursuant to subsection (b) with respect to such use or intended
use of such drug, and
(B) such drug, its labeling, and such use conform to such
approved application.
A new animal drug shall also be deemed unsafe for such purposes
in the event of removal from the establishment of a manufacturer,
packer, or distributor of such drug for use in the manufacture of
animal feed in any State unless at the time of such removal such
manufacturer, packer, or distributor has an unrevoked written
statement from the consignee of such drug, or notice from the Sec-
retary, to the effect that, with respect to the use of such drug in
animal feed, such consignee (i) holds a license issued under sub-
section (m) and has in its possession current approved labeling for
such drug in animal feed; or (ii) will, if the consignee is not a user
of the drug, ship such drug only to a holder of a license issued
under subsection (m).
(2) An animal feed bearing or containing a new animal drug
shall, with respect to any particular use or intended use of such
animal feed be deemed unsafe for the purposes of section 501(a)(6)
unless—
(A) there is in effect an approval of an application filed
pursuant to subsection (b) with respect to such drug, as used
in such animal feed,
(B) such animal feed is manufactured at a site for which
there is in effect a license issued pursuant to subsection (m)(1)
to manufacture such animal feed, and
(C) such animal feed and its labeling, distribution, holding,
and use conform to the conditions and indications of use pub-
lished pursuant to subsection (i).
(3) A new animal drug or an animal feed bearing or containing
a new animal drug shall not be deemed unsafe for the purposes of
section 501(a)(5) or (6) if such article is for investigational use and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
168
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Pursuant to subsections (c) and (d) of section 2 of P.L. 103–396, paragraphs (4) and (5) shall
become effective:
(c) REGULATIONS.—Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Sec-
retary of Health and Human Services shall promulgate regulations to implement paragraphs
(4)(A) and (5) of section 512(a) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (as amended by
subsection (a)).
(d) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments made by this section shall take effect upon the adop-
tion of the final regulations under subsection (c).
1 See footnote 1 on page 153.
conforms to the terms of an exemption in effect with respect there-
to under section 512(j).
(4) 1(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), if an approval
of an application filed under subsection (b) is in effect with respect
to a particular use or intended use of a new animal drug, the drug
shall not be deemed unsafe for the purposes of paragraph (1) and
shall be exempt from the requirements of section 502(f) with re-
spect to a different use or intended use of the drug, other than a
use in or on animal feed, if such use or intended use—
(i) is by or on the lawful written or oral order of a licensed
veterinarian within the context of a veterinarian-client-patient
relationship, as defined by the Secretary; and
(ii) is in compliance with regulations promulgated by the
Secretary that establish the conditions for such different use or
intended use.
The regulations promulgated by the Secretary under clause (ii)
may prohibit particular uses of an animal drug and shall not per-
mit such different use of an animal drug if the labeling of another
animal drug that contains the same active ingredient and which is
in the same dosage form and concentration provides for such dif-
ferent use.
(B) If the Secretary finds that there is a reasonable probability
that a use of an animal drug authorized under subparagraph (A)
may present a risk to the public health, the Secretary may—
(i) establish a safe level for a residue of an animal drug
when it is used for such different use authorized by subpara-
graph (A); and
(ii) require the development of a practical, analytical meth-
od for the detection of residues of such drug above the safe
level established under clause (i).
The use of an animal drug that results in residues exceeding a safe
level established under clause (i) shall be considered an unsafe use
of such drug under paragraph (1). Safe levels may be established
under clause (i) either by regulation or order.
(C) The Secretary may by general regulation provide access to
the records of veterinarians to ascertain any use or intended use
authorized under subparagraph (A) that the Secretary has deter-
mined may present a risk to the public health.
(D) If the Secretary finds, after affording an opportunity for
public comment, that a use of an animal drug authorized under
subparagraph (A) presents a risk to the public health or that an
analytical method required under subparagraph (B) has not been
developed and submitted to the Secretary, the Secretary may, by
order, prohibit any such use.
(5) 1 If the approval of an application filed under section 505
is in effect, the drug under such application shall not be deemed
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
169
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
unsafe for purposes of paragraph (1) and shall be exempt from the
requirements of section 502(f) with respect to a use or intended use
of the drug in animals if such use or intended use—
(A) is by or on the lawful written or oral order of a licensed
veterinarian within the context of a veterinarian-client-patient
relationship, as defined by the Secretary; and
(B) is in compliance with regulations promulgated by the
Secretary that establish the conditions for the use or intended
use of the drug in animals.
(6) For purposes of section 402(a)(2)(D), a use or intended use
of a new animal drug shall not be deemed unsafe under this sec-
tion if the Secretary establishes a tolerance for such drug and any
edible portion of any animal imported into the United States does
not contain residues exceeding such tolerance. In establishing such
tolerance, 
the 
Secretary 
shall 
rely 
on 
data 
sufficient 
to
demonstrate that a proposed tolerance is safe based on similar food
safety criteria used by the Secretary to establish tolerances for ap-
plications for new animal drugs filed under subsection (b)(1). The
Secretary may consider and rely on data submitted by the drug
manufacturer, including data submitted to appropriate regulatory
authorities in any country where the new animal drug is lawfully
used or data available from a relevant international organization,
to the extent such data are not inconsistent with the criteria used
by the Secretary to establish a tolerance for applications for new
animal drugs filed under subsection (b)(1). For purposes of this
paragraph, ‘‘relevant international organization’’ means the Codex
Alimenterius Commission or other international organization
deemed appropriate by the Secretary. The Secretary may, under
procedures specified by regulation, revoke a tolerance established
under this paragraph if information demonstrates that the use of
the new animal drug under actual use conditions results in food
being imported into the United States with residues exceeding the
tolerance or if scientific evidence shows the tolerance to be unsafe.
(b)(1) Any person may file with the Secretary an application
with respect to any intended use or uses of a new animal drug.
Such person shall submit to the Secretary as a part of the applica-
tion (A) full reports of investigations which have been made to
show whether or not such drug is safe and effective for use; (B) a
full list of the articles used as components of such drug; (C) a full
statement of the composition of such drug; (D) a full description of
the methods used in, and the facilities and controls used for, the
manufacture, processing, and packing of such drug; (E) such sam-
ples of such drug and of the articles used as components thereof,
of any animal feed for use in or on which such drug is intended,
and of the edible portions or products (before or after slaughter) of
animals to which such drug (directly or in or on animal feed) is in-
tended to be administered, as the Secretary may require; (F) speci-
mens of the labeling proposed to be used for such drug, or in case
such drug is intended for use in animal feed, proposed labeling ap-
propriate for such use, and specimens of the labeling for the drug
to be manufactured, packed, or distributed by the applicant; (G) a
description of practicable methods for determining the quantity, if
any, of such drug in or on food, and any substance formed in or
on food, because of its use; and (H) the proposed tolerance or with-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
170
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
drawal period or other use restrictions for such drug if any toler-
ance or withdrawal period or other use restrictions are required in
order to assure that the proposed use of such drug will be safe. The
applicant shall file with the application the patent number and the
expiration date of any patent which claims the new animal drug for
which the applicant filed the application or which claims a method
of using such drug and with respect to which a claim of patent in-
fringement could reasonably be asserted if a person not licensed by
the owner engaged in the manufacture, use, or sale of the drug. If
an application is filed under this subsection for a drug and a patent
which claims such drug or a method of using such drug is issued
after the filing date but before approval of the application, the ap-
plicant shall amend the application to include the information re-
quired by the preceding sentence. Upon approval of the application,
the Secretary shall publish information submitted under the two
preceding sentences.
(2) Any person may file with the Secretary an abbreviated ap-
plication for the approval of a new animal drug. An abbreviated ap-
plication shall contain the information required by subsection (n).
(3) Any person intending to file an application under para-
graph (1) or a request for an investigational exemption under sub-
section (j) shall be entitled to one or more conferences prior to such
submission to reach an agreement acceptable to the Secretary es-
tablishing a submission or an investigational requirement, which
may include a requirement for a field investigation. A decision es-
tablishing a submission or an investigational requirement shall
bind the Secretary and the applicant or requestor unless (A) the
Secretary and the applicant or requestor mutually agree to modify
the requirement, or (B) the Secretary by written order determines
that a substantiated scientific requirement essential to the deter-
mination of safety or effectiveness of the animal drug involved has
appeared after the conference. No later than 25 calendar days after
each such conference, the Secretary shall provide a written order
setting forth a scientific justification specific to the animal drug
and intended uses under consideration if the agreement referred to
in the first sentence requires more than one field investigation as
being essential to provide substantial evidence of effectiveness for
the intended uses of the drug. Nothing in this paragraph shall be
construed as compelling the Secretary to require a field investiga-
tion.
(c)(1) Within one hundred and eighty days after the filing of an
application pursuant to subsection (b), or such additional period as
may be agreed upon by the Secretary and the applicant, the Sec-
retary shall either (A) issue an order approving the application if
he then finds that none of the grounds for denying approval speci-
fied in subsection (d) applies, or (B) give the applicant notice of an
opportunity for a hearing before the Secretary under subsection (d)
on the question whether such application is approvable. If the ap-
plicant elects to accept the opportunity for a hearing by written re-
quest within thirty days after such notice, such hearing shall com-
mence not more than ninety days after the expiration of such thirty
days unless the Secretary and the applicant otherwise agree. Any
such hearing shall thereafter be conducted on an expedited basis
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
171
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
and the Secretary’s order thereon shall be issued within ninety
days after the date fixed by the Secretary for filing final briefs.
(2)(A) Subject to subparagraph (C), the Secretary shall approve
an abbreviated application for a drug unless the Secretary finds—
(i) the methods used in, or the facilities and controls used
for, the manufacture, processing, and packing of the drug are
inadequate to assure and preserve its identity, strength, qual-
ity, and purity;
(ii) the conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or sug-
gested in the proposed labeling are not reasonably certain to
be followed in practice or, except as provided in subparagraph
(B), information submitted with the application is insufficient
to show that each of the proposed conditions of use or similar
limitations (whether in the labeling or published pursuant to
subsection (i)) have been previously approved for the approved
new animal drug referred to in the application;
(iii) information submitted with the application is insuffi-
cient to show that the active ingredients are the same as those
of the approved new animal drug referred to in the application;
(iv)(I) if the application is for a drug whose active ingredi-
ents, route of administration, dosage form, strength, or use
with other animal drugs in animal feed is the same as the ac-
tive 
ingredients, route 
of 
administration, 
dosage 
form,
strength, or use with other animal drugs in animal feed of the
approved new animal drug referred to in the application, infor-
mation submitted in the application is insufficient to show that
the active ingredients, route of administration, dosage form,
strength, or use with other animal drugs in animal feed is the
same as that of the approved new animal drug, or
(II) if the application is for a drug whose active ingredi-
ents, route of administration, dosage form, strength, or use
with other animal drugs in animal feed is different from that
of the approved new animal drug referred to in the application,
no petition to file an application for the drug with the different
active ingredients, route of administration, dosage form,
strength, or use with other animal drugs in animal feed was
approved under subsection (n)(3);
(v) if the application was filed pursuant to the approval of
a petition under subsection (n)(3), the application did not con-
tain the information required by the Secretary respecting the
active ingredients, route of administration, dosage form,
strength, or use with other animal drugs in animal feed which
is not the same;
(vi) information submitted in the application is insufficient
to show that the drug is bioequivalent to the approved new
animal drug referred to in the application, or if the application
is filed under a petition approved pursuant to subsection (n)(3),
information submitted in the application is insufficient to show
that the active ingredients of the new animal drug are of the
same pharmacological or therapeutic class as the pharma-
cological or therapeutic class of the approved new animal drug
and that the new animal drug can be expected to have the
same therapeutic effect as the approved new animal drug when
used in accordance with the labeling;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
172
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(vii) information submitted in the application is insuffi-
cient to show that the labeling proposed for the drug is the
same as the labeling approved for the approved new animal
drug referred to in the application except for changes required
because of differences approved under a petition filed under
subsection (n)(3), because of a different withdrawal period, or
because the drug and the approved new animal drug are pro-
duced or distributed by different manufacturers;
(viii) information submitted in the application or any other
information available to the Secretary shows that (I) the inac-
tive ingredients of the drug are unsafe for use under the condi-
tions prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the labeling
proposed for the drug, (II) the composition of the drug is un-
safe under such conditions because of the type or quantity of
inactive ingredients included or the manner in which the inac-
tive ingredients are included, or (III) in the case of a drug for
food producing animals, the inactive ingredients of the drug or
its composition may be unsafe with respect to human food safe-
ty;
(ix) the approval under subsection (b)(1) of the approved
new animal drug referred to in the application filed under sub-
section (b)(2) has been withdrawn or suspended for grounds de-
scribed in paragraph (1) of subsection (e), the Secretary has
published a notice of a hearing to withdraw approval of the ap-
proved new animal drug for such grounds, the approval under
this paragraph of the new animal drug for which the applica-
tion under subsection (b)(2) was filed has been withdrawn or
suspended under subparagraph (G) for such grounds, or the
Secretary has determined that the approved new animal drug
has been withdrawn from sale for safety or effectiveness rea-
sons;
(x) the application does not meet any other requirement of
subsection (n); or
(xi) the application contains an untrue statement of mate-
rial fact.
(B) If the Secretary finds that a new animal drug for which an
application is submitted under subsection (b)(2) is bioequivalent to
the approved new animal drug referred to in such application and
that residues of the new animal drug are consistent with the toler-
ances established for such approved new animal drug but at a
withdrawal period which is different than the withdrawal period
approved for such approved new animal drug, the Secretary may
establish, on the basis of information submitted, such different
withdrawal period as the withdrawal period for the new animal
drug for purposes of the approval of such application for such drug.
(C) Within 180 days of the initial receipt of an application
under subsection (b)(2) or within such additional period as may be
agreed upon by the Secretary and the applicant, the Secretary shall
approve or disapprove the application.
(D) The approval of an application filed under subsection (b)(2)
shall be made effective on the last applicable date determined
under the following:
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
173
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(i) If the applicant only made a certification described in
clause (i) or (ii) of subsection (n)(1)(G) or in both such clauses,
the approval may be made effective immediately.
(ii) If the applicant made a certification described in clause
(iii) of subsection (n)(1)(G), the approval may be made effective
on the date certified under clause (iii).
(iii) If the applicant made a certification described in
clause (iv) of subsection (n)(1)(G), the approval shall be made
effective immediately unless an action is brought for infringe-
ment of a patent which is the subject of the certification before
the expiration of 45 days from the date the notice provided
under subsection (n)(2)(B)(i) is received. If such an action is
brought before the expiration of such days, the approval shall
be made effective upon the expiration of the 30 month period
beginning on the date of the receipt of the notice provided
under subsection (n)(2)(B) or such shorter or longer period as
the court may order because either party to the action failed
to reasonably cooperate in expediting the action, except that if
before the expiration of such period—
(I) the court decides that such patent is invalid or not
infringed, the approval shall be made effective on the date
of the court decision,
(II) the court decides that such patent has been in-
fringed, the approval shall be made effective on such date
as the court orders under section 271(e)(4)(A) of title 35,
United States Code, or
(III) the court grants a preliminary injunction prohib-
iting the applicant from engaging in the commercial manu-
facture or sale of the drug until the court decides the
issues of patent validity and infringement and if the court
decides that such patent is invalid or not infringed, the ap-
proval shall be made effective on the date of such court de-
cision.
In such an action, each of the parties shall reasonably cooper-
ate in expediting the action. Until the expiration of 45 days
from the date the notice made under subsection (n)(2)(B) is re-
ceived, no action may be brought under section 2201 of title 28,
United States Code, for a declaratory judgment with respect to
the patent. Any action brought under section 2201 shall be
brought in the judicial district where the defendant has its
principal place of business or a regular and established place
of business.
(iv) If the application contains a certification described in
clause (iv) of subsection (n)(1)(G) and is for a drug for which
a previous application has been filed under this subsection con-
taining such a certification, the application shall be made effec-
tive not earlier than 180 days after—
(I) the date the Secretary receives notice from the ap-
plicant under the previous application of the first commer-
cial marketing of the drug under the previous application,
or
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
174
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should be ‘‘clause (iii)(III)’’.
2 Probably should strike out ‘‘the date of the enactment of this paragraph’’ and inserting ‘‘No-
vember 16, 1988’’.
3 Probably should strike out ‘‘the date of enactment of this paragraph’’ and insert ‘‘November
16, 1988’’.
(II) the date of a decision of a court in an action de-
scribed in subclause (III) 1 holding the patent which is the
subject of the certification to be invalid or not infringed,
whichever is earlier.
(E) If the Secretary decides to disapprove an application, the
Secretary shall give the applicant notice of an opportunity for a
hearing before the Secretary on the question of whether such appli-
cation is approvable. If the applicant elects to accept the oppor-
tunity for hearing by written request within 30 days after such no-
tice, such hearing shall commence not more than 90 days after the
expiration of such 30 days unless the Secretary and the applicant
otherwise agree. Any such hearing shall thereafter be conducted on
an expedited basis and the Secretary’s order thereon shall be
issued within 90 days after the date fixed by the Secretary for fil-
ing final briefs.
(F)(i) If an application submitted under subsection (b)(1) for a
drug, no active ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active
ingredient) of which has been approved in any other application
under subsection (b)(1), is approved after the date of the enactment
of this paragraph 2, no application may be submitted under sub-
section (b)(2) which refers to the drug for which the subsection
(b)(1) application was submitted before the expiration of 5 years
from the date of the approval of the application under subsection
(b)(1), except that such an application may be submitted under sub-
section (b)(2) after the expiration of 4 years from the date of the
approval of the subsection (b)(1) application if it contains a certifi-
cation of patent invalidity or noninfringement described in clause
(iv) of subsection (n)(1)(G). The approval of such an application
shall be made effective in accordance with subparagraph (B) except
that, if an action for patent infringement is commenced during the
one-year period beginning 48 months after the date of the approval
of the subsection (b) application, the 30 month period referred to
in subparagraph (D)(iii) shall be extended by such amount of time
(if any) which is required for seven and one-half years to have
elapsed from the date of approval of the subsection (b) application.
(ii) If an application submitted under subsection (b)(1) for a
drug, which includes an active ingredient (including any ester or
salt of the active ingredient) that has been approved in another ap-
plication approved under such subsection, is approved after the
date of enactment of this paragraph 3 and if such application con-
tains substantial evidence of the effectiveness of the drug involved,
any studies of animal safety, or, in the case of food producing ani-
mals, human food safety studies (other than bioequivalence or res-
idue studies) required for the approval of the application and con-
ducted or sponsored by the applicant, the Secretary may not make
the approval of an application submitted under subsection (b)(2) for
the conditions of approval of such drug in the subsection (b)(1) ap-
plication effective before the expiration of 3 years from the date of
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
175
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
the approval of the application under subsection (b)(1) for such
drug.
(iii) If a supplement to an application approved under sub-
section (b)(1) is approved after the date of enactment of this para-
graph 2 and the supplement contains substantial evidence of the ef-
fectiveness of the drug involved, any studies of animal safety, or,
in the case of food producing animals, human food safety studies
(other than bioequivalence or residue studies) required for the ap-
proval of the supplement and conducted or sponsored by the person
submitting the supplement, the Secretary may not make the ap-
proval of an application submitted under subsection (b)(2) for a
change approved in the supplement effective before the expiration
of 3 years from the date of the approval of the supplement.
(iv) An applicant under subsection (b)(1) who comes within the
provisions of clause (i) of this subparagraph as a result of an appli-
cation which seeks approval for a use solely in non-food producing
animals, may elect, within 10 days of receiving such approval, to
waive clause (i) of this subparagraph, in which event the limitation
on approval of applications submitted under subsection (b)(2) set
forth in clause (ii) of this subparagraph shall be applicable to the
subsection (b)(1) application.
(v) If an application (including any supplement to a new ani-
mal drug application) submitted under subsection (b)(1) for a new
animal drug for a food-producing animal use, which includes an ac-
tive ingredient (including any ester or salt of the active ingredient)
which has been the subject of a waiver under clause (iv) is ap-
proved after the date of enactment of this paragraph 1, and if the
application contains substantial evidence of the effectiveness of the
drug involved, any studies of animal safety, or human food safety
studies (other than bioequivalence or residue studies) required for
the new approval of the application and conducted or sponsored by
the applicant, the Secretary may not make the approval of an ap-
plication (including any supplement to such application) submitted
under subsection (b)(2) for the new conditions of approval of such
drug in the subsection (b)(1) application effective before the expira-
tion of five years from the date of approval of the application under
subsection (b)(1) for such drug. The provisions of this paragraph
shall apply only to the first approval for a food-producing animal
use for the same applicant after the waiver under clause (iv).
(G) If an approved application submitted under subsection
(b)(2) for a new animal drug refers to a drug the approval of which
was withdrawn or suspended for grounds described in paragraph
(1) or (2) of subsection (e) or was withdrawn or suspended under
this subparagraph or which, as determined by the Secretary, has
been withdrawn from sale for safety or effectiveness reasons, the
approval of the drug under this paragraph shall be withdrawn or
suspended—
(i) for the same period as the withdrawal or suspension
under subsection (e) or this subparagraph, or
(ii) if the approved new animal drug has been withdrawn
from sale, for the period of withdrawal from sale or, if earlier,
the period ending on the date the Secretary determines that
the withdrawal from sale is not for safety or effectiveness rea-
sons.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
176
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(H) For purposes of this paragraph:
(i) The term ‘‘bioequivalence’’ means the rate and extent to
which the active ingredient or therapeutic ingredient is ab-
sorbed from a new animal drug and becomes available at the
site of drug action.
(ii) A new animal drug shall be considered to be bioequiva-
lent to the approved new animal drug referred to in its applica-
tion under subsection (n) if—
(I) the rate and extent of absorption of the drug do not
show a significant difference from the rate and extent of
absorption of the approved new animal drug referred to in
the application when administered at the same dose of the
active ingredient under similar experimental conditions in
either a single dose or multiple doses;
(II) the extent of absorption of the drug does not show
a significant difference from the extent of absorption of the
approved new animal drug referred to in the application
when administered at the same dose of the active ingre-
dient under similar experimental conditions in either a
single dose or multiple doses and the difference from the
approved new animal drug in the rate of absorption of the
drug is intentional, is reflected in its proposed labeling, is
not essential to the attainment of effective drug concentra-
tions in use, and is considered scientifically insignificant
for the drug in attaining the intended purposes of its use
and preserving human food safety; or
(III) in any case in which the Secretary determines
that the measurement of the rate and extent of absorption
or excretion of the new animal drug in biological fluids is
inappropriate or impractical, an appropriate acute phar-
macological effects test or other test of the new animal
drug and, when deemed scientifically necessary, of the ap-
proved new animal drug referred to in the application in
the species to be tested or in an appropriate animal model
does not show a significant difference between the new
animal drug and such approved new animal drug when ad-
ministered at the same dose under similar experimental
conditions.
If the approved new animal drug referred to in the application
for a new animal drug under subsection (n) is approved for use
in more than one animal species, the bioequivalency informa-
tion described in subclauses (I), (II), and (III) shall be obtained
for one species, or if the Secretary deems appropriate based on
scientific principles, shall be obtained for more than one spe-
cies. The Secretary may prescribe the dose to be used in deter-
mining bioequivalency under subclause (I), (II), or (III). To as-
sure that the residues of the new animal drug will be con-
sistent with the established tolerances for the approved new
animal drug referred to in the application under subsection
(b)(2) upon the expiration of the withdrawal period contained
in the application for the new animal drug, the Secretary shall
require bioequivalency data or residue depletion studies of the
new animal drug or such other data or studies as the Secretary
considers appropriate based on scientific principles. If the Sec-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
177
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘the date of the enactment of this sentence’’ and insert ‘‘November
16, 1988’’.
retary requires one or more residue studies under the pre-
ceding sentence, the Secretary may not require that the assay
methodology used to determine the withdrawal period of the
new animal drug be more rigorous than the methodology used
to determine the withdrawal period for the approved new ani-
mal drug referred to in the application. If such studies are re-
quired and if the approved new animal drug, referred to in the
application for the new animal drug for which such studies are
required, is approved for use in more than one animal species,
such studies shall be conducted for one species, or if the Sec-
retary deems appropriate based on scientific principles, shall
be conducted for more than one species.
(3) If the patent information described in subsection (b)(1)
could not be filed with the submission of an application under sub-
section (b)(1) because the application was filed before the patent in-
formation was required under subsection (b)(1) or a patent was
issued after the application was approved under such subsection,
the holder of an approved application shall file with the Secretary
the patent number and the expiration date of any patent which
claims the new animal drug for which the application was filed or
which claims a method of using such drug and with respect to
which a claim of patent infringement could reasonably be asserted
if a person not licensed by the owner engaged in the manufacture,
use, or sale of the drug. If the holder of an approved application
could not file patent information under subsection (b)(1) because it
was not required at the time the application was approved, the
holder shall file such information under this subsection not later
than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this sentence 1, and
if the holder of an approved application could not file patent infor-
mation under subsection (b)(1) because no patent had been issued
when an application was filed or approved, the holder shall file
such information under this subsection not later than 30 days after
the date the patent involved is issued. Upon the submission of pat-
ent information under this subsection, the Secretary shall publish
it.
(4) A drug manufactured in a pilot or other small facility may
be used to demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of the drug and
to obtain approval for the drug prior to manufacture of the drug
in a larger facility, unless the Secretary makes a determination
that a full scale production facility is necessary to ensure the safety
or effectiveness of the drug.
(d)(1) If the Secretary finds, after due notice to the applicant
in accordance with subsection (c) and giving him an opportunity for
a hearing, in accordance with said subsection, that—
(A) the investigations, reports of which are required to be
submitted to the Secretary pursuant to subsection (b), do not
include adequate tests by all methods reasonably applicable to
show whether or not such drug is safe for use under the condi-
tions prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the proposed
labeling thereof;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
178
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(B) the results of such tests show that such drug is unsafe
for use under such conditions or do not show that such drug
is safe for use under such conditions;
(C) the methods used in, and the facilities and controls
used for, the manufacture, processing, and packing of such
drug are inadequate to preserve its identity, strength, quality,
and purity;
(D) upon the basis of the information submitted to him as
part of the application, or upon the basis of any other informa-
tion before him with respect to such drug, he has insufficient
information to determine whether such drug is safe for use
under such conditions;
(E) evaluated on the basis of the information submitted to
him as part of the application and any other information before
him with respect to such drug, there is a lack of substantial
evidence that the drug will have the effect it purports or is rep-
resented to have under the conditions of use prescribed, rec-
ommended, or suggested in the proposed labeling thereof;
(F) upon the basis of information submitted to the Sec-
retary as part of the application or any other information be-
fore the Secretary with respect to such drug, any use pre-
scribed, recommended, or suggested in labeling proposed for
such drug will result in a residue of such drug in excess of a
tolerance found by the Secretary to be safe for such drug;
(G) the application failed to contain the patent information
prescribed by subsection (b)(1);
(H) based on a fair evaluation of all material facts, such
labeling is false or misleading in any particular; or
(I) such drug induces cancer when ingested by man or ani-
mal or, after tests which are appropriate for the evaluation of
the safety of such drug, induces cancer in man or animal, ex-
cept that the foregoing provisions of this subparagraph shall
not apply with respect to such drug if the Secretary finds that,
under the conditions of use specified in proposed labeling and
reasonably certain to be followed in practice (i) such drug will
not adversely affect the animals for which it is intended, and
(ii) no residue of such drug will be found (by methods of exam-
ination prescribed or approved by the Secretary by regulations,
which regulations shall not be subject to subsections (c), (d),
and (h)), in any edible portion of such animals after slaughter
or in any food yielded by or derived from the living animals;
he shall issue an order refusing to approve the application. If, after
such notice and opportunity for hearing, the Secretary finds that
subparagraphs (A) through (I) do not apply, he shall issue an order
approving the application.
(2) In determining whether such drug is safe for use under the
conditions prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the proposed
labeling thereof, the Secretary shall consider, among other relevant
factors, (A) the probable consumption of such drug and of any sub-
stance formed in or on food because of the use of such drug, (B)
the cumulative effect on man or animal of such drug, taking into
account any chemically or pharmacologically related substance, (C)
safety factors which in the opinion of experts, qualified by scientific
training and experience to evaluate the safety of such drugs, are
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
179
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
appropriate for the use of animal experimentation data, and (D)
whether the conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or sug-
gested in the proposed labeling are reasonably certain to be fol-
lowed in practice. Any order issued under this subsection refusing
to approve an application shall state the findings upon which it is
based.
(3) As used in this section, the term ‘‘substantial evidence’’
means evidence consisting of one or more adequate and well con-
trolled investigations, such as—
(A) a study in a target species;
(B) a study in laboratory animals;
(C) any field investigation that may be required under this
section and that meets the requirements of subsection (b)(3) if
a presubmission conference is requested by the applicant;
(D) a bioequivalence study; or
(E) an in vitro study;
by experts qualified by scientific training and experience to evalu-
ate the effectiveness of the drug involved, on the basis of which it
could fairly and reasonably be concluded by such experts that the
drug will have the effect it purports or is represented to have
under the conditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested
in the labeling or proposed labeling thereof.
(4) In a case in which an animal drug contains more than one
active ingredient, or the labeling of the drug prescribes, rec-
ommends, or suggests use of the drug in combination with one or
more other animal drugs, and the active ingredients or drugs in-
tended for use in the combination have previously been separately
approved for particular uses and conditions of use for which they
are intended for use in the combination—
(A) the Secretary shall not issue an order under paragraph
(1)(A), (1)(B), or (1)(D) refusing to approve the application for
such combination on human food safety grounds unless the
Secretary finds that the application fails to establish that—
(i) none of the active ingredients or drugs intended for
use in the combination, respectively, at the longest with-
drawal time of any of the active ingredients or drugs in
the combination, respectively, exceeds its established toler-
ance; or
(ii) none of the active ingredients or drugs in the com-
bination interferes with the methods of analysis for an-
other of the active ingredients or drugs in the combination,
respectively;
(B) the Secretary shall not issue an order under paragraph
(1)(A), (1)(B), or (1)(D) refusing to approve the application for
such combination on target animal safety grounds unless the
Secretary finds that—
(i)(I) there is a substantiated scientific issue, specific
to one or more of the active ingredients or animal drugs
in the combination, that cannot adequately be evaluated
based on information contained in the application for the
combination (including any investigations, studies, or tests
for which the applicant has a right of reference or use from
the person by or for whom the investigations, studies, or
tests were conducted); or
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
180
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(II) there is a scientific issue raised by target animal
observations contained in studies submitted to the
Secretary as part of the application; and
(ii) based on the Secretary’s evaluation of the informa-
tion contained in the application with respect to the issues
identified in clauses (i) (I) and (II), paragraph (1) (A), (B),
or (D) apply;
(C) except in the case of a combination that contains a
nontopical antibacterial ingredient or animal drug, the
Secretary shall not issue an order under paragraph (1)(E) re-
fusing to approve an application for a combination animal drug
intended for use other than in animal feed or drinking water
unless the Secretary finds that the application fails to dem-
onstrate that—
(i) there is substantial evidence that any active ingre-
dient or animal drug intended only for the same use as an-
other active ingredient or animal drug in the combination
makes a contribution to labeled effectiveness;
(ii) each active ingredient or animal drug intended for
at least one use that is different from all other active in-
gredients or animal drugs used in the combination
provides appropriate concurrent use for the intended tar-
get population; or
(iii) 
where 
based 
on 
scientific 
information 
the
Secretary has reason to believe the active ingredients or
animal drugs may be physically incompatible or have dis-
parate dosing regimens, such active ingredients or
animal drugs are physically compatible or do not have dis-
parate dosing regimens; and
(D) the Secretary shall not issue an order under paragraph
(1)(E) refusing to approve an application for a combination ani-
mal drug intended for use in animal feed or drinking water un-
less the Secretary finds that the application fails to dem-
onstrate that—
(i) there is substantial evidence that any active ingre-
dient or animal drug intended only for the same use as an-
other active ingredient or animal drug in the combination
makes a contribution to the labeled effectiveness;
(ii) each of the active ingredients or animal drugs in-
tended for at least one use that is different from all other
active ingredients or animal drugs used in the combination
provides appropriate concurrent use for the intended tar-
get population;
(iii) where a combination contains more than one non-
topical antibacterial ingredient or animal drug, there is
substantial evidence that each of the nontopical anti-
bacterial ingredients or animal drugs makes a contribution
to the labeled effectiveness, except that for purposes of this
clause, antibacterial ingredient or animal drug does not in-
clude the ionophore or arsenical classes of animal drugs; or
(iv) where based on scientific information the Sec-
retary has reason to believe the active ingredients or ani-
mal drugs intended for use in drinking water may be phys-
ically incompatible, such active ingredients or animal
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
181
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
drugs intended for use in drinking water are physically
compatible.
(e)(1) The Secretary shall, after due notice and opportunity for
hearing to the applicant, issue an order withdrawing approval of
an application filed pursuant to subsection (b) with respect to any
new animal drug if the Secretary finds—
(A) that experience or scientific data show that such drug
is unsafe for use under the conditions of use upon the basis of
which the application was approved or the condition of use au-
thorized under subsection (a)(4)(A);
(B) that new evidence not contained in such application or
not available to the Secretary until after such application was
approved, or tests by new methods, or tests by methods not
deemed reasonably applicable when such application was ap-
proved, evaluated together with the evidence available to the
Secretary when the application was approved, shows that such
drug is not shown to be safe for use under the conditions of use
upon the basis of which the application was approved or that
subparagraph (I) of paragraph (1) of subsection (d) applies to
such drug;
(C) on the basis of new information before him with re-
spect to such drug, evaluated together with the evidence avail-
able to him when the application was approved, that there is
a lack of substantial evidence that such drug will have the ef-
fect it purports or is represented to have under the conditions
of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the labeling
thereof;
(D) the patent information prescribed by subsection (c)(3)
was not filed within 30 days after the receipt of written notice
from the Secretary specifying the failure to file such informa-
tion;
(E) that the application contains any untrue statement of
a material fact; or
(F) that the applicant has made any changes from the
standpoint of safety or effectiveness beyond the variations pro-
vided for in the application unless he has supplemented the
application by filing with the Secretary adequate information
respecting all such changes and unless there is in effect an ap-
proval of the supplemental application. The supplemental ap-
plication shall be treated in the same manner as the original
application.
If the Secretary (or in his absence the officer acting as Secretary)
finds that there is an imminent hazard to the health of man or of
the animals for which such drug is intended, he may suspend the
approval of such application immediately, and give the applicant
prompt notice of his action and afford the applicant the opportunity
for an expedited hearing under this subsection; but the authority
conferred by this sentence to suspend the approval of an applica-
tion shall not be delegated.
(2) The Secretary may also, after due notice and opportunity
for hearing to the applicant, issue an order withdrawing the ap-
proval of an application with respect to any new animal drug under
this section if the Secretary finds—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
182
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(A) that the applicant has failed to establish a system for
maintaining required records, or has repeatedly or deliberately
failed to maintain such records or to make required reports in
accordance with a regulation or order under subsection (l), or
the applicant has refused to permit access to, or copying or
verification of, such records as required by paragraph (2) of
such subsection;
(B) that on the basis of new information before him, evalu-
ated together with the evidence before him when the applica-
tion was approved, the methods used in, or the facilities and
controls used for, the manufacture, processing, and packing of
such drug are inadequate to assure and preserve its identity,
strength, quality, and purity and were not made adequate
within a reasonable time after receipt of written notice from
the Secretary specifying the matter complained of; or
(C) that on the basis of new information before him, evalu-
ated together with the evidence before him when the applica-
tion was approved, the labeling of such drug, based on a fair
evaluation of all material facts, is false or misleading in any
particular and was not corrected within a reasonable time after
receipt of written notice from the Secretary specifying the mat-
ter complained of.
(3) Any order under this subsection shall state the findings
upon which it is based.
(f) Whenever the Secretary finds that the facts so require, he
shall revoke any previous order under subsection (d), (e), or (m) re-
fusing, withdrawing, or suspending approval of an application and
shall approve such application or reinstate such approval, as may
be appropriate.
(g) Orders of the Secretary issued under this section (other
than orders issuing, amending, or repealing regulations) shall be
served (1) in person by any officer or employee of the department
designated by the Secretary or (2) by mailing the order by reg-
istered mail or by certified mail addressed to the applicant or re-
spondent at his last known address in the records of the Secretary.
(h) An appeal may be taken by the applicant from an order of
the Secretary refusing or withdrawing approval of an application
filed under subsection (b) or (m) of this section. The provisions of
subsection (h) of section 505 of this Act shall govern any such ap-
peal.
(i) When a new animal drug application filed pursuant to sub-
section (b) is approved, the Secretary shall by notice, which upon
publication shall be effective as a regulation, publish in the Federal
Register the name and address of the applicant and the conditions
and indications of use of the new animal drug covered by such ap-
plication, including any tolerance and withdrawal period or other
use restrictions and, if such new animal drug is intended for use
in animal feed, appropriate purposes and conditions of use (includ-
ing special labeling requirements and any requirement that an ani-
mal feed bearing or containing the new animal drug be limited to
use under the professional supervision of a licensed veterinarian)
applicable to any animal feed for use in which such drug is ap-
proved, and such other information, upon the basis of which such
application was approved, as the Secretary deems necessary to as-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
183
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should be ‘‘this subsection’’.
sure the safe and effective use of such drug. Upon withdrawal of
approval of such new animal drug application or upon its suspen-
sion, the Secretary shall forthwith revoke or suspend, as the case
may be, the regulation published pursuant to this subsection (i) 1
insofar as it is based on the approval of such application.
(j) To the extent consistent with the public health, the Sec-
retary shall promulgate regulations for exempting from the oper-
ation of this section new animal drugs, and animal feeds bearing
or containing new animal drugs, intended solely for investigational
use by experts qualified by scientific training and experience to in-
vestigate the safety and effectiveness of animal drugs. Such regula-
tions may, in the discretion of the Secretary, among other condi-
tions relating to the protection of the public health, provide for con-
ditioning such exemption upon the establishment and maintenance
of such records, and the making of such reports to the Secretary,
by the manufacturer or the sponsor of the investigation of such ar-
ticle, of data (including but not limited to analytical reports by in-
vestigators) obtained as a result of such investigational use of such
article, as the Secretary finds will enable him to evaluate the safe-
ty and effectiveness of such article in the event of the filing of an
application pursuant to this section. Such regulations, among other
things, shall set forth the conditions (if any) upon which animals
treated with such articles, and any products of such animals (be-
fore or after slaughter), may be marketed for food use.
(k) While approval of an application for a new animal drug is
effective, a food shall not, by reason of bearing or containing such
drug or any substance formed in or on the food because of its use
in accordance with such application (including the conditions and
indications of use prescribed pursuant to subsection (i)), be consid-
ered adulterated within the meaning of clause (1) of section 402(a).
(l)(1) In the case of any new animal drug for which an approval
of an application filed pursuant to subsection (b) is in effect, the
applicant shall establish and maintain such records, and make
such reports to the Secretary, of data relating to experience, includ-
ing experience with uses authorized under subsection (a)(4)(A), and
other data or information, received or otherwise obtained by such
applicant with respect to such drug, or with respect to animal feeds
bearing or containing such drug, as the Secretary may by general
regulation, or by order with respect to such application, prescribe
on the basis of a finding that such records and reports are nec-
essary in order to enable the Secretary to determine, or facilitate
a determination, whether there is or may be ground for invoking
subsection (e) or subsection (m)(4) of this section. Such regulation
or order shall provide, where the Secretary deems it to be appro-
priate, for the examination, upon request, by the persons to whom
such regulation or order is applicable, of similar information re-
ceived or otherwise obtained by the Secretary.
(2) Every person required under this subsection to maintain
records, and every person in charge or custody thereof, shall, upon
request of an officer or employee designated by the Secretary, per-
mit such officer or employee at all reasonable times to have access
to and copy and verify such records.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
184
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(m)(1) Any person may file with the Secretary an application
for a license to manufacture animal feeds bearing or containing
new animal drugs. Such person shall submit to the Secretary as
part of the application (A) a full statement of the business name
and address of the specific facility at which the manufacturing is
to take place and the facility’s registration number, (B) the name
and signature of the responsible individual or individuals for that
facility, (C) a certification that the animal feeds bearing or con-
taining new animal drugs are manufactured and labeled in accord-
ance with the applicable regulations published pursuant to sub-
section (i), and (D) a certification that the methods used in, and the
facilities and controls used for, manufacturing, processing, pack-
aging, and holding such animal feeds are in conformity with cur-
rent 
good 
manufacturing 
practice 
as 
described 
in 
section
501(a)(2)(B).
(2) Within 90 days after the filing of an application pursuant
to paragraph (1), or such additional period as may be agreed upon
by the Secretary and the applicant, the Secretary shall (A) issue an
order approving the application if the Secretary then finds that
none of the grounds for denying approval specified in paragraph (3)
applies, or (B) give the applicant notice of an opportunity for a
hearing before the Secretary under paragraph (3) on the question
whether such application is approvable. The procedure governing
such a hearing shall be the procedure set forth in the last two sen-
tences of subsection (c)(1).
(3) If the Secretary, after due notice to the applicant in accord-
ance with paragraph (2) and giving the applicant an opportunity
for a hearing in accordance with such paragraph, finds, on the
basis of information submitted to the Secretary as part of the appli-
cation, on the basis of a preapproval inspection, or on the basis of
any other information before the Secretary—
(A) that the application is incomplete, false, or misleading
in any particular;
(B) that the methods used in, and the facilities and con-
trols used for, the manufacture, processing, and packing of
such animal feed are inadequate to preserve the identity,
strength, quality, and purity of the new animal drug therein;
or
(C) that the facility manufactures animal feeds bearing or
containing new animal drugs in a manner that does not accord
with the specifications for manufacture or labels animal feeds
bearing or containing new animal drugs in a manner that does
not accord with the conditions or indications of use that are
published pursuant to subsection (i),
the Secretary shall issue an order refusing to approve the applica-
tion. If, after such notice and opportunity for hearing, the Secretary
finds that subparagraphs (A) through (C) do not apply, the Sec-
retary shall issue an order approving the application. An order
under this subsection approving an application for a license to
manufacture animal feeds bearing or containing new animal drugs
shall permit a facility to manufacture only those animal feeds bear-
ing or containing new animal drugs for which there are in effect
regulations pursuant to subsection (i) relating to the use of such
drugs in or on such animal feed.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
185
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(4)(A) The Secretary shall, after due notice and opportunity for
hearing to the applicant, revoke a license to manufacture animal
feeds bearing or containing new animal drugs under this sub-
section if the Secretary finds—
(i) that the application for such license contains any un-
true statement of a material fact; or
(ii) that the applicant has made changes that would cause
the application to contain any untrue statements of material
fact or that would affect the safety or effectiveness of the ani-
mal feeds manufactured at the facility unless the applicant has
supplemented the application by filing with the Secretary ade-
quate information respecting all such changes and unless there
is in effect an approval of the supplemental application.
If the Secretary (or in the Secretary’s absence the officer acting as
the Secretary) finds that there is an imminent hazard to the health
of humans or of the animals for which such animal feed is in-
tended, the Secretary may suspend the license immediately, and
give the applicant prompt notice of the action and afford the appli-
cant the opportunity for an expedited hearing under this sub-
section; but the authority conferred by this sentence shall not be
delegated.
(B) The Secretary may also, after due notice and opportunity
for hearing to the applicant, revoke a license to manufacture ani-
mal feed under this subsection if the Secretary finds—
(i) that the applicant has failed to establish a system for
maintaining required records, or has repeatedly or deliberately
failed to maintain such records or to make required reports in
accordance with a regulation or order under paragraph (5)(A)
of this subsection or section 504(a)(3)(A), or the applicant has
refused to permit access to, or copying or verification of, such
records as required by subparagraph (B) of such paragraph or
section 504(a)(3)(B);
(ii) that on the basis of new information before the
Secretary, evaluated together with the evidence before the Sec-
retary when such license was issued, the methods used in, or
the facilities and controls used for, the manufacture, proc-
essing, packing, and holding of such animal feed are inad-
equate to assure and preserve the identity, strength, quality,
and purity of the new animal drug therein, and were not made
adequate within a reasonable time after receipt of written no-
tice from the Secretary, specifying the matter complained of;
(iii) that on the basis of new information before the
Secretary, evaluated together with the evidence before the Sec-
retary when such license was issued, the labeling of any ani-
mal feeds, based on a fair evaluation of all material facts, is
false or misleading in any particular and was not corrected
within a reasonable time after receipt of written notice from
the Secretary specifying the matter complained of; or
(iv) that on the basis of new information before the
Secretary, evaluated together with the evidence before the Sec-
retary when such license was issued, the facility has manufac-
tured, processed, packed, or held animal feed bearing or con-
taining a new animal drug adulterated under section 501(a)(6)
and the facility did not discontinue the manufacture, proc-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
186
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
essing, packing, or holding of such animal feed within a rea-
sonable time after receipt of written notice from the
Secretary specifying the matter complained of.
(C) The Secretary may also revoke a license to manufacture
animal feeds under this subsection if an applicant gives notice to
the Secretary of intention to discontinue the manufacture of all
animal feed covered under this subsection and waives an oppor-
tunity for a hearing on the matter.
(D) Any order under this paragraph shall state the findings
upon which it is based.
(5) When a license to manufacture animal feeds bearing or con-
taining new animal drugs has been issued—
(A) the applicant shall establish and maintain such
records, and make such reports to the Secretary, or (at the op-
tion of the Secretary) to the appropriate person or persons
holding an approved application filed under subsection (b), as
the Secretary may by general regulation, or by order with re-
spect to such application, prescribe on the basis of a finding
that such records and reports are necessary in order to enable
the Secretary to determine, or facilitate a determination,
whether there is or may be ground for invoking subsection (e)
or paragraph (4); and
(B) every person required under this subsection to main-
tain records, and every person in charge or custody thereof,
shall, upon request of an officer or employee designated by the
Secretary, permit such officer or employee at all reasonable
times to have access to and copy and verify such records.
(6) To the extent consistent with the public health, the
Secretary may promulgate regulations for exempting from the oper-
ation of this subsection facilities that manufacture, process, pack,
or hold animal feeds bearing or containing new animal drugs.
(n)(1) An abbreviated application for a new animal drug shall
contain—
(A)(i) except as provided in clause (ii), information to show
that the conditions of use or similar limitations (whether in the
labeling or published pursuant to subsection (i)) prescribed,
recommended, or suggested in the labeling proposed for the
new animal drug have been previously approved for a new ani-
mal drug listed under paragraph (4) (hereinafter in this sub-
section referred to as an ‘‘approved new animal drug’’), and
(ii) information to show that the withdrawal period at
which residues of the new animal drug will be consistent with
the tolerances established for the approved new animal drug is
the same as the withdrawal period previously established for
the approved new animal drug or, if the withdrawal period is
proposed to be different, information showing that the residues
of the new animal drug at the proposed different withdrawal
period will be consistent with the tolerances established for the
approved new animal drug;
(B)(i) information to show that the active ingredients of
the new animal drug are the same as those of the approved
new animal drug, and
(ii) if the approved new animal drug has more than one ac-
tive ingredient, and if one of the active ingredients of the new
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
187
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
animal drug is different from one of the active ingredients of
the approved new animal drug and the application is filed pur-
suant to the approval of a petition filed under paragraph (3)—
(I) information to show that the other active ingredi-
ents of the new animal drug are the same as the active in-
gredients of the approved new animal drug,
(II) information to show either that the different active
ingredient is an active ingredient of another approved new
animal drug or of an animal drug which does not meet the
requirements of section 201(v), and
(III) such other information respecting the different
active ingredients as the Secretary may require;
(C)(i) if the approved new animal drug is permitted to be
used with one or more animal drugs in animal feed, informa-
tion to show that the proposed uses of the new animal drug
with other animal drugs in animal feed are the same as the
uses of the approved new animal drug, and
(ii) if the approved new animal drug is permitted to be
used with one or more other animal drugs in animal feed, and
one of the other animal drugs proposed for use with the new
animal drug in animal feed is different from one of the other
animal drugs permitted to be used in animal feed with the ap-
proved new animal drug, and the application is filed pursuant
to the approval of a petition filed under paragraph (3)—
(I) information to show either that the different ani-
mal drug proposed for use with the approved new animal
drug in animal feed is an approved new animal drug per-
mitted to be used in animal feed or does not meet the re-
quirements of section 201(v) when used with another ani-
mal drug in animal feed,
(II) information to show that other animal drugs pro-
posed for use with the new animal drug in animal feed are
the same as the other animal drugs permitted to be used
with the approved new animal drug, and
(III) such other information respecting the different
animal drug or combination with respect to which the peti-
tion was filed as the Secretary may require,
(D) information to show that the route of administration,
the dosage form, and the strength of the new animal drug are
the same as those of the approved new animal drug or, if the
route of administration, the dosage form, or the strength of the
new animal drug is different and the application is filed pursu-
ant to the approval of a petition filed under paragraph (3),
such information respecting the route of administration, dosage
form, or strength with respect to which the petition was filed
as the Secretary may require;
(E) information to show that the new animal drug is bio-
equivalent to the approved new animal drug, except that if the
application is filed pursuant to the approval of a petition filed
under paragraph (3) for the purposes described in subpara-
graph (B) or (C), information to show that the active ingredi-
ents of the new animal drug are of the same pharmacological
or therapeutic class as the pharmacological or therapeutic class
of the approved new animal drug and that the new animal
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
188
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
drug can be expected to have the same therapeutic effect as
the approved new animal drug when used in accordance with
the labeling;
(F) information to show that the labeling proposed for the
new animal drug is the same as the labeling approved for the
approved new animal drug except for changes required because
of differences approved under a petition filed under paragraph
(3), because of a different withdrawal period, or because the
new animal drug and the approved new animal drug are pro-
duced or distributed by different manufacturers;
(G) the items specified in clauses (B) through (F) of sub-
section (b)(1);
(H) a certification, in the opinion of the applicant and to
the best of his knowledge, with respect to each patent which
claims the approved new animal drug or which claims a use for
such approved new animal drug for which the applicant is
seeking approval under this subsection and for which informa-
tion is required to be filed under subsection (b)(1) or (c)(3)—
(i) that such patent information has not been filed,
(ii) that such patent has expired,
(iii) of the date on which such patent will expire, or
(iv) that such patent is invalid or will not be infringed
by the manufacture, use, or sale of the new animal drug
for which the application is filed; and
(I) if with respect to the approved new animal drug infor-
mation was filed under subsection (b)(1) or (c)(3) for a method
of use patent which does not claim a use for which the appli-
cant is seeking approval of an application under subsection
(c)(2), a statement that the method of use patent does not
claim such a use.
The Secretary may not require that an abbreviated application con-
tain information in addition to that required by subparagraphs (A)
through (I).
(2)(A) An applicant who makes a certification described in
paragraph (1)(G)(iv) shall include in the application a statement
that the applicant will give the notice required by subparagraph
(B) to—
(i) each owner of the patent which is the subject of the cer-
tification or the representative of such owner designated to re-
ceive such notice, and
(ii) the holder of the approved application under subsection
(c)(1) for the drug which is claimed by the patent or a use of
which is claimed by the patent or the representative of such
holder designated to receive such notice.
(B) The notice referred to in subparagraph (A) shall state that
an application, which contains data from bioequivalence studies,
has been filed under this subsection for the drug with respect to
which the certification is made to obtain approval to engage in the
commercial manufacture, use, or sale of such drug before the expi-
ration of the patent referred to in the certification. Such notice
shall include a detailed statement of the factual and legal basis of
the applicant’s opinion that the patent is not valid or will not be
infringed.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
189
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike ‘‘the date of the enactment of this subsection’’ and insert ‘‘November
16, 1988’’.
(C) If an application is amended to include a certification de-
scribed in paragraph (1)(G)(iv), the notice required by subpara-
graph (B) shall be given when the amended application is filed.
(3) If a person wants to submit an abbreviated application for
a new animal drug—
(A) whose active ingredients, route of administration, dos-
age form, or strength differ from that of an approved new ani-
mal drug, or
(B) whose use with other animal drugs in animal feed dif-
fers from that of an approved new animal drug,
such person shall submit a petition to the Secretary seeking per-
mission to file such an application. The Secretary shall approve a
petition for a new animal drug unless the Secretary finds that—
(C) investigations must be conducted to show the safety
and effectiveness, in animals to be treated with the drug, of
the active ingredients, route of administration, dosage form,
strength, or use with other animal drugs in animal feed which
differ from the approved new animal drug, or
(D) investigations must be conducted to show the safety for
human consumption of any residues in food resulting from the
proposed active ingredients, route of administration, dosage
form, strength, or use with other animal drugs in animal feed
for the new animal drug which is different from the active in-
gredients, route of administration, dosage form, strength, or
use with other animal drugs in animal feed of the approved
new animal drug.
The Secretary shall approve or disapprove a petition submitted
under this paragraph within 90 days of the date the petition is sub-
mitted.
(4)(A)(i) Within 60 days of the date of the enactment of this
subsection 1, the Secretary shall publish and make available to the
public a list in alphabetical order of the official and proprietary
name of each new animal drug which has been approved for safety
and effectiveness before the date of the enactment of this sub-
section 1.
(ii) Every 30 days after the publication of the first list under
clause (i) the Secretary shall revise the list to include each new
animal drug which has been approved for safety and effectiveness
under subsection (c) during the 30 day period.
(iii) When patent information submitted under subsection
(b)(1) or (c)(3) respecting a new animal drug included on the list
is to be published by the Secretary, the Secretary shall, in revisions
made under clause (ii), include such information for such drug.
(B) A new animal drug approved for safety and effectiveness
before the date of the enactment of this subsection 1 or approved for
safety and effectiveness under subsection (c) shall, for purposes of
this subsection, be considered to have been published under sub-
paragraph (A) on the date of its approval or the date of enactment,
whichever is later.
(C) If the approval of a new animal drug was withdrawn or
suspended under subsection (c)(2)(G) or for grounds described in
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
190
Sec. 512
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
subsection (e) or if the Secretary determines that a drug has been
withdrawn from sale for safety or effectiveness reasons, it may not
be published in the list under subparagraph (A) or, if the with-
drawal or suspension occurred after its publication in such list, it
shall be immediately removed from such list—
(i) for the same period as the withdrawal or suspension
under subsection (c)(2)(G) or (e), or
(ii) if the listed drug has been withdrawn from sale, for the
period of withdrawal from sale or, if earlier, the period ending
on the date the Secretary determines that the withdrawal from
sale is not for safety or effectiveness reasons.
A notice of the removal shall be published in the Federal Register.
(5) If an application contains the information required by
clauses (A), (G), and (H) of subsection (b)(1) and such information—
(A) is relied on by the applicant for the approval of the ap-
plication, and
(B) is not information derived either from investigations,
studies, or tests conducted by or for the applicant or for which
the applicant had obtained a right of reference or use from the
person by or for whom the investigations, studies, or tests were
conducted,
such application shall be considered to be an application filed
under subsection (b)(2).
(o) For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘patent’’ means a pat-
ent issued by the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
(p)(1) Safety and effectiveness data and information which has
been submitted in an application filed under subsection (b)(1) for
a drug and which has not previously been disclosed to the public
shall be made available to the public, upon request, unless extraor-
dinary circumstances are shown—
(A) if no work is being or will be undertaken to have the
application approved,
(B) if the Secretary has determined that the application is
not approvable and all legal appeals have been exhausted,
(C) if approval of the application under subsection (c) is
withdrawn and all legal appeals have been exhausted,
(D) if the Secretary has determined that such drug is not
a new drug, or
(E) upon the effective date of the approval of the first ap-
plication filed under subsection (b)(2) which refers to such drug
or upon the date upon which the approval of an application
filed under subsection (b)(2) which refers to such drug could be
made effective if such an application had been filed.
(2) Any request for data and information pursuant to para-
graph (1) shall include a verified statement by the person making
the request that any data or information received under such para-
graph shall not be disclosed by such person to any other person—
(A) for the purpose of, or as part of a plan, scheme, or de-
vice for, obtaining the right to make, use, or market, or mak-
ing, using, or marketing, outside the United States, the drug
identified in the application filed under subsection (b)(1), and
(B) without obtaining from any person to whom the data
and information are disclosed an identical verified statement,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
191
Sec. 513
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
a copy of which is to be provided by such person to the Sec-
retary, which meets the requirements of this paragraph.
CLASSIFICATION OF DEVICES INTENDED FOR HUMAN USE
Device Classes
SEC. 513. ø21 U.S.C. 360c¿ (a)(1) There are established the fol-
lowing classes of devices intended for human use:
(A) CLASS I, GENERAL CONTROLS.—
(i) A device for which the controls authorized by or
under section 501, 502, 510, 516, 518, 519, or 520 or any
combination of such sections are sufficient to provide rea-
sonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the de-
vice.
(ii) A device for which insufficient information exists
to determine that the controls referred to in clause (i) are
sufficient to provide reasonable assurance of the safety and
effectiveness of the device or to establish special controls
to provide such assurance, but because it—
(I) is not purported or represented to be for a use
in supporting or sustaining human life or for a use
which is of substantial importance in preventing im-
pairment of human health, and
(II) does not present a potential unreasonable risk
of illness or injury,
is to be regulated by the controls referred to in clause (i).
(B) CLASS II, SPECIAL CONTROLS.—A device which cannot
be classified as a class I device because the general controls by
themselves are insufficient to provide reasonable assurance of
the safety and effectiveness of the device, and for which there
is sufficient information to establish special controls to provide
such assurance, including the promulgation of performance
standards, postmarket surveillance, patient registries, develop-
ment and dissemination of guidelines (including guidelines for
the submission of clinical data in premarket notification sub-
missions in accordance with section 510(k)), recommendations,
and other appropriate actions as the Secretary deems nec-
essary to provide such assurance. For a device that is pur-
ported or represented to be for a use in supporting or sus-
taining human life, the Secretary shall examine and identify
the special controls, if any, that are necessary to provide ade-
quate assurance of safety and effectiveness and describe how
such controls provide such assurance.
(C) CLASS III, PREMARKET APPROVAL.—A device which
because—
(i) it (I) cannot be classified as a class I device because
insufficient information exists to determine that the appli-
cation of general controls are sufficient to provide reason-
able assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the device,
and (II) cannot be classified as a class II device because in-
sufficient information exists to determine that the special
controls described in subparagraph (B) would provide rea-
sonable assurance of its safety and effectiveness, and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
192
Sec. 513
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(ii)(I) is purported or represented to be for a use in
supporting or sustaining human life or for a use which is
of substantial importance in preventing impairment of
human health, or
(II) presents a potential unreasonable risk of illness or
injury,
is to be subject, in accordance with section 515, to premarket
approval to provide reasonable assurance of its safety and ef-
fectiveness.
If there is not sufficient information to establish a performance
standard for a device to provide reasonable assurance of its safety
and effectiveness, the Secretary may conduct such activities as may
be necessary to develop or obtain such information.
(2) For purposes of this section and sections 514 and 515, the
safety and effectiveness of a device are to be determined—
(A) with respect to the persons for whose use the device is
represented or intended,
(B) with respect to the conditions of use prescribed, rec-
ommended, or suggested in the labeling of the device, and
(C) weighing any probable benefit to health from the use
of the device against any probable risk of injury or illness from
such use.
(3)(A) Except as authorized by subparagraph (B), the effective-
ness of a device is, for purposes of this section and sections 514 and
515, to be determined, in accordance with regulations promulgated
by the Secretary, on the basis of well-controlled investigations, in-
cluding 1 or more clinical investigations where appropriate, by ex-
perts qualified by training and experience to evaluate the effective-
ness of the device, from which investigations it can fairly and re-
sponsibly be concluded by qualified experts that the device will
have the effect it purports or is represented to have under the con-
ditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the label-
ing of the device.
(B) If the Secretary determines that there exists valid scientific
evidence (other than evidence derived from investigations described
in subparagraph (A))—
(i) which is sufficient to determine the effectiveness of a
device, and
(ii) from which it can fairly and responsibly be concluded
by qualified experts that the device will have the effect it pur-
ports or is represented to have under the conditions of use pre-
scribed, recommended, or suggested in the labeling of the de-
vice,
then, for purposes of this section and sections 514 and 515, the Sec-
retary may authorize the effectiveness of the device to be deter-
mined on the basis of such evidence.
(C) In making a determination of a reasonable assurance of the
effectiveness of a device for which an application under section 515
has been submitted, the Secretary shall consider whether the ex-
tent of data that otherwise would be required for approval of the
application with respect to effectiveness can be reduced through re-
liance on postmarket controls.
(D)(i) The Secretary, upon the written request of any person in-
tending to submit an application under section 515, shall meet with
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
193
Sec. 513
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
such person to determine the type of valid scientific evidence (with-
in the meaning of subparagraphs (A) and (B)) that will be nec-
essary to demonstrate for purposes of approval of an application
the effectiveness of a device for the conditions of use proposed by
such person. The written request shall include a detailed descrip-
tion of the device, a detailed description of the proposed conditions
of use of the device, a proposed plan for determining whether there
is a reasonable assurance of effectiveness, and, if available, infor-
mation regarding the expected performance from the device. Within
30 days after such meeting, the Secretary shall specify in writing
the type of valid scientific evidence that will provide a reasonable
assurance that a device is effective under the conditions of use pro-
posed by such person.
(ii) Any clinical data, including one or more well-controlled in-
vestigations, specified in writing by the Secretary for dem-
onstrating a reasonable assurance of device effectiveness shall be
specified as result of a determination by the Secretary that such
data are necessary to establish device effectiveness. The Secretary
shall consider, in consultation with the applicant, the least burden-
some appropriate means of evaluating device effectiveness that
would have a reasonable likelihood of resulting in approval.
(iii) The determination of the Secretary with respect to the
specification of valid scientific evidence under clauses (i) and (ii)
shall be binding upon the Secretary, unless such determination by
the Secretary could be contrary to the public health.
Classification; Classification Panels
(b)(1) For purposes of—
(A) determining which devices intended for human use
should be subject to the requirements of general controls, per-
formance standards, or premarket approval, and
(B) providing notice to the manufacturers and importers of
such devices to enable them to prepare for the application of
such requirements to devices manufactured or imported by
them,
the Secretary shall classify all such devices (other than devices
classified by subsection (f)) into the classes established by sub-
section (a). For the purpose of securing recommendations with re-
spect to the classification of devices, the Secretary shall establish
panels of experts or use panels of experts established before the
date of the enactment of this section, or both. Section 14 of the
Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to the duration of
a panel established under this paragraph.
(2) The Secretary shall appoint to each panel established under
paragraph (1) persons who are qualified by training and experience
to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the devices to be referred
to the panel and who, to the extent feasible, possess skill in the use
of, or experience in the development, manufacture, or utilization of,
such devices. The Secretary shall make appointments to each panel
so that each panel shall consist of members with adequately diver-
sified expertise in such fields as clinical and administrative medi-
cine, engineering, biological and physical sciences, and other re-
lated professions. In addition, each panel shall include as non-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
194
Sec. 513
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘the daily equivalent of the rate in effect for grade GS-18 of the
General Schedule,’’ and insert in lieu thereof ‘‘the daily equivalent of the rate of pay for level
4 of the Senior Executive Schedule under section 5382 of title 5, United States Code,’’.
voting members a representative of consumer interests and a rep-
resentative of interests of the device manufacturing industry. Sci-
entific, trade, and consumer organizations shall be afforded an op-
portunity to nominate individuals for appointment to the panels.
No individual who is in the regular full-time employ of the United
States and engaged in the administration of this Act may be a
member of any panel. The Secretary shall designate one of the
members of each panel to serve as chairman thereof.
(3) Panel members (other than officers or employees of the
United States), while attending meetings or conferences of a panel
or otherwise engaged in its business, shall be entitled to receive
compensation at rates to be fixed by the Secretary, but not at rates
exceeding the daily equivalent of the rate in effect for grade GS–
18 of the General Schedule 1, for each day so engaged, including
traveltime; and while so serving away from their homes or regular
places of business each member may be allowed travel expenses
(including per diem in lieu of subsistence) as authorized by section
5703 of title 5, United States Code, for persons in the Government
service employed intermittently.
(4) The Secretary shall furnish each panel with adequate cler-
ical and other necessary assistance.
(5) Classification panels covering each type of device shall be
scheduled to meet at such times as may be appropriate for the Sec-
retary to meet applicable statutory deadlines.
(6)(A) Any person whose device is specifically the subject of re-
view by a classification panel shall have—
(i) the same access to data and information submitted to
a classification panel (except for data and information that are
not available for public disclosure under section 552 of title 5,
United States Code) as the Secretary;
(ii) the opportunity to submit, for review by a classification
panel, information that is based on the data or information
provided in the application submitted under section 515 by the
person, which information shall be submitted to the Secretary
for prompt transmittal to the classification panel; and
(iii) the same opportunity as the Secretary to participate
in meetings of the panel.
(B) Any meetings of a classification panel shall provide ade-
quate time for initial presentations and for response to any dif-
fering views by persons whose devices are specifically the subject
of a classification panel review, and shall encourage free and open
participation by all interested persons.
(7) After receiving from a classification panel the conclusions
and recommendations of the panel on a matter that the panel has
reviewed, the Secretary shall review the conclusions and rec-
ommendations, shall make a final decision on the matter in accord-
ance with section 515(d)(2), and shall notify the affected persons of
the decision in writing and, if the decision differs from the conclu-
sions and recommendations of the panel, shall include the reasons
for the difference.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
195
Sec. 513
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(8) A classification panel under this subsection shall not be
subject to the annual chartering and annual report requirements of
the Federal Advisory Committee Act.
Classification Panel Organization and Operation
(c)(1) The Secretary shall organize the panels according to the
various fields of clinical medicine and fundamental sciences in
which devices intended for human use are used. The Secretary
shall refer a device to be classified under this section to an appro-
priate panel established or authorized to be used under subsection
(b) for its review and for its recommendation respecting the classi-
fication of the device. The Secretary shall by regulation prescribe
the procedure to be followed by the panels in making their reviews
and recommendations. In making their reviews of devices, the pan-
els, to the maximum extent practicable, shall provide an oppor-
tunity for interested persons to submit data and views on the clas-
sification of the devices.
(2)(A) Upon completion of a panel’s review of a device referred
to it under paragraph (1), the panel shall, subject to subparagraphs
(B) and (C), submit to the Secretary its recommendation for the
classification of the device. Any such recommendation shall (i) con-
tain (I) a summary of the reasons for the recommendation, (II) a
summary of the data upon which the recommendation is based,
and (III) an identification of the risks to health (if any) presented
by the device with respect to which the recommendation is made,
and (ii) to the extent practicable, include a recommendation for the
assignment of a priority for the application of the requirements of
section 514 or 515 to a device recommended to be classified in class
II or class III.
(B) A recommendation of a panel for the classification of a de-
vice in class I shall include a recommendation as to whether the
device should be exempted from the requirements of section 510,
519, or 520(f).
(C) In the case of a device which has been referred under para-
graph (1) to a panel, and which—
(i) is intended to be implanted in the human body or is
purported or represented to be for a use in supporting or sus-
taining human life, and
(ii)(I) has been introduced or delivered for introduction into
interstate commerce for commercial distribution before the
date of enactment of this section, or
(II) is within a type of device which was so introduced or
delivered before such date and is substantially equivalent to
another device within that type,
such panel shall recommend to the Secretary that the device be
classified in class III unless the panel determines that classification
of the device in such class is not necessary to provide reasonable
assurance of its safety and effectiveness. If a panel does not rec-
ommend that such a device be classified in class III, it shall in its
recommendation to the Secretary for the classification of the device
set forth the reasons for not recommending classification of the de-
vice in such class.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
196
Sec. 513
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(3) The panels shall submit to the Secretary within one year
of the date funds are first appropriated for the implementation of
this section their recommendations respecting all devices of a type
introduced or delivered for introduction into interstate commerce
for commercial distribution before the date of the enactment of this
section.
Classification
(d)(1) Upon receipt of a recommendation from a panel respect-
ing a device, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register the
panel’s recommendation and a proposed regulation classifying such
device and shall provide interested persons an opportunity to sub-
mit comments on such recommendation and the proposed regula-
tion. After reviewing such comments, the Secretary shall, subject to
paragraph (2), by regulation classify such device.
(2)(A) A regulation under paragraph (1) classifying a device in
class I shall prescribe which, if any, of the requirements of section
510, 519 or 520(f) shall not apply to the device. A regulation which
makes a requirement of section 510, 519, or 520(f) inapplicable to
a device shall be accompanied by a statement of the reasons of the
Secretary for making such requirement inapplicable.
(B) A device described in subsection (c)(2)(C) shall be classified
in class III unless the Secretary determines that classification of
the device in such class is not necessary to provide reasonable as-
surance of its safety and effectiveness. A proposed regulation under
paragraph (1) classifying such a device in a class other than class
III shall be accompanied by a full statement of the reasons of the
Secretary (and supporting documentation and data) for not
classifying such device in such class and an identification of the
risks to health (if any) presented by such device.
(3) In the case of devices classified in class II and devices clas-
sified under this subsection in class III and described in section
515(b)(1) the Secretary may establish priorities which, in his dis-
cretion, shall be used in applying sections 514 and 515, as appro-
priate, to such devices.
Classification Changes
(e)(1) Based on new information respecting a device, the Sec-
retary may, upon his own initiative or upon petition of an inter-
ested person, by regulation (A) change such device’s classification,
and (B) revoke, because of the change in classification, any regula-
tion or requirement in effect under section 514 or 515 with respect
to such device. In the promulgation of such a regulation respecting
a device’s classification, the Secretary may secure from the panel
to which the device was last referred pursuant to subsection (c) a
recommendation respecting the proposed change in the device’s
classification and shall publish in the Federal Register any rec-
ommendation submitted to the Secretary by the panel respecting
such change. A regulation under this subsection changing the clas-
sification of a device from class III to class II may provide that
such classification shall not take effect until the effective date of
a performance standard established under section 514 for such de-
vice.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
197
Sec. 513
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(2) By regulation promulgated under paragraph (1), the Sec-
retary may change the classification of a device from class III—
(A) to class II if the Secretary determines that special con-
trols would provide reasonable assurance of the safety and ef-
fectiveness of the device and that general controls would not
provide reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of
the device, or
(B) to class I if the Secretary determines that general con-
trols would provide reasonable assurance of the safety and ef-
fectiveness of the device.
Initial Classification and Reclassification of Certain Devices
(f)(1) Any device intended for human use which was not intro-
duced or delivered for introduction into interstate commerce for
commercial distribution before the date of the enactment of this
section is classified in class III unless—
(A) the device—
(i) is within a type of device (I) which was introduced
or delivered for introduction into interstate commerce for
commercial distribution before such date and which is to
be classified pursuant to subsection (b), or (II) which was
not so introduced or delivered before such date and has
been classified in class I or II, and
(ii) is substantially equivalent to another device within
such type, or
(B) the Secretary in response to a petition submitted under
paragraph (3) has classified such device in class I or II.
A device classified in class III under this paragraph shall be classi-
fied in that class until the effective date of an order of the Sec-
retary under paragraph (2) or (3) classifying the device in class I
or II.
(2)(A) Any person who submits a report under section 510(k)
for a type of device that has not been previously classified under
this Act, and that is classified into class III under paragraph (1),
may request, within 30 days after receiving written notice of such
a classification, the Secretary to classify the device under the cri-
teria set forth in subparagraphs (A) through (C) of subsection
(a)(1). The person may, in the request, recommend to the Secretary
a classification for the device. Any such request shall describe the
device and provide detailed information and reasons for the rec-
ommended classification.
(B)(i) Not later than 60 days after the date of the submission
of the request under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall by writ-
ten order classify the device involved. Such classification shall be
the initial classification of the device for purposes of paragraph (1)
and any device classified under this paragraph shall be a predicate
device for determining substantial equivalence under paragraph
(1).
(ii) A device that remains in class III under this subparagraph
shall be deemed to be adulterated within the meaning of section
501(f)(1)(B) until approved under section 515 or exempted from
such approval under section 520(g).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
198
Sec. 513
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(C) Within 30 days after the issuance of an order classifying
a device under this paragraph, the Secretary shall publish a notice
in the Federal Register announcing such classification.
(3)(A) The Secretary may initiate the reclassification of a de-
vice classified into class III under paragraph (1) of this subsection
or the manufacturer or importer of a device classified under para-
graph (1) may petition the Secretary (in such form and manner as
he shall prescribe) for the issuance of an order classifying the de-
vice in class I or class II. Within thirty days of the filing of such
a petition, the Secretary shall notify the petitioner of any defi-
ciencies in the petition which prevent the Secretary from making
a decision on the petition.
(B)(i) Upon determining that a petition does not contain any
deficiency which prevents the Secretary from making a decision on
the petition, the Secretary may for good cause shown refer the peti-
tion to an appropriate panel established or authorized to be used
under subsection (b). A panel to which such a petition has been re-
ferred shall not later than ninety days after the referral of the peti-
tion make a recommendation to the Secretary respecting approval
or denial of the petition. Any such recommendation shall contain
(I) a summary of the reasons for the recommendation, (II) a sum-
mary of the data upon which the recommendation is based, and
(III) an identification of the risks to health (if any) presented by
the device with respect to which the petition was filed. In the case
of a petition for a device which is intended to be implanted in the
human body or which is purported or represented to be for a use
in supporting or sustaining human life, the panel shall recommend
that the petition be denied unless the panel determines that the
classification in class III of the device is not necessary to provide
reasonable assurance of its safety and effectiveness. If the panel
recommends that such petition be approved, it shall in its rec-
ommendation to the Secretary set forth its reasons for such rec-
ommendation.
(ii) The requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (c)
(relating to opportunities for submission of data and views and rec-
ommendations respecting priorities and exemptions from sections
510, 519, and 520(f)) shall apply with respect to consideration by
panels of petitions submitted under subparagraph (A).
(C)(i) Within ninety days from the date the Secretary receives
the recommendation of a panel respecting a petition (but not later
than 210 days after the filing of such petition) the Secretary shall
by order deny or approve the petition. If the Secretary approves the
petition, the Secretary shall order the classification of the device
into class I or class II in accordance with the criteria prescribed by
subsection (a)(1)(A) or (a)(1)(B). In the case of a petition for a de-
vice which is intended to be implanted in the human body or which
is purported or represented to be for a use in supporting or sus-
taining human life, the Secretary shall deny the petition unless the
Secretary determines that the classification in class III of the de-
vice is not necessary to provide reasonable assurance of its safety
and effectiveness. An order approving such petition shall be accom-
panied by a full statement of the reasons of the Secretary (and sup-
porting documentation and data) for approving the petition and an
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
199
Sec. 513
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
identification of the risks to health (if any) presented by the device
to which such order applies.
(ii) The requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2)(A) of subsection
(d) (relating to publication of recommendations, opportunity for
submission of comments, and exemption from sections 510, 519,
and 520(f)) shall apply with respect to action by the Secretary on
petitions submitted under subparagraph (A).
(4) If a manufacturer reports to the Secretary under section
510(k) that a device is substantially equivalent to another device—
(A) which the Secretary has classified as a class III device
under subsection (b),
(B) which was introduced or delivered for introduction into
interstate commerce for commercial distribution before Decem-
ber 1, 1990, and
(C) for which no final regulation requiring premarket ap-
proval has been promulgated under section 515(b),
the manufacturer shall certify to the Secretary that the manufac-
turer has conducted a reasonable search of all information known
or otherwise available to the manufacturer respecting such other
device and has included in the report under section 510(k) a sum-
mary of and a citation to all adverse safety and effectiveness data
respecting such other device and respecting the device for which
the section 510(k) report is being made and which has not been
submitted to the Secretary under section 519. The Secretary may
require the manufacturer to submit the adverse safety and effec-
tiveness data described in the report.
(5) The Secretary may not withhold a determination of the ini-
tial classification of a device under paragraph (1) because of a fail-
ure to comply with any provision of this Act unrelated to a sub-
stantial equivalence decision, including a finding that the facility
in which the device is manufactured is not in compliance with good
manufacturing requirements as set forth in regulations of the Sec-
retary under section 520(f) (other than a finding that there is a
substantial likelihood that the failure to comply with such regula-
tions will potentially present a serious risk to human health).
Information
(g) Within sixty days of the receipt of a written request of any
person for information respecting the class in which a device has
been classified or the requirements applicable to a device under
this Act, the Secretary shall provide such person a written state-
ment of the classification (if any) of such device and the require-
ments of this Act applicable to the device.
Definitions
(h) For purposes of this section and sections 501, 510, 514, 515,
516, 519, and 520—
(1) a reference to ‘‘general controls’’ is a reference to the
controls authorized by or under sections 501, 502, 510, 516,
518, 519, and 520,
(2) a reference to ‘‘class I,’’ ‘‘class II,’’ or ‘‘class III’’ is a ref-
erence to a class of medical devices described in subparagraph
(A), (B), or (C) of subsection (a)(1), and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
200
Sec. 513
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(3) a reference to a ‘‘panel under section 513’’ is a reference
to a panel established or authorized to be used under this sec-
tion.
Substantial Equivalence
(i)(1)(A) For purposes of determinations of substantial equiva-
lence under subsection (f) and section 520(l), the term ‘‘substan-
tially equivalent’’ or ‘‘substantial equivalence’’ means, with respect
to a device being compared to a predicate device, that the device
has the same intended use as the predicate device and that the
Secretary by order has found that the device—
(i) has the same technological characteristics as the predi-
cate device, or
(ii)(I) has different technological characteristics and the in-
formation submitted that the device is substantially equivalent
to the predicate device contains information, including appro-
priate clinical or scientific data if deemed necessary by the Sec-
retary or a person accredited under section 523, that dem-
onstrates that the device is as safe and effective as a legally
marketed device, and (II) does not raise different questions of
safety and effectiveness than the predicate device.
(B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term ‘‘different tech-
nological characteristics’’ means, with respect to a device being
compared to a predicate device, that there is a significant change
in the materials, design, energy source, or other features of the de-
vice from those of the predicate device.
(C) To facilitate reviews of reports submitted to the Secretary
under section 510(k), the Secretary shall consider the extent to
which reliance on postmarket controls may expedite the classifica-
tion of devices under subsection (f)(1) of this section.
(D) Whenever the Secretary requests information to dem-
onstrate that devices with differing technological characteristics
are substantially equivalent, the Secretary shall only request infor-
mation that is necessary to making substantial equivalence deter-
minations. In making such request, the Secretary shall consider
the least burdensome means of demonstrating substantial equiva-
lence and request information accordingly.
(E)(i) Any determination by the Secretary of the intended use
of a device shall be based upon the proposed labeling submitted in
a report for the device under section 510(k). However, when deter-
mining that a device can be found substantially equivalent to a le-
gally marketed device, the director of the organizational unit re-
sponsible for regulating devices (in this subparagraph referred to
as the ‘‘Director’’) may require a statement in labeling that pro-
vides appropriate information regarding a use of the device not
identified in the proposed labeling if, after providing an oppor-
tunity for consultation with the person who submitted such report,
the Director determines and states in writing—
(I) that there is a reasonable likelihood that the device will
be used for an intended use not identified in the proposed la-
beling for the device; and
(II) that such use could cause harm.
(ii) Such determination shall—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
201
Sec. 514
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(I) be provided to the person who submitted the report
within 10 days from the date of the notification of the Direc-
tor’s concerns regarding the proposed labeling;
(II) specify the limitations on the use of the device not in-
cluded in the proposed labeling; and
(III) find the device substantially equivalent if the require-
ments of subparagraph (A) are met and if the labeling for such
device conforms to the limitations specified in subclause (II).
(iii) The responsibilities of the Director under this subpara-
graph may not be delegated.
(F) Not later than 270 days after the date of the enactment of
the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997, the
Secretary shall issue guidance specifying the general principles
that the Secretary will consider in determining when a specific in-
tended use of a device is not reasonably included within a general
use of such device for purposes of a determination of substantial
equivalence under subsection (f) or section 520(l).
(2) A device may not be found to be substantially equivalent
to a predicate device that has been removed from the market at the
initiative of the Secretary or that has been determined to be mis-
branded or adulterated by a judicial order.
(3)(A) As part of a submission under section 510(k) respecting
a device, the person required to file a premarket notification under
such section shall provide an adequate summary of any informa-
tion respecting safety and effectiveness or state that such informa-
tion will be made available upon request by any person.
(B) Any summary under subparagraph (A) respecting a device
shall contain detailed information regarding data concerning ad-
verse health effects and shall be made available to the public by
the Secretary within 30 days of the issuance of a determination
that such device is substantially equivalent to another device.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Provisions of Standards
SEC. 514. ø21 U.S.C. 360d¿ (a)(1) The special controls required
by section 513(a)(1)(B) shall include performance standards for a
class II device if the Secretary determines that a performance
standard is necessary to provide reasonable assurance of the safety
and effectiveness of the device. A class III device may also be con-
sidered a class II device for purposes of establishing a standard for
the device under subsection (b) if the device has been reclassified
as a class II device under a regulation under section 513(e) but
such regulation provides that the reclassification is not to take ef-
fect until the effective date of such a standard for the device.
(2) A performance standard established under subsection (b)
for a device—
(A) shall include provisions to provide reasonable assur-
ance of its safe and effective performance;
(B) shall, where necessary to provide reasonable assurance
of its safe and effective performance, include—
(i) provisions respecting the construction, components,
ingredients, and properties of the device and its compat-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
202
Sec. 514
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ibility with power systems and connections to such sys-
tems,
(ii) provisions for the testing (on a sample basis or, if
necessary, on an individual basis) of the device or, if it is
determined that no other more practicable means are
available to the Secretary to assure the conformity of the
device to the standard, provisions for the testing (on a
sample basis or, if necessary, on an individual basis) by
the Secretary or by another person at the direction of the
Secretary,
(iii) provisions for the measurement of the perform-
ance characteristics of the device,
(iv) provisions requiring that the results of each or of
certain of the tests of the device required to be made under
clause (ii) show that the device is in conformity with the
portions of the standard for which the test or tests were
required, and
(v) a provision requiring that the sale and distribution
of the device be restricted but only to the extent that the
sale and distribution of a device may be restricted under
a regulation under section 520(e); and
(C) shall, where appropriate, require the use and prescribe
the form and content of labeling for the proper installation,
maintenance, operation, and use of the device.
(3) The Secretary shall provide for periodic evaluation of per-
formance standards established under subsection (b) to determine
if such standards should be changed to reflect new medical, sci-
entific, or other technological data.
(4) In carrying out his duties under this subsection and sub-
section (b), the Secretary shall, to the maximum extent
practicable—
(A) use personnel, facilities, and other technical support
available in other Federal agencies,
(B) consult with other Federal agencies concerned with
standard-setting and other nationally or internationally recog-
nized standard-setting entities, and
(C) invite appropriate participation, through joint or other
conferences, workshops, or other means, by informed persons
representative of scientific, professional, industry, or consumer
organizations who in his judgment can make a significant con-
tribution.
Establishment of a Standard
(b)(1)(A) The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a
notice of proposed rulemaking for the establishment, amendment,
or revocation of any performance standard for a device.
(B) A notice of proposed rulemaking for the establishment or
amendment of a performance standard for a device shall—
(i) set forth a finding with supporting justification that the
performance standard is appropriate and necessary to provide
reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of the de-
vice,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
203
Sec. 514
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(ii) set forth proposed findings with respect to the risk of
illness or injury that the performance standard is intended to
reduce or eliminate,
(iii) invite interested persons to submit to the Secretary,
within 30 days of the publication of the notice, requests for
changes in the classification of the device pursuant to section
513(e) based on new information relevant to the classification,
and
(iv) invite interested persons to submit an existing per-
formance standard for the device, including a draft or proposed
performance standard, for consideration by the Secretary.
(C) A notice of proposed rulemaking for the revocation of a per-
formance standard shall set forth a finding with supporting jus-
tification that the performance standard is no longer necessary to
provide reasonable assurance of the safety and effectiveness of a
device.
(D) The Secretary shall provide for a comment period of not
less than 60 days.
(2) If, after publication of a notice in accordance with para-
graph (1), the Secretary receives a request for a change in the clas-
sification of the device, the Secretary shall, within 60 days of the
publication of the notice, after consultation with the appropriate
panel under section 513, either deny the request or give notice of
an intent to initiate such change under section 513(e).
(3)(A) After the expiration of the period for comment on a no-
tice of proposed rulemaking published under paragraph (1) respect-
ing a performance standard and after consideration of such com-
ments and any report from an advisory committee under paragraph
(5), the Secretary shall (i) promulgate a regulation establishing a
performance standard and publish in the Federal Register findings
on the matters referred to in paragraph (1), or (ii) publish a notice
terminating the proceeding for the development of the standard to-
gether with the reasons for such termination. If a notice of termi-
nation is published, the Secretary shall (unless such notice is
issued because the device is a banned device under section 516) ini-
tiate a proceeding under section 513(e) to reclassify the device sub-
ject to the proceeding terminated by such notice.
(B) A regulation establishing a performance standard shall set
forth the date or dates upon which the standard shall take effect,
but no such regulation may take effect before one year after the
date of its publication unless (i) the Secretary determines that an
earlier effective date is necessary for the protection of the public
health and safety, or (ii) such standard has been established for a
device which, effective upon the effective date of the standard, has
been reclassified from class III to class II. Such date or dates shall
be established so as to minimize, consistent with the public health
and safety, economic loss to, and disruption or dislocation of, do-
mestic and international trade.
(4)(A) The Secretary, upon his own initiative or upon petition
of an interested person may by regulation, promulgated in accord-
ance with the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (3)(B) of this
subsection, amend or revoke a performance standard.
(B) The Secretary may declare a proposed amendment of a per-
formance standard to be effective on and after its publication in the
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
204
Sec. 514
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘the daily equivalent of the rate in effect for grade GS-18 of the
General Schedule,’’ and insert in lieu thereof ‘‘the daily equivalent of the rate of pay for level
4 of the Senior Executive Schedule under section 5382 of title 5, United States Code,’’.
Federal Register and until the effective date of any final action
taken on such amendment if he determines that making it so effec-
tive is in the public interest. A proposed amendment of a perform-
ance standard made so effective under the preceding sentence may
not prohibit, during the period in which it is so effective, the intro-
duction or delivery for introduction into interstate commerce of a
device which conforms to such standard without the change or
changes provided by such proposed amendment.
(5)(A) The Secretary—
(i) may on his own initiative refer a proposed regulation
for the establishment, amendment, or revocation of a perform-
ance standard, or
(ii) shall, upon the request of an interested person which
demonstrates good cause for referral and which is made before
the expiration of the period for submission of comments on
such proposed regulation refer such proposed regulation,
to an advisory committee of experts, established pursuant to sub-
paragraph (B) for a report and recommendation with respect to any
matter involved in the proposed regulation which requires the exer-
cise of scientific judgment. If a proposed regulation is referred
under this subparagraph to an advisory committee, the Secretary
shall provide the advisory committee with the data and information
on which such proposed regulation is based. The advisory com-
mittee shall, within sixty days of the referral of a proposed regula-
tion and after independent study of the data and information fur-
nished to it by the Secretary and other data and information before
it, submit to the Secretary a report and recommendation respecting
such regulation, together with all underlying data and information
and a statement of the reason or basis for the recommendation. A
copy of such report and recommendation shall be made public by
the Secretary.
(B) The Secretary shall establish advisory committees (which
may not be panels under section 513) to receive referrals under
subparagraph (A). The Secretary shall appoint as members of any
such advisory committee persons qualified in the subject matter to
be referred to the committee and of appropriately diversified pro-
fessional background, except that the Secretary may not appoint to
such a committee any individual who is in the regular full-time em-
ploy of the United States and engaged in the administration of this
Act. Each such committee shall include as nonvoting members a
representative of consumer interests and a representative of inter-
ests of the device manufacturing industry. Members of an advisory
committee who are not officers or employees of the United States,
while attending conferences or meetings of their committee or oth-
erwise serving at the request of the Secretary, shall be entitled to
receive compensation at rates to be fixed by the Secretary, which
rates may not exceed the daily equivalent of the rate in effect for
grade GS–18 of the General Schedule 1, for each day (including
traveltime) they are so engaged; and while so serving away from
their homes or regular places of business each member may be al-
lowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
205
Sec. 514
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
authorized by section 5703 of title 5 of the United States Code for
persons in the Government service employed intermittently. The
Secretary shall designate one of the members of each advisory com-
mittee to serve as chairman thereof. The Secretary shall furnish
each advisory committee with clerical and other assistance, and
shall by regulation prescribe the procedures to be followed by each
such committee in acting on referrals made under subparagraph
(A).
Recognition of a Standard
(c)(1)(A) In addition to establishing a performance standard
under this section, the Secretary shall, by publication in the Fed-
eral Register, recognize all or part of an appropriate standard es-
tablished by a nationally or internationally recognized standard de-
velopment organization for which a person may submit a declara-
tion of conformity in order to meet a premarket submission require-
ment or other requirement under this Act to which such standard
is applicable.
(B) If a person elects to use a standard recognized by the Sec-
retary under subparagraph (A) to meet the requirements described
in such subparagraph, the person shall provide a declaration of
conformity to the Secretary that certifies that the device is in con-
formity with such standard. A person may elect to use data, or in-
formation, other than data required by a standard recognized
under subparagraph (A) to meet any requirement regarding devices
under this Act.
(2) The Secretary may withdraw such recognition of a standard
through publication of a notice in the Federal Register if the Sec-
retary determines that the standard is no longer appropriate for
meeting a requirement regarding devices under this Act.
(3)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall accept
a declaration of conformity that a device is in conformity with a
standard recognized under paragraph (1) unless the Secretary
finds—
(i) that the data or information submitted to support such
declaration does not demonstrate that the device is in con-
formity with the standard identified in the declaration of con-
formity; or
(ii) that the standard identified in the declaration of con-
formity is not applicable to the particular device under review.
(B) The Secretary may request, at any time, the data or infor-
mation relied on by the person to make a declaration of conformity
with respect to a standard recognized under paragraph (1).
(C) A person making a declaration of conformity with respect
to a standard recognized under paragraph (1) shall maintain the
data and information demonstrating conformity of the device to the
standard for a period of two years after the date of the classifica-
tion or approval of the device by the Secretary or a period equal
to the expected design life of the device, whichever is longer.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
206
Sec. 515
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
PREMARKET APPROVAL
General Requirement
SEC. 515. ø21 U.S.C. 360e¿ (a) A class III device—
(1) which is subject to a regulation promulgated under sub-
section (b); or
(2) which is a class III device because of section 513(f),
is required to have, unless exempt under section 520(g), an ap-
proval under this section of an application for premarket
approvalor, as applicable, an approval under subsection (c)(2) of a
report seeking premarket approval.
Regulation To Require Premarket Approval
(b)(1) In the case of a class III device which—
(A) was introduced or delivered for introduction into inter-
state commerce for commercial distribution before the date of
enactment of this section; or
(B) is (i) of a type so introduced or delivered, and (ii) is
substantially equivalent to another device within that type;
the Secretary shall by regulation, promulgated in accordance with
this subsection, require that such device have an approval under
this section of an application for premarket approval.
(2)(A) A proceeding for the promulgation of a regulation under
paragraph (1) respecting a device shall be initiated by the publica-
tion in the Federal Register of a notice of proposed rulemaking.
Such notice shall contain—
(i) the proposed regulation;
(ii) proposed findings with respect to the degree of risk of
illness or injury designed to be eliminated or reduced by re-
quiring the device to have an approved application for pre-
market approval and the benefit to the public from use of the
device;
(iii) opportunity for the submission of comments on the
proposed regulation and the proposed findings; and
(iv) opportunity to request a change in the classification of
the device based on new information relevant to the classifica-
tion of the device.
(B) If, within fifteen days after publication of a notice under
subparagraph (A), the Secretary receives a request for a change in
the classification of a device, he shall, within sixty days of the pub-
lication of such notice and after consultation with the appropriate
panel under section 513, by order published in the Federal Reg-
ister, either deny the request for change in classification or give no-
tice of his intent to initiate such a change under section 513(e).
(3) After the expiration of the period for comment on a pro-
posed regulation and proposed findings published under paragraph
(2) and after consideration of comments submitted on such pro-
posed regulation and findings, the Secretary shall (A) promulgate
such regulation and publish in the Federal Register findings on the
matters referred to in paragraph (2)(A)(ii), or (B) publish a notice
terminating the proceeding for the promulgation of the regulation
together with the reasons for such termination. If a notice of termi-
nation is published, the Secretary shall (unless such notice is
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
207
Sec. 515
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
issued because the device is a banned device under section 516) ini-
tiate a proceeding under section 513(e) to reclassify the device sub-
ject to the proceeding terminated by such notice.
(4) The Secretary, upon his own initiative or upon petition of
an interested person, may by regulation amend or revoke any regu-
lation promulgated under this subsection. A regulation to amend or
revoke a regulation under this subsection shall be promulgated in
accordance with the requirements prescribed by this subsection for
the promulgation of the regulation to be amended or revoked.
Application for Premarket Approval
(c)(1) Any person may file with the Secretary an application for
premarket approval for a class III device. Such an application for
a device shall contain—
(A) full reports of all information, published or known to
or which should reasonably be known to the applicant, con-
cerning investigations which have been made to show whether
or not such device is safe and effective;
(B) a full statement of the components, ingredients, and
properties and of the principle or principles of operation, of
such device;
(C) a full description of the methods used in, and the facili-
ties and controls used for, the manufacture, processing, and,
when relevant, packing and installation of, such device;
(D) an identifying reference to any performance standard
under section 514 which would be applicable to any aspect of
such device if it were a class II device, and either adequate in-
formation to show that such aspect of such device fully meets
such performance standard or adequate information to justify
any deviation from such standard;
(E) such samples of such device and of components thereof
as the Secretary may reasonably require, except that where
the submission of such samples is impracticable or unduly bur-
densome, the requirement of this subparagraph may be met by
the submission of complete information concerning the location
of one or more such devices readily available for examination
and testing;
(F) specimens of the labeling proposed to be used for such
device; and
(G) such other information relevant to the subject matter
of the application as the Secretary, with the concurrence of the
appropriate panel under section 513, may require.
(2) Upon receipt of an application meeting the requirements
set forth in paragraph (1), the Secretary—
(A) may on the Secretary’s own initiative, or
(B) shall, upon the request of an applicant unless the Sec-
retary finds that the information in the application which
would be reviewed by a panel substantially duplicates informa-
tion which has previously been reviewed by a panel appointed
under section 513,
refer such application to the appropriate panel under section 513
for study and for submission (within such period as he may estab-
lish) of a report and recommendation respecting approval of the ap-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
208
Sec. 515
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
plication, together with all underlying data and the reasons or
basis for the recommendation.
Action on an Application for Premarket Approval
(d)(1)(A) As promptly as possible, but in no event later than
one hundred and eighty days after the receipt of an application
under subsection (c) (except as provided in section 520(l)(3)(D)(ii) or
unless, in accordance with subparagraph (B)(i), an additional pe-
riod as agreed upon by the Secretary and the applicant), the Sec-
retary, after considering the report and recommendation submitted
under paragraph (2) of such subsection, shall—
(i) issue an order approving the application if he finds that
none of the grounds for denying approval specified in para-
graph (2) of this subsection applies; or
(ii) deny approval of the application if he finds (and sets
forth the basis for such finding as part of or accompanying
such denial) that one or more grounds for denial specified in
paragraph (2) of this subsection apply.
In making the determination whether to approve or deny the appli-
cation, the Secretary shall rely on the conditions of use included in
the proposed labeling as the basis for determining whether or not
there is a reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness, if the
proposed labeling is neither false nor misleading. In determining
whether or not such labeling is false or misleading, the Secretary
shall fairly evaluate all material facts pertinent to the proposed la-
beling.
(B)(i) The Secretary may not enter into an agreement to extend
the period in which to take action with respect to an application
submitted for a device subject to a regulation promulgated under
subsection (b) unless he finds that the continued availability of the
device is necessary for the public health.
(ii) An order approving an application for a device may require
as a condition to such approval that the sale and distribution of the
device be restricted but only to the extent that the sale and dis-
tribution of a device may be restricted under a regulation under
section 520(e).
(iii) The Secretary shall accept and review statistically valid
and reliable data and any other information from investigations
conducted under the authority of regulations required by section
520(g) to make a determination of whether there is a reasonable
assurance of safety and effectiveness of a device subject to a pend-
ing application under this section if—
(I) the data or information is derived from investigations
of an earlier version of the device, the device has been modified
during or after the investigations (but prior to submission of an
application under subsection (c)) and such a modification of the
device does not constitute a significant change in the design or
in the basic principles of operation of the device that would in-
validate the data or information; or
(II) the data or information relates to a device approved
under this section, is available for use under this Act, and is
relevant to the design and intended use of the device for which
the application is pending.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
209
Sec. 515
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(2) The Secretary shall deny approval of an application for a
device if, upon the basis of the information submitted to the Sec-
retary as part of the application and any other information before
him with respect to such device, the Secretary finds that—
(A) there is a lack of a showing of reasonable assurance
that such device is safe under the conditions of use prescribed,
recommended, or suggested in the proposed labeling thereof;
(B) there is a lack of a showing of reasonable assurance
that the device is effective under the conditions of use pre-
scribed, recommended, or suggested in the proposed labeling
thereof;
(C) the methods used in, or the facilities or controls used
for, the manufacture, processing, packing, or installation of
such device do not conform to the requirements of section
520(f);
(D) based on a fair evaluation of all material facts, the pro-
posed labeling is false or misleading in any particular; or
(E) such device is not shown to conform in all respects to
a performance standard in effect under section 514 compliance
with which is a condition to approval of the application and
there is a lack of adequate information to justify the deviation
from such standard.
Any denial of an application shall, insofar as the Secretary deter-
mines to be practicable, be accompanied by a statement informing
the applicant of the measures required to place such application in
approvable form (which measures may include further research by
the applicant in accordance with one or more protocols prescribed
by the Secretary).
(3)(A)(i) The Secretary shall, upon the written request of an ap-
plicant, meet with the applicant, not later than 100 days after the
receipt of an application that has been filed as complete under sub-
section (c), to discuss the review status of the application.
(ii) The Secretary shall, in writing and prior to the meeting,
provide to the applicant a description of any deficiencies in the ap-
plication that, at that point, have been identified by the Secretary
based on an interim review of the entire application and identify
the information that is required to correct those deficiencies.
(iii) The Secretary shall notify the applicant promptly of—
(I) any additional deficiency identified in the application,
or
(II) any additional information required to achieve comple-
tion of the review and final action on the application,
that was not described as a deficiency in the written description
provided by the Secretary under clause (ii).
(B) The Secretary and the applicant may, by mutual consent,
establish a different schedule for a meeting required under this
paragraph.
(4) An applicant whose application has been denied approval
may, by petition filed on or before the thirtieth day after the date
upon which he receives notice of such denial, obtain review thereof
in accordance with either paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (g), and
any interested person may obtain review, in accordance with para-
graph (1) or (2) of subsection (g), of an order of the Secretary ap-
proving an application.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
210
Sec. 515
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(5) In order to provide for more effective treatment or diagnosis
of life-threatening or irreversibly debilitating human diseases or
conditions, the Secretary shall provide review priority for devices—
(A) representing breakthrough technologies,
(B) for which no approved alternatives exist,
(C) which offer significant advantages over existing ap-
proved alternatives, or
(D) the availability of which is in the best interest of the
patients.
(6)(A)(i) A supplemental application shall be required for any
change to a device subject to an approved application under this
subsection that affects safety or effectiveness, unless such change
is a modification in a manufacturing procedure or method of manu-
facturing and the holder of the approved application submits a
written notice to the Secretary that describes in detail the change,
summarizes the data or information supporting the change, and in-
forms the Secretary that the change has been made under the re-
quirements of section 520(f).
(ii) The holder of an approved application who submits a notice
under clause (i) with respect to a manufacturing change of a device
may distribute the device 30 days after the date on which the Sec-
retary receives the notice, unless the Secretary within such 30-day
period notifies the holder that the notice is not adequate and de-
scribes such further information or action that is required for ac-
ceptance of such change. If the Secretary notifies the holder that
a supplemental application is required, the Secretary shall review
the supplement within 135 days after the receipt of the supple-
ment. The time used by the Secretary to review the notice of the
manufacturing change shall be deducted from the 135-day review
period if the notice meets appropriate content requirements for pre-
market approval supplements.
(B)(i) Subject to clause (ii), in reviewing a supplement to an ap-
proved application, for an incremental change to the design of a de-
vice that affects safety or effectiveness, the Secretary shall approve
such supplement if—
(I) nonclinical data demonstrate that the design modifica-
tion creates the intended additional capacity, function, or per-
formance of the device; and
(II) clinical data from the approved application and any
supplement to the approved application provide a reasonable
assurance of safety and effectiveness for the changed device.
(ii) The Secretary may require, when necessary, additional
clinical data to evaluate the design modification of the device to
provide a reasonable assurance of safety and effectiveness.
Withdrawal and Temporary Suspension of Approval of Application
(e)(1) The Secretary shall, upon obtaining, where appropriate,
advice on scientific matters from a panel or panels under section
513, and after due notice and opportunity for informal hearing to
the holder of an approved application for a device, issue an order
withdrawing approval of the application if the Secretary finds—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
211
Sec. 515
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(A) that such device is unsafe or ineffective under the con-
ditions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the la-
beling thereof;
(B) on the basis of new information before him with re-
spect to such device, evaluated together with the evidence
available to him when the application was approved, that there
is a lack of a showing of reasonable assurance that the device
is safe or effective under the conditions of use prescribed, rec-
ommended, or suggested in the labeling thereof;
(C) that the application contained or was accompanied by
an untrue statement of a material fact;
(D) that the applicant (i) has failed to establish a system
for maintaining records, or has repeatedly or deliberately failed
to maintain records or to make reports, required by an applica-
ble regulation under section 519(a), (ii) has refused to permit
access to, or copying or verification of, such records as required
by section 704, or (iii) has not complied with the requirements
of section 510;
(E) on the basis of new information before him with re-
spect to such device, evaluated together with the evidence be-
fore him when the application was approved, that the methods
used in, or the facilities and controls used for, the manufac-
ture, processing, packing, or installation of such device do not
conform with the requirements of section 520(f) and were not
brought into conformity with such requirements within a rea-
sonable time after receipt of written notice from the Secretary
of nonconformity;
(F) on the basis of new information before him, evaluated
together with the evidence before him when the application
was approved, that the labeling of such device, based on a fair
evaluation of all material facts, is false or misleading in any
particular and was not corrected within a reasonable time after
receipt of written notice from the Secretary of such fact; or
(G) on the basis of new information before him, evaluated
together with the evidence before him when the application
was approved, that such device is not shown to conform in all
respects to a performance standard which is in effect under
section 514 compliance with which was a condition to approval
of the application and that there is a lack of adequate informa-
tion to justify the deviation from such standard.
(2) The holder of an application subject to an order issued
under paragraph (1) withdrawing approval of the application may,
by petition filed on or before the thirtieth day after the date upon
which he receives notice of such withdrawal, obtain review thereof
in accordance with either paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (g).
(3) If, after providing an opportunity for an informal hearing,
the Secretary determines there is reasonable probability that the
continuation of distribution of a device under an approved applica-
tion would cause serious, adverse health consequences or death,
the Secretary shall by order temporarily suspend the approval of
the application approved under this section. If the Secretary issues
such an order, the Secretary shall proceed expeditiously under
paragraph (1) to withdraw such application.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
212
Sec. 515
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
Product Development Protocol
(f)(1) In the case of a class III device which is required to have
an approval of an application submitted under subsection (c), such
device shall be considered as having such an approval if a notice
of completion of testing conducted in accordance with a product de-
velopment protocol approved under paragraph (4) has been de-
clared completed under paragraph (6).
(2) Any person may submit to the Secretary a proposed product
development protocol with respect to a device. Such a protocol shall
be accompanied by data supporting it. If, within thirty days of the
receipt of such a protocol, the Secretary determines that it appears
to be appropriate to apply the requirements of this subsection to
the device with respect to which the protocol is submitted, the
Secretary—
(A) may, at the initiative of the Secretary, refer the pro-
posed protocol to the appropriate panel under section 513 for
its recommendation respecting approval of the protocol; or
(B) shall so refer such protocol upon the request of the
submitter, unless the Secretary finds that the proposed pro-
tocol and accompanying data which would be reviewed by such
panel substantially duplicate a product development protocol
and accompanying data which have previously been reviewed
by such a panel.
(3) A proposed product development protocol for a device may
be approved only if—
(A) the Secretary determines that it is appropriate to apply
the requirements of this subsection to the device in lieu of the
requirement of approval of an application submitted under
subsection (c); and
(B) the Secretary determines that the proposed protocol
provides—
(i) a description of the device and the changes which
may be made in the device,
(ii) a description of the preclinical trials (if any) of the
device and a specification of (I) the results from such trials
to be required before the commencement of clinical trials
of the device, and (II) any permissible variations in pre-
clinical trials and the results therefrom,
(iii) a description of the clinical trials (if any) of the
device and a specification of (I) the results from such trials
to be required before the filing of a notice of completion of
the requirements of the protocol, and (II) any permissible
variations in such trials and the results therefrom,
(iv) a description of the methods to be used in, and the
facilities and controls to be used for, the manufacture,
processing, and when relevant, packing and installation of
the device,
(v) an identifying reference to any performance stand-
ard under section 514 to be applicable to any aspect of
such device,
(vi) if appropriate, specimens of the labeling proposed
to be used for such device,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
213
Sec. 515
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(vii) such other information relevant to the subject
matter of the protocol as the Secretary, with the concur-
rence of the appropriate panel or panels under section 513,
may require, and
(viii) a requirement for submission of progress reports
and, when completed, records of the trials conducted under
the protocol which records are adequate to show compli-
ance with the protocol.
(4) The Secretary shall approve or disapprove a proposed prod-
uct development protocol submitted under paragraph (2) within one
hundred and twenty days of its receipt unless an additional period
is agreed upon by the Secretary and the person who submitted the
protocol. Approval of a protocol or denial of approval of a protocol
is final agency action subject to judicial review under chapter 7 of
title 5, United States Code.
(5) At any time after a product development protocol for a de-
vice has been approved pursuant to paragraph (4), the person for
whom the protocol was approved may submit a notice of
completion—
(A) stating (i) his determination that the requirements of
the protocol have been fulfilled and that, to the best of his
knowledge, there is no reason bearing on safety or effectiveness
why the notice of completion should not become effective, and
(ii) the data and other information upon which such determina-
tion was made, and
(B) setting forth the results of the trials required by the
protocol and all the information required by subsection (c)(1).
(6)(A) The Secretary may, after providing the person who has
an approved protocol an opportunity for an informal hearing and
at any time prior to receipt of notice of completion of such protocol,
issue a final order to revoke such protocol if he finds that—
(i) such person has failed substantially to comply with the
requirements of the protocol,
(ii) the results of the trials obtained under the protocol dif-
fer so substantially from the results required by the protocol
that further trials cannot be justified, or
(iii) the results of the trials conducted under the protocol
or available new information do not demonstrate that the de-
vice tested under the protocol does not present an unreason-
able risk to health and safety.
(B) After the receipt of a notice of completion of an approved
protocol the Secretary shall, within the ninety-day period beginning
on the date such notice is received, by order either declare the pro-
tocol completed or declare it not completed. An order declaring a
protocol not completed may take effect only after the Secretary has
provided the person who has the protocol opportunity for an infor-
mal hearing on the order. Such an order may be issued only if the
Secretary finds—
(i) such person has failed substantially to comply with the
requirements of the protocol,
(ii) the results of the trials obtained under the protocol dif-
fer substantially from the results required by the protocol, or
(iii) there is a lack of a showing of reasonable assurance
of the safety and effectiveness of the device under the condi-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
214
Sec. 515
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
tions of use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the pro-
posed labeling thereof.
(C) A final order issued under subparagraph (A) or (B) shall be
in writing and shall contain the reasons to support the conclusions
thereof.
(7) At any time after a notice of completion has become effec-
tive, the Secretary may issue an order (after due notice and oppor-
tunity for an informal hearing to the person for whom the notice
is effective) revoking the approval of a device provided by a notice
of completion which has become effective as provided in subpara-
graph (B) if he finds that any of the grounds listed in subpara-
graphs (A) through (G) of subsection (e)(1) of this section apply.
Each reference in such subparagraphs to an application shall be
considered for purposes of this paragraph as a reference to a pro-
tocol and the notice of completion of such protocol, and each ref-
erence to the time when an application was approved shall be con-
sidered for purposes of this paragraph as a reference to the time
when a notice of completion took effect.
(8) A person who has an approved protocol subject to an order
issued under paragraph (6)(A) revoking such protocol, a person who
has an approved protocol with respect to which an order under
paragraph (6)(B) was issued declaring that the protocol had not
been completed, or a person subject to an order issued under para-
graph (7) revoking the approval of a device may, by petition filed
on or before the thirtieth day after the date upon which he receives
notice of such order, obtain review thereof in accordance with ei-
ther paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (g).
Review
(g)(1) Upon petition for review of—
(A) an order under subsection (d) approving or denying ap-
proval of an application or an order under subsection (e) with-
drawing approval of an application, or
(B) an order under subsection (f)(6)(A) revoking an ap-
proved protocol, under subsection (f)(6)(B) declaring that an ap-
proved protocol has not been completed, or under subsection
(f)(7) revoking the approval of a device,
the Secretary shall, unless he finds the petition to be without good
cause or unless a petition for review of such order has been sub-
mitted under paragraph (2), hold a hearing, in accordance with sec-
tion 554 of title 5 of the United States Code, on the order. The
panel or panels which considered the application, protocol, or de-
vice subject to such order shall designate a member to appear and
testify at any such hearing upon request of the Secretary, the peti-
tioner, or the officer conducting the hearing, but this requirement
does not preclude any other member of the panel or panels from
appearing and testifying at any such hearing. Upon completion of
such hearing and after considering the record established in such
hearing, the Secretary shall issue an order either affirming the
order subject to the hearing or reversing such order and, as appro-
priate, approving or denying approval of the application, rein-
stating the application’s approval, approving the protocol, or plac-
ing in effect a notice of completion.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
215
Sec. 515
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(2)(A) Upon petition for review of—
(i) an order under subsection (d) approving or denying ap-
proval of an application or an order under subsection (e) with-
drawing approval of an application, or
(ii) an order under subsection (f)(6)(A) revoking an ap-
proved protocol, under subsection (f)(6)(B) declaring that an ap-
proved protocol has not been completed, or under subsection
(f)(7) revoking the approval of a device,
the Secretary shall refer the application or protocol subject to the
order and the basis for the order to an advisory committee of ex-
perts established pursuant to subparagraph (B) for a report and
recommendation with respect to the order. The advisory committee
shall, after independent study of the data and information fur-
nished to it by the Secretary and other data and information before
it, submit to the Secretary a report and recommendation, together
with all underlying data and information and a statement of the
reasons or basis for the recommendation. A copy of such report
shall be promptly supplied by the Secretary to any person who pe-
titioned for such referral to the advisory committee.
(B) The Secretary shall establish advisory committees (which
may not be panels under section 513) to receive referrals under
subparagraph (A). The Secretary shall appoint as members of any
such advisory committee persons qualified in the subject matter to
be referred to the committee and of appropriately diversified pro-
fessional backgrounds, except that the Secretary may not appoint
to such a committee any individual who is in the regular full-time
employ of the United States and engaged in the administration of
this Act. Members of an advisory committee (other than officers or
employees of the United States), while attending conferences or
meetings of their committee or otherwise serving at the request of
the Secretary, shall be entitled to receive compensation at rates to
be fixed by the Secretary which rates may not exceed the daily
equivalent for grade GS–18 of the General Schedule for each day
(including traveltime) they are so engaged; and while so serving
away from their homes or regular places of business each member
may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of sub-
sistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5 of the United
States Code for persons in the Government service employed inter-
mittently. The Secretary shall designate the chairman of an advi-
sory committee from its members. The Secretary shall furnish each
advisory committee with clerical and other assistance, and shall by
regulation prescribe the procedures to be followed by each such
committee in acting on referrals made under subparagraph (A).
(C) The Secretary shall make public the report and rec-
ommendation made by an advisory committee with respect to an
application and shall by order, stating the reasons therefor, either
affirm the order referred to the advisory committee or reverse such
order and, if appropriate, approve or deny approval of the applica-
tion, reinstate the application’s approval, approve the protocol, or
place in effect a notice of completion.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
216
Sec. 516
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
Service of Orders
(h) Orders of the Secretary under this section shall be served
(1) in person by any officer or employee of the department des-
ignated by the Secretary, or (2) by mailing the order by registered
mail or certified mail addressed to the applicant at his last known
address in the records of the Secretary.
Revision
(i)(1) Before December 1, 1995, the Secretary shall by order re-
quire manufacturers of devices, which were introduced or delivered
for introduction into interstate commerce for commercial distribu-
tion before May 28, 1976, and which are subject to revision of clas-
sification under paragraph (2), to submit to the Secretary a sum-
mary of and citation to any information known or otherwise avail-
able to the manufacturer respecting such devices, including adverse
safety or effectiveness information which has not been submitted
under section 519. The Secretary may require the manufacturer to
submit the adverse safety or effectiveness data for which a sum-
mary and citation were submitted, if such data are available to the
manufacturer.
(2) After the issuance of an order under paragraph (1) but be-
fore December 1, 1995, the Secretary shall publish a regulation in
the Federal Register for each device—
(A) which the Secretary has classified as a class III device,
and
(B) for which no final regulation has been promulgated
under section 515(b),
revising the classification of the device so that the device is classi-
fied into class I or class II, unless the regulation requires the de-
vice to remain in class III. In determining whether to revise the
classification of a device or to require a device to remain in class
III, the Secretary shall apply the criteria set forth in section 513(a).
Before the publication of a regulation requiring a device to remain
in class III or revising its classification, the Secretary shall publish
a proposed regulation respecting the classification of a device under
this paragraph and provide reasonable opportunity for the submis-
sion of comments on any such regulation. No regulation requiring
a device to remain in class III or revising its classification may
take effect before the expiration of 90 days from the date of its pub-
lication in the Federal Register as a proposed regulation.
(3) The Secretary shall, as promptly as is reasonably achiev-
able, but not later than 12 months after the effective date of the
regulation requiring a device to remain in class III, establish a
schedule for the promulgation of a section 515(b) regulation for
each device which is subject to the regulation requiring the device
to remain in class III.
BANNED DEVICES
General Rule
SEC. 516. ø21 U.S.C. 360f¿ (a) Whenever the Secretary finds,
on the basis of all available data and information, that—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
217
Sec. 517
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(1) a device intended for human use presents substantial
deception or an unreasonable and substantial risk of illness or
injury; and
(2) in the case of substantial deception or an unreasonable
and substantial risk of illness or injury which the Secretary de-
termined could be corrected or eliminated by labeling or
change in labeling and with respect to which the Secretary pro-
vided written notice to the manufacturer specifying the decep-
tion or risk of illness or injury, the labeling or change in label-
ing to correct the deception or eliminate or reduce such risk,
and the period within which such labeling or change in label-
ing was to be done, such labeling or change in labeling was not
done within such period;
he may initiate a proceeding to promulgate a regulation to make
such device a banned device.
Special Effective Date
(b) The Secretary may declare a proposed regulation under
subsection (a) to be effective upon its publication in the Federal
Register and until the effective date of any final action taken re-
specting such regulation if (1) he determines, on the basis of all
available data and information, that the deception or risk of illness
or injury associated with the use of the device which is subject to
the regulation presents an unreasonable, direct, and substantial
danger to the health of individuals, and (2) before the date of the
publication of such regulation, the Secretary notifies the manufac-
turer of such device that such regulation is to be made so effective.
If the Secretary makes a proposed regulation so effective, he shall,
as expeditiously as possible, give interested persons prompt notice
of his action under this subsection, provide reasonable opportunity
for an informal hearing on the proposed regulation, and either af-
firm, modify, or revoke such proposed regulation.
JUDICIAL REVIEW
Application of Section
SEC. 517. ø21 U.S.C. 360g¿ (a) Not later than thirty days
after—
(1) the promulgation of a regulation under section 513
classifying a device in class I or changing the classification of
a device to class I or an order under subsection (f)(2) of such
section reclassifying a device or denying a petition for reclassi-
fication of a device,
(2) the promulgation of a regulation under section 514 es-
tablishing, amending, or revoking a performance standard for
a device,
(3) the issuance of an order under section 514(b)(2) or 515
(b)(2)(B) denying a request for reclassification of a device,
(4) the promulgation of a regulation under paragraph (3)
of section 515(b) requiring a device to have an approval of a
premarket application, a regulation under paragraph (4) of
that section amending or revoking a regulation under para-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
218
Sec. 517
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
graph (3), or an order pursuant to section 515(g)(1) or
515(g)(2)(C),
(5) the promulgation of a regulation under section 516
(other than a proposed regulation made effective under sub-
section (b) of such section upon the regulation’s publication)
making a device a banned device,
(6) the issuance of an order under section 520(f)(2),
(7) an order under section 520(g)(4) disapproving an appli-
cation for an exemption of a device for investigational use or
an order under section 520(g)(5) withdrawing such an exemp-
tion for a device,
(8) an order pursuant to section 513(i), or
(9) a regulation under section 515(i)(2) or 520(l)(5)(B),
any person adversely affected by such regulation or order may file
a petition with the United States Court of Appeals for the District
of Columbia or for the circuit wherein such person resides or has
his principal place of business for judicial review of such regulation
or order. A copy of the petition shall be transmitted by the clerk
of the court to the Secretary or other officer designated by him for
that purpose. The Secretary shall file in the court the record of the
proceedings on which the Secretary based his regulation or order
as provided in section 2112 of title 28, United States Code. For pur-
poses of this section, the term ‘‘record’’ means all notices and other
matter published in the Federal Register with respect to the regu-
lation or order reviewed, all information submitted to the Secretary
with respect to such regulation or order, proceedings of any panel
or advisory committee with respect to such regulation or order, any
hearing held with respect to such regulation or order, and any
other information identified by the Secretary, in the administrative
proceeding held with respect to such regulation or order, as being
relevant to such regulation or order.
Additional Data, Views, and Arguments
(b) If the petitioner applies to the court for leave to adduce ad-
ditional data, views, or arguments respecting the regulation or
order being reviewed and shows to the satisfaction of the court that
such additional data, views, or arguments are material and that
there were reasonable grounds for the petitioner’s failure to adduce
such data, views, or arguments in the proceedings before the Sec-
retary, the court may order the Secretary to provide additional op-
portunity for the oral presentation of data, views, or arguments
and for written submissions. The Secretary may modify his find-
ings, or make new findings by reason of the additional data, views,
or arguments so taken and shall file with the court such modified
or new findings, and his recommendation, if any, for the modifica-
tion or setting aside of the regulation or order being reviewed, with
the return of such additional data, views, or arguments.
Standard for Review
(c) Upon the filing of the petition under subsection (a) of this
section for judicial review of a regulation or order, the court shall
have jurisdiction to review the regulation or order in accordance
with chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code, and to grant appro-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
219
Sec. 518
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
priate relief, including interim relief, as provided in such chapter.
A regulation described in paragraph (2) or (5) of subsection (a) and
an order issued after the review provided by section 515(g) shall
not be affirmed if it is found to be unsupported by substantial evi-
dence on the record taken as a whole.
Finality of Judgments
(d) The judgment of the court affirming or setting aside, in
whole or in part, any regulation or order shall be final, subject to
review by the Supreme Court of the United States upon certiorari
or certification, as provided in section 1254 of title 28 of the United
States Code.
Other Remedies
(e) The remedies provided for in this section shall be in addi-
tion to and not in lieu of any other remedies provided by law.
Statement of Reasons
(f) To facilitate judicial review under this section or under any
other provision of law of a regulation or order issued under section
513, 514, 515, 516, 518, 519, 520, or 521 each such regulation or
order shall contain a statement of the reasons for its issuance and
the basis, in the record of the proceedings held in connection with
its issuance, for its issuance.
NOTIFICATION AND OTHER REMEDIES
Notification
SEC. 518. ø21 U.S.C. 360h¿ (a) If the Secretary determines
that—
(1) a device intended for human use which is introduced or
delivered for introduction into interstate commerce for commer-
cial distribution presents an unreasonable risk of substantial
harm to the public health, and
(2) notification under this subsection is necessary to elimi-
nate the unreasonable risk of such harm and no more prac-
ticable means is available under the provisions of this Act
(other than this section) to eliminate such risk,
the Secretary may issue such order as may be necessary to assure
that adequate notification is provided in an appropriate form, by
the persons and means best suited under the circumstances in-
volved, to all health professionals who prescribe or use the device
and to any other person (including manufacturers, importers, dis-
tributors, retailers, and device users) who should properly receive
such notification in order to eliminate such risk. An order under
this subsection shall require that the individuals subject to the risk
with respect to which the order is to be issued be included in the
persons to be notified of the risk unless the Secretary determines
that notice to such individuals would present a greater danger to
the health of such individuals than no such notification. If the Sec-
retary makes such a determination with respect to such individ-
uals, the order shall require that the health professionals who pre-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
220
Sec. 518
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
scribe or use the device provide for the notification of the individ-
uals whom the health professionals treated with the device of the
risk presented by the device and of any action which may be taken
by or on behalf of such individuals to eliminate or reduce such risk.
Before issuing an order under this subsection, the Secretary shall
consult with the persons who are to give notice under the order.
Repair, Replacement, or Refund
(b)(1)(A) If, after affording opportunity for an informal hearing,
the Secretary determines that—
(i) a device intended for human use which is introduced or
delivered for introduction into interstate commerce for commer-
cial distribution presents an unreasonable risk of substantial
harm to the public health.
(ii) there are reasonable grounds to believe that the device
was not properly designed or manufactured with reference to
the state of the art as it existed at the time of its design or
manufacture,
(iii) there are reasonable grounds to believe that the un-
reasonable risk was not caused by failure of a person other
than a manufacturer, importer, distributor, or retailer of the
device to exercise due care in the installation, maintenance, re-
pair, or use of the device, and
(iv) the notification authorized by subsection (a) would not
by itself be sufficient to eliminate the unreasonable risk and
action described in paragraph (2) of this subsection is nec-
essary to eliminate such risk,
the Secretary may order the manufacturer, importer, or any dis-
tributor of such device, or any combination of such persons, to sub-
mit to him within a reasonable time a plan for taking one or more
of the actions described in paragraph (2). An order issued under
the preceding sentence which is directed to more than one person
shall specify which person may decide which action shall be taken
under such plan and the person specified shall be the person who
the Secretary determines bears the principal, ultimate financial re-
sponsibility for action taken under the plan unless the Secretary
cannot determine who bears such responsibility or the Secretary
determines that the protection of the public health requires that
such decision be made by a person (including a device user or
health professional) other than the person he determines bears
such responsibility.
(B) The Secretary shall approve a plan submitted pursuant to
an order issued under subparagraph (A) unless he determines
(after affording opportunity for an informal hearing) that the action
or actions to be taken under the plan or the manner in which such
action or actions are to be taken under the plan will not assure
that the unreasonable risk with respect to which such order was
issued will be eliminated. If the Secretary disapproves a plan, he
shall order a revised plan to be submitted to him within a reason-
able time. If the Secretary determines (after affording opportunity
for an informal hearing) that the revised plan is unsatisfactory or
if no revised plan or no initial plan has been submitted to the Sec-
retary within the prescribed time, the Secretary shall (i) prescribe
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
221
Sec. 518
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
a plan to be carried out by the person or persons to whom the order
issued under subparagraph (A) was directed, or (ii) after affording
an opportunity for an informal hearing, by order prescribe a plan
to be carried out by a person who is a manufacturer, importer, dis-
tributor, or retailer of the device with respect to which the order
was issued but to whom the order under subparagraph (A) was not
directed.
(2) The actions which may be taken under a plan submitted
under an order issued under paragraph (1) are as follows:
(A) To repair the device so that it does not present the un-
reasonable risk of substantial harm with respect to which the
order under paragraph (1) was issued.
(B) To replace the device with a like or equivalent device
which is in conformity with all applicable requirements of this
Act.
(C) To refund the purchase price of the device (less a rea-
sonable allowance for use if such device has been in the posses-
sion of the device user for one year or more—
(i) at the time of notification ordered under subsection
(a), or
(ii) at the time the device user receives actual notice
of the unreasonable risk with respect to which the order
was issued under paragraph (1),
whichever first occurs).
(3) No charge shall be made to any person (other than a manu-
facturer, importer, distributor or retailer) for availing himself of
any remedy, described in paragraph (2) and provided under an
order issued under paragraph (1), and the person subject to the
order shall reimburse each person (other than a manufacturer, im-
porter, distributor, or retailer) who is entitled to such a remedy for
any reasonable and foreseeable expenses actually incurred by such
person in availing himself of such remedy.
Reimbursement
(c) An order issued under subsection (b) with respect to a de-
vice may require any person who is a manufacturer, importer, dis-
tributor, or retailer of the device to reimburse any other person
who is a manufacturer, importer, distributor, or retailer of such de-
vice for such other person’s expenses actually incurred in connec-
tion with carrying out the order if the Secretary determines such
reimbursement is required for the protection of the public health.
Any such requirement shall not affect any rights or obligations
under any contract to which the person receiving reimbursement or
the person making such reimbursement is a party.
Effect on Other Liability
(d) Compliance with an order issued under this section shall
not relieve any person from liability under Federal or State law. In
awarding damages for economic loss in an action brought for the
enforcement of any such liability, the value to the plaintiff in such
action of any remedy provided him under such order shall be taken
into account.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
222
Sec. 519
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
Recall Authority
(e)(1) If the Secretary finds that there is a reasonable prob-
ability that a device intended for human use would cause serious,
adverse health consequences or death, the Secretary shall issue an
order requiring the appropriate person (including the manufactur-
ers, importers, distributors, or retailers of the device)—
(A) to immediately cease distribution of such device, and
(B) to immediately notify health professionals and device
user facilities of the order and to instruct such professionals
and facilities to cease use of such device.
The order shall provide the person subject to the order with an op-
portunity for an informal hearing, to be held not later than 10 days
after the date of the issuance of the order, on the actions required
by the order and on whether the order should be amended to re-
quire a recall of such device. If, after providing an opportunity for
such a hearing, the Secretary determines that inadequate grounds
exist to support the actions required by the order, the Secretary
shall vacate the order.
(2)(A) If, after providing an opportunity for an informal hear-
ing under paragraph (1), the Secretary determines that the order
should be amended to include a recall of the device with respect to
which the order was issued, the Secretary shall, except as provided
in subparagraphs (B) and (C), amend the order to require a recall.
The Secretary shall specify a timetable in which the device recall
will occur and shall require periodic reports to the Secretary de-
scribing the progress of the recall.
(B) An amended order under subparagraph (A)—
(i) shall—
(I) not include recall of a device from individuals, and
(II) not include recall of a device from device user fa-
cilities if the Secretary determines that the risk of recall-
ing such device from the facilities presents a greater
health risk than the health risk of not recalling the device
from use, and
(ii) shall provide for notice to individuals subject to the
risks associated with the use of such device.
In providing the notice required by clause (ii), the Secretary may
use the assistance of health professionals who prescribed or used
such a device for individuals. If a significant number of such indi-
viduals cannot be identified, the Secretary shall notify such individ-
uals pursuant to section 705(b).
(3) The remedy provided by this subsection shall be in addition
to remedies provided by subsections (a), (b), and (c).
RECORDS AND REPORTS ON DEVICES
General Rule
SEC. 519. ø21 U.S.C. 360i¿ (a) Every person who is a manufac-
turer or importer of a device intended for human use shall estab-
lish and maintain such records, make such reports, and provide
such information, as the Secretary may by regulation reasonably
require to assure that such device is not adulterated or misbranded
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
223
Sec. 519
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
and to otherwise assure its safety and effectiveness. Regulations
prescribed under the preceding sentence—
(1) shall require a device manufacturer or importer to re-
port to the Secretary whenever the manufacturer or importer
receives or otherwise becomes aware of information that rea-
sonably suggests that one of its marketed devices—
(A) may have caused or contributed to a death or seri-
ous injury, or
(B) has malfunctioned and that such device or a simi-
lar device marketed by the manufacturer or importer
would be likely to cause or contribute to a death or serious
injury if the malfunction were to recur;
(2) shall define the term ‘‘serious injury’’ to mean an injury
that—
(A) is life threatening,
(B) results in permanent impairment of a body func-
tion or permanent damage to a body structure, or
(C) necessitates medical or surgical intervention to
preclude permanent impairment of a body function or per-
manent damage to a body structure;
(3) shall require reporting of other significant adverse de-
vice experiences as determined by the Secretary to be nec-
essary to be reported;
(4) shall not impose requirements unduly burdensome to a
device manufacturer or importer taking into account his cost of
complying with such requirements and the need for the protec-
tion of the public health and the implementation of this Act;
(5) which prescribe the procedure for making requests for
reports or information shall require that each request made
under such regulations for submission of a report or informa-
tion to the Secretary state the reason or purpose for such re-
quest and identify to the fullest extent practicable such report
or information;
(6) which require submission of a report or information to
the Secretary shall state the reason or purpose for the submis-
sion of such report or information and identify to the fullest ex-
tent practicable such report or information;
(7) may not require that the identity of any patient be dis-
closed in records, reports, or information required under this
subsection unless required for the medical welfare of an indi-
vidual, to determine the safety or effectiveness of a device, or
to verify a record, report, or information submitted under this
Act; and
(8) may not require a manufacturer or importer of a class
I device to—
(A) maintain for such a device records respecting infor-
mation not in the possession of the manufacturer or im-
porter, or
(B) to submit for such a device to the Secretary any
report or information—
(i) not in the possession of the manufacturer or
importer, or
(ii) on a periodic basis,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
224
Sec. 519
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 So in original. Section 213(a)(1)(D)(ii) of Public Law 105–115 amended this paragraph ‘‘by
striking the semicolon at the end and inserting a period’’. The amendment probably should have
been to strike ‘‘; and’’ and insert a period.
unless such report or information is necessary to determine if
the device should be reclassified or if the device is adulterated
or misbranded. and 1
In prescribing such regulations, the Secretary shall have due re-
gard for the professional ethics of the medical profession and the
interests of patients. The prohibitions of paragraph (7) of this sub-
section continue to apply to records, reports, and information con-
cerning any individual who has been a patient, irrespective of
whether or when he ceases to be a patient. The Secretary shall by
regulation require distributors to keep records and make such
records available to the Secretary upon request. Paragraphs (4) and
(8) apply to distributors to the same extent and in the same man-
ner as such paragraphs apply to manufacturers and importers.
User Reports
(b)(1)(A) Whenever a device user facility receives or otherwise
becomes aware of information that reasonably suggests that a de-
vice has or may have caused or contributed to the death of a pa-
tient of the facility, the facility shall, as soon as practicable but not
later than 10 working days after becoming aware of the informa-
tion, report the information to the Secretary and, if the identity of
the manufacturer is known, to the manufacturer of the device. In
the case of deaths, the Secretary may by regulation prescribe a
shorter period for the reporting of such information.
(B) Whenever a device user facility receives or otherwise be-
comes aware of—
(i) information that reasonably suggests that a device has
or may have caused or contributed to the serious illness of, or
serious injury to, a patient of the facility, or
(ii) other significant adverse device experiences as deter-
mined by the Secretary by regulation to be necessary to be re-
ported,
shall, as soon as practicable but not later than 10 working days
after becoming aware of the information, report the information to
the manufacturer of the device or to the Secretary if the identity
of the manufacturer is not known.
(C) Each device user facility shall submit to the Secretary on
an annual basis a summary of the reports made under subpara-
graphs (A) and (B). Such summary shall be submitted on January
1 of each year. The summary shall be in such form and contain
such information from such reports as the Secretary may require
and shall include—
(i) sufficient information to identify the facility which
made the reports for which the summary is submitted,
(ii) in the case of any product which was the subject of a
report, the product name, serial number, and model number,
(iii) the name and the address of the manufacturer of such
device, and
(iv) a brief description of the event reported to the manu-
facturer.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
225
Sec. 519
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(D) For purposes of subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C), a device
user facility shall be treated as having received or otherwise be-
come aware of information with respect to a device of that facility
when medical personnel who are employed by or otherwise formally
affiliated with the facility receive or otherwise become aware of in-
formation with respect to that device in the course of their duties.
(2) The Secretary may not disclose the identity of a device user
facility which makes a report under paragraph (1) except in connec-
tion with—
(A) an action brought to enforce section 301(q), or
(B) a communication to a manufacturer of a device which
is the subject of a report under paragraph (1).
This paragraph does not prohibit the Secretary from disclosing the
identity of a device user facility making a report under paragraph
(1) or any information in such a report to employees of the Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services, to the Department of Justice,
or to the duly authorized committees and subcommittees of the
Congress.
(3) No report made under paragraph (1) by—
(A) a device user facility,
(B) an individual who is employed by or otherwise formally
affiliated with such a facility, or
(C) a physician who is not required to make such a report,
shall be admissible into evidence or otherwise used in any civil ac-
tion involving private parties unless the facility, individual, or phy-
sician who made the report had knowledge of the falsity of the in-
formation contained in the report.
(4) A report made under paragraph (1) does not affect any obli-
gation of a manufacturer who receives the report to file a report
as required under subsection (a).
(5) With respect to device user facilities:
(A) The Secretary shall by regulation plan and implement
a program under which the Secretary limits user reporting
under paragraphs (1) through (4) to a subset of user facilities
that constitutes a representative profile of user reports for de-
vice deaths and serious illnesses or serious injuries.
(B) During the period of planning the program under sub-
paragraph (A), paragraphs (1) through (4) continue to apply.
(C) During the period in which the Secretary is providing
for a transition to the full implementation of the program,
paragraphs (1) through (4) apply except to the extent that the
Secretary determines otherwise.
(D) On and after the date on which the program is fully
implemented, paragraphs (1) through (4) do not apply to a user
facility unless the facility is included in the subset referred to
in subparagraph (A).
(E) Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment
of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of
1997, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Com-
merce of the House of Representatives, and to the Committee
on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate, a report de-
scribing the plan developed by the Secretary under subpara-
graph (A) and the progress that has been made toward the im-
plementation of the plan.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
226
Sec. 519
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(6) For purposes of this subsection:
(A) The term ‘‘device user facility’’ means a hospital, ambu-
latory surgical facility, nursing home, or outpatient treatment
facility which is not a physician’s office. The Secretary may by
regulation include an outpatient diagnostic facility which is not
a physician’s office in such term.
(B) The terms ‘‘serious illness’’ and ‘‘serious injury’’ mean
illness or injury, respectively, that—
(i) is life threatening,
(ii) results in permanent impairment of a body func-
tion or permanent damage to a body structure, or
(iii) necessitates medical or surgical intervention to
preclude permanent impairment of a body function or per-
manent damage to a body structure.
Persons Exempt
(c) Subsection (a) shall not apply to—
(1) any practitioner who is licensed by law to prescribe or
administer devices intended for use in humans and who manu-
factures or imports devices solely for use in the course of his
professional practice;
(2) any person who manufactures or imports devices in-
tended for use in humans solely for such person’s use in re-
search or teaching and not for sale (including any person who
uses a device under an exemption granted under section
520(g)); and
(3) any other class of persons as the Secretary may by reg-
ulation exempt from subsection (a) upon a finding that compli-
ance with the requirements of such subsection by such class
with respect to a device is not necessary to (A) assure that a
device is not adulterated or misbranded or (B) otherwise to as-
sure its safety and effectiveness.
ø(d) Repealed by Pub. L. 105–115, November 21, 1997.¿
Device Tracking
(e)(1) The Secretary may by order require a manufacturer to
adopt a method of tracking a class II or class III device—
(A) the failure of which would be reasonably likely to have
serious adverse health consequences; or
(B) which is—
(i) intended to be implanted in the human body for
more than one year, or
(ii) a life sustaining or life supporting device used out-
side a device user facility.
(2) Any patient receiving a device subject to tracking under
paragraph (1) may refuse to release, or refuse permission to re-
lease, the patient’s name, address, social security number, or other
identifying information for the purpose of tracking.
Reports of Removals and Corrections
(f)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall
by regulation require a manufacturer or importer of a device to re-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
227
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
port promptly to the Secretary any correction or removal of a de-
vice undertaken by such manufacturer or importer if the removal
or correction was undertaken—
(A) to reduce a risk to health posed by the device, or
(B) to remedy a violation of this Act caused by the device
which may present a risk to health.
A manufacturer or importer of a device who undertakes a correc-
tion or removal of a device which is not required to be reported
under this paragraph shall keep a record of such correction or re-
moval.
(2) No report of the corrective action or removal of a device
may be required under paragraph (1) if a report of the corrective
action or removal is required and has been submitted under sub-
section (a).
(3) For purposes of paragraphs (1) and (2), the terms ‘‘correc-
tion’’ and ‘‘removal’’ do not include routine servicing.
GENERAL PROVISIONS RESPECTING CONTROL OF DEVICES INTENDED
FOR HUMAN USE
General Rule
SEC. 520. ø21 U.S.C. 360j¿ (a) Any requirement authorized by
or under section 501, 502, 510, or 519 applicable to a device in-
tended for human use shall apply to such device until the applica-
bility of the requirement to the device has been changed by action
taken under section 513, 514, or 515 or under subsection (g) of this
section, and any requirement established by or under section 501,
502, 510, or 519 which is inconsistent with a requirement imposed
on such device under section 514 or 515 or under subsection (g) of
this section shall not apply to such device.
Custom Devices
(b) Sections 514 and 515 do not apply to any device which, in
order to comply with the order of an individual physician or dentist
(or any other specially qualified person designated under regula-
tions promulgated by the Secretary after an opportunity for an oral
hearing) necessarily deviates from an otherwise applicable perform-
ance standard or requirement prescribed by or under section 515
if (1) the device is not generally available in finished form for pur-
chase or for dispensing upon prescription and is not offered
through labeling or advertising by the manufacturer, importer, or
distributor thereof for commercial distribution, and (2) such
device—
(A)(i) is intended for use by an individual patient named
in such order of such physician or dentist (or other specially
qualified person so designated) and is to be made in a specific
form for such patient, or
(ii) is intended to meet the special needs of such physician
or dentist (or other specially qualified person so designated) in
the course of the professional practice of such physician or den-
tist (or other specially qualified person so designated), and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
228
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(B) is not generally available to or generally used by other
physicians or dentists (or other specially qualified persons so
designated).
Trade Secrets
(c) Any information reported to or otherwise obtained by the
Secretary or his representative under section 513, 514, 515, 516,
518, 519, or 704 or under subsection (f) or (g) of this section which
is exempt from disclosure pursuant to subsection (a) of section 552
of title 5, United States Code, by reason of subsection (b)(4) of such
section shall be considered confidential and shall not be disclosed
and may not be used by the Secretary as the basis for the reclassi-
fication of a device from class III to class II or class I or as the
basis for the establishment or amendment of a performance stand-
ard under section 514 for a device reclassified from class III to
class II, except (1) in accordance with subsection (h), and (2) that
such information may be disclosed to other officers or employees
concerned with carrying out this Act or when relevant in any pro-
ceeding under this Act (other than section 513 or 514 thereof).
Notices and Findings
(d) Each notice of proposed rulemaking under section 513, 514,
515, 516, 518, or 519, or under this section, any other notice which
is published in the Federal Register with respect to any other ac-
tion taken under any such section and which states the reasons for
such action, and each publication of findings required to be made
in connection with rulemaking under any such section shall set
forth—
(1) the manner in which interested persons may examine
data and other information on which the notice or findings is
based, and
(2) the period within which interested persons may present
their comments on the notice or findings (including the need
therefor) orally or in writing, which period shall be at least
sixty days but may not exceed ninety days unless the time is
extended by the Secretary by a notice published in the Federal
Register stating good cause therefor.
Restricted Devices
(e)(1) The Secretary may by regulation require that a device be
restricted to sale, distribution, or use—
(A) only upon the written or oral authorization of a practi-
tioner licensed by law to administer or use such device, or
(B) upon such other conditions as the Secretary may pre-
scribe in such regulation,
if, because of its potentiality for harmful effect or the collateral
measures necessary to its use, the Secretary determines that there
cannot otherwise be reasonable assurance of its safety and effec-
tiveness. No condition prescribed under subparagraph (B) may re-
strict the use of a device to persons with specific training or experi-
ence in its use or to persons for use in certain facilities unless the
Secretary determines that such a restriction is required for the safe
and effective use of the device. No such condition may exclude a
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
229
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
person from using a device solely because the person does not have
the training or experience to make him eligible for certification by
a certifying board recognized by the American Board of Medical
Specialties or has not been certified by such a Board. A device sub-
ject to a regulation under this subsection is a restricted device.
(2) The label of a restricted device shall bear such appropriate
statements of the restrictions required by a regulation under para-
graph (1) as the Secretary may in such regulation prescribe.
Good Manufacturing Practice Requirements
(f)(1)(A) The Secretary may, in accordance with subparagraph
(B), prescribe regulations requiring that the methods used in, and
the facilities and controls used for, the manufacture, pre-production
design validation (including a process to assess the performance of
a device but not including an evaluation of the safety or effective-
ness of a device), packing, storage, and installation of a device con-
form to current good manufacturing practice, as prescribed in such
regulations, to assure that the device will be safe and effective and
otherwise in compliance with this Act.
(B) Before the Secretary may promulgate any regulation under
subparagraph (A) he shall—
(i) afford the advisory committee established under para-
graph (3) an opportunity to submit recommendations to him
with respect to the regulation proposed to be promulgated;
(ii) afford opportunity for an oral hearing; and
(iii) ensure that such regulation conforms, to the extent
practicable, with internationally recognized standards defining
quality systems, or parts of the standards, for medical devices.
The Secretary shall provide the advisory committee a reasonable
time to make its recommendation with respect to proposed regula-
tions under subparagraph (A).
(2)(A) Any person subject to any requirement prescribed by
regulations under paragraph (1) may petition the Secretary for an
exemption or variance from such requirement. Such a petition shall
be submitted to the Secretary in such form and manner as he shall
prescribe and shall—
(i) in the case of a petition for an exemption from a re-
quirement, set forth the basis for the petitioner’s determination
that compliance with the requirement is not required to assure
that the device will be safe and effective and otherwise in com-
pliance with this Act,
(ii) in the case of a petition for a variance from a require-
ment, set forth the methods proposed to be used in, and the
facilities and controls proposed to be used for, the manufac-
ture, packing, storage, and installation of the device in lieu of
the methods, facilities, and controls prescribed by the require-
ment, and
(iii) contain such other information as the Secretary shall
prescribe.
(B) The Secretary may refer to the advisory committee estab-
lished under paragraph (3) any petition submitted under subpara-
graph (A). The advisory committee shall report its recommenda-
tions to the Secretary with respect to a petition referred to it with-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
230
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘the daily equivalent of the rate in effect for grade GS-18 of the
General Schedule,’’ and insert in lieu thereof ‘‘the daily equivalent of the rate of pay for level
4 of the Senior Executive Schedule under section 5382 of title 5, United States Code,’’.
in sixty days of the date of the petition’s referral. Within sixty days
after—
(i) the date the petition was submitted to the Secretary
under subparagraph (A), or
(ii) if the petition was referred to an advisory committee,
the expiration of the sixty-day period beginning on the date the
petition was referred to the advisory committee,
whichever occurs later, the Secretary shall by order either deny the
petition or approve it.
(C) The Secretary may approve—
(i) a petition for an exemption for a device from a require-
ment if he determines that compliance with such requirement
is not required to assure that the device will be safe and effec-
tive and otherwise in compliance with this Act, and
(ii) a petition for a variance for a device from a require-
ment if he determines that the methods to be used in, and the
facilities and controls to be used for, the manufacture, packing,
storage, and installation of the device in lieu of the methods,
controls, and facilities prescribed by the requirement are suffi-
cient to assure that the device will be safe and effective and
otherwise in compliance with this Act.
An order of the Secretary approving a petition for a variance shall
prescribe such conditions respecting the methods used in, and the
facilities and controls used for, the manufacture, packing, storage,
and installation of the device to be granted the variance under the
petition as may be necessary to assure that the device will be safe
and effective and otherwise in compliance with this Act.
(D) After the issuance of an order under subparagraph (B) re-
specting a petition, the petitioner shall have an opportunity for an
informal hearing on such order.
(3) The Secretary shall establish an advisory committee for the
purpose of advising and making recommendations to him with re-
spect to regulations proposed to be promulgated under paragraph
(1)(A) and the approval or disapproval of petitions submitted under
paragraph (2). The advisory committee shall be composed of nine
members as follows:
(A) Three of the members shall be appointed from persons
who are officers or employees of any State or local government
or of the Federal Government.
(B) Two of the members shall be appointed from persons
who are representative of interests of the device manufacturing
industry; two of the members shall be appointed from persons
who are representative of the interests of physicians and other
health professionals; and two of the members shall be rep-
resentative of the interests of the general public.
Members of the advisory committee who are not officers or employ-
ees of the United States, while attending conferences or meetings
of the committee or otherwise engaged in its business, shall be en-
titled to receive compensation at rates to be fixed by the Secretary,
which rates may not exceed the daily equivalent of the rate in ef-
fect for grade GS–18 of the General Schedule 1, for each day (in-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
231
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
cluding traveltime) they are so engaged; and while so serving away
from their homes or regular places of business each member may
be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsist-
ence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5 of the United States
Code for persons in the Government service employed intermit-
tently. The Secretary shall designate one of the members of the ad-
visory committee to serve as its chairman. The Secretary shall fur-
nish the advisory committee with clerical and other assistance. Sec-
tion 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply with
respect to the duration of the advisory committee established under
this paragraph.
Exemption for Devices for Investigational Use
(g)(1) It is the purpose of this subsection to encourage to the
extent consistent with the protection of the public health and safe-
ty and with ethical standards, the discovery and development of
useful devices intended for human use and to that end to maintain
optimum freedom for scientific investigators in their pursuit of that
purpose.
(2)(A) The Secretary shall, within the one hundred and twenty-
day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this section,
by regulation prescribe procedures and conditions under which de-
vices intended for human use may upon application be granted an
exemption from the requirements of section 502, 510, 514, 515, 516,
519, or 721 or subsection (e) or (f) of this section or from any com-
bination of such requirements to permit the investigational use of
such devices by experts qualified by scientific training and experi-
ence to investigate the safety and effectiveness of such devices.
(B) The conditions prescribed pursuant to subparagraph (A)
shall include the following:
(i) A requirement that an application be submitted to the
Secretary before an exemption may be granted and that the
application be submitted in such form and manner as the Sec-
retary shall specify.
(ii) A requirement that the person applying for an exemp-
tion for a device assure the establishment and maintenance of
such records, and the making of such reports to the Secretary
of data obtained as a result of the investigational use of the de-
vice during the exemption, as the Secretary determines will en-
able him to assure compliance with such conditions, review the
progress of the investigation, and evaluate the safety and effec-
tiveness of the device.
(iii) Such other requirements as the Secretary may deter-
mine to be necessary for the protection of the public health and
safety.
(C) Procedures and conditions prescribed pursuant to subpara-
graph (A) for an exemption may appropriately vary depending on
(i) the scope and duration of clinical testing to be conducted under
such exemption, (ii) the number of human subjects that are to be
involved in such testing, (iii) the need to permit changes to be
made in the device subject to the exemption during testing con-
ducted in accordance with a clinical testing plan required under
paragraph (3)(A), and (iv) whether the clinical testing of such de-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
232
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
vice is for the purpose of developing data to obtain approval for the
commercial distribution of such device.
(3) Procedures and conditions prescribed pursuant to para-
graph (2)(A) shall require, as a condition to the exemption of any
device to be the subject of testing involving human subjects, that
the person applying for the exemption—
(A) submit a plan for any proposed clinical testing of the
device and a report of prior investigations of the device (includ-
ing, where appropriate, tests on animals) adequate to justify
the proposed clinical testing—
(i) to the local institutional review committee which
has been established in accordance with regulations of the
Secretary to supervise clinical testing of devices in the fa-
cilities where the proposed clinical testing is to be con-
ducted, or
(ii) to the Secretary, if—
(I) no such committee exists, or
(II) the Secretary finds that the process of review
by such committee is inadequate (whether or not the
plan for such testing has been approved by such com-
mittee),
for review for adequacy to justify the commencement of such
testing; and, unless the plan and report are submitted to the
Secretary, submit to the Secretary a summary of the plan and
a report of prior investigations of the device (including, where
appropriate, tests on animals);
(B) promptly notify the Secretary (under such cir-
cumstances and in such manner as the Secretary prescribes) of
approval by a local institutional review committee of any clin-
ical testing plan submitted to it in accordance with subpara-
graph (A);
(C) in the case of a device to be distributed to investigators
for testing, obtain signed agreements from each of such inves-
tigators that any testing of the device involving human sub-
jects will be under such investigator’s supervision and in ac-
cordance with subparagraph (D) and submit such agreements
to the Secretary; and
(D) assure that informed consent will be obtained from
each human subject (or his representative) of proposed clinical
testing involving such device, except where subject to such con-
ditions as the Secretary may prescribe, the investigator con-
ducting or supervising the proposed clinical testing of the de-
vice determines in writing that there exists a life threatening
situation involving the human subject of such testing which ne-
cessitates the use of such device and it is not feasible to obtain
informed consent from the subject and there is not sufficient
time to obtain such consent from his representative.
The determination required by subparagraph (D) shall be con-
curred in by a licensed physician who is not involved in the testing
of the human subject with respect to which such determination is
made unless immediate use of the device is required to save the life
of the human subject of such testing and there is not sufficient
time to obtain such concurrence.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
233
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(4)(A) An application, submitted in accordance with the proce-
dures prescribed by regulations under paragraph (2), for an exemp-
tion for a device (other than an exemption from section 516) shall
be deemed approved on the thirtieth day after the submission of
the application to the Secretary unless on or before such day the
Secretary by order disapproves the application and notifies the ap-
plicant of the disapproval of the application.
(B) The Secretary may disapprove an application only if he
finds that the investigation with respect to which the application
is submitted does not conform to procedures and conditions pre-
scribed under regulations under paragraph (2). Such a notification
shall contain the order of disapproval and a complete statement of
the reasons for the Secretary’s disapproval of the application and
afford the applicant opportunity for an informal hearing on the dis-
approval order.
(5) The Secretary may by order withdraw an exemption grant-
ed under this subsection for a device if the Secretary determines
that the conditions applicable to the device under this subsection
for such exemption are not met. Such an order may be issued only
after opportunity for an informal hearing, except that such an
order may be issued before the provision of an opportunity for an
informal hearing if the Secretary determines that the continuation
of testing under the exemption with respect to which the order is
to be issued will result in an unreasonable risk to the public
health.
(6)(A) Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of
the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997, the
Secretary shall by regulation establish, with respect to a device for
which an exemption under this subsection is in effect, procedures
and conditions that, without requiring an additional approval of an
application for an exemption or the approval of a supplement to
such an application, permit—
(i) developmental changes in the device (including manu-
facturing changes) that do not constitute a significant change
in design or in basic principles of operation and that are made
in response to information gathered during the course of an in-
vestigation; and
(ii) changes or modifications to clinical protocols that do
not affect—
(I) the validity of data or information resulting from
the completion of an approved protocol, or the relationship
of likely patient risk to benefit relied upon to approve a
protocol;
(II) the scientific soundness of an investigational plan
submitted under paragraph (3)(A); or
(III) the rights, safety, or welfare of the human sub-
jects involved in the investigation.
(B) Regulations under subparagraph (A) shall provide that a
change or modification described in such subparagraph may be
made if—
(i) the sponsor of the investigation determines, on the basis
of credible information (as defined by the Secretary) that the
applicable conditions under subparagraph (A) are met; and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
234
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(ii) the sponsor submits to the Secretary, not later than 5
days after making the change or modification, a notice of the
change or modification.
(7)(A) In the case of a person intending to investigate the safe-
ty or effectiveness of a class III device or any implantable device,
the Secretary shall ensure that the person has an opportunity,
prior to submitting an application to the Secretary or to an institu-
tional review committee, to submit to the Secretary, for review, an
investigational plan (including a clinical protocol). If the applicant
submits a written request for a meeting with the Secretary regard-
ing such review, the Secretary shall, not later than 30 days after
receiving the request, meet with the applicant for the purpose of
reaching agreement regarding the investigational plan (including a
clinical protocol). The written request shall include a detailed de-
scription of the device, a detailed description of the proposed condi-
tions of use of the device, a proposed plan (including a clinical pro-
tocol) for determining whether there is a reasonable assurance of
effectiveness, and, if available, information regarding the expected
performance from the device.
(B) Any agreement regarding the parameters of an investiga-
tional plan (including a clinical protocol) that is reached between
the Secretary and a sponsor or applicant shall be reduced to writ-
ing and made part of the administrative record by the Secretary.
Any such agreement shall not be changed, except—
(i) with the written agreement of the sponsor or applicant;
or
(ii) pursuant to a decision, made in accordance with sub-
paragraph (C) by the director of the office in which the device
involved is reviewed, that a substantial scientific issue essen-
tial to determining the safety or effectiveness of the device in-
volved has been identified.
(C) A decision under subparagraph (B)(ii) by the director shall
be in writing, and may be made only after the Secretary has pro-
vided to the sponsor or applicant an opportunity for a meeting at
which the director and the sponsor or applicant are present and at
which the director documents the scientific issue involved.
Release of Safety and Effectiveness Information
(h)(1) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations under which
a detailed summary of information respecting the safety and effec-
tiveness of a device which information was submitted to the Sec-
retary and which was the basis for—
(A) an order under section 515(d)(1)(A) approving an appli-
cation for premarket approval for the device or denying ap-
proval of such an application or an order under section 515(e)
withdrawing approval of such an application for the device,
(B) an order under section 515(f)(6)(A) revoking an ap-
proved protocol for the device, an order under section
515(f)(6)(B) declaring a protocol for the device completed or not
completed, or an order under section 515(f)(7) revoking the ap-
proval of the device, or
(C) an order approving an application under subsection (g)
for an exemption for the device from section 516 or an order
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
235
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
disapproving, or withdrawing approval of, an application for an
exemption under such subsection for the device,
shall be made available to the public upon issuance of the order.
Summaries of information made available pursuant to this para-
graph respecting a device shall include information respecting any
adverse effects on health of the device.
(2) The Secretary shall promulgate regulations under which
each advisory committee established under section 515(g)(2)(B)
shall make available to the public a detailed summary of informa-
tion respecting the safety and effectiveness of a device which infor-
mation was submitted to the advisory committee and which was
the basis for its recommendation to the Secretary made pursuant
to section 515(g)(2)(A). A summary of information upon which such
a recommendation is based shall be made available pursuant to
this paragraph only after the issuance of the order with respect to
which the recommendation was made and each summary shall in-
clude information respecting any adverse effect on health of the de-
vice subject to such order.
(3) Except as provided in paragraph (4), any information re-
specting a device which is made available pursuant to paragraph
(1) or (2) of this subsection (A) may not be used to establish the
safety or effectiveness of another device for purposes of this Act by
any person other than the person who submitted the information
so made available, and (B) shall be made available subject to sub-
section (c) of this section.
(4)(A) Any information contained in an application for pre-
market approval filed with the Secretary pursuant to section 515(c)
(including information from clinical and preclinical tests or studies
that demonstrate the safety and effectiveness of a device, but ex-
cluding descriptions of methods of manufacture and product com-
position and other trade secrets) shall be available, 6 years after
the application has been approved by the Secretary, for use by the
Secretary in—
(i) approving another device;
(ii) determining whether a product development protocol
has been completed, under section 515 for another device;
(iii) establishing a performance standard or special control
under this Act; or
(iv) classifying or reclassifying another device under sec-
tion 513 and subsection (l)(2).
(B) The publicly available detailed summaries of information
respecting the safety and effectiveness of devices required by para-
graph (1)(A) shall be available for use by the Secretary as the evi-
dentiary basis for the agency actions described in subparagraph
(A).
Proceedings of Advisory Panels and Committees
(i) Each panel under section 513 and each advisory committee
established under section 514(b)(5)(B) or 515(g) or under subsection
(f) of this section shall make and maintain a transcript of any pro-
ceeding of the panel or committee. Each such panel and committee
shall delete from any transcript made pursuant to this subsection
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
236
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘sections 3648 and 3709 of the Revised Statutes (31 U.S.C. 529,
41 U.S.C. 5)’’ and insert ‘‘subsections (a) and (b) of section 3324 of title 31, United States Code,
and section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 U.S.C. 5)’’.
2 Probably should strike out ‘‘the date of enactment of the Medical Device Amendments of
1976’’ and insert ‘‘May 28, 1976’’.
information which under subsection (c) of this section is to be con-
sidered confidential.
Traceability Requirements
(j) Except as provided in section 519(e), no regulation under
this Act may impose on a type or class of device requirements for
the traceability of such type or class of device unless such require-
ments are necessary to assure the protection of the public health.
Research and Development
(k) The Secretary may enter into contracts for research, test-
ing, and demonstrations respecting devices and may obtain devices
for research, testing, and demonstration purposes without regard to
sections 3648 and 3709 of the Revised Statutes (31 U.S.C. 529, 41
U.S.C. 5) 1.
Transitional Provisions for Devices Considered as New Drugs
(l)(1) Any device intended for human use—
(A) for which on the date of enactment of the Medical De-
vice Amendments of 1976 2 (hereinafter in this subsection re-
ferred to as the ‘‘enactment date’’) an approval of an applica-
tion submitted under section 505(b) was in effect;
(B) for which such an application was filed on or before the
enactment date and with respect to which application no order
of approval or refusing to approve had been issued on such
date under subsection (c) or (d) of such section;
(C) for which on the enactment date an exemption under
subsection (i) of such section was in effect;
(D) which is within a type of device described in subpara-
graph (A), (B), or (C) and is substantially equivalent to another
device within that type;
(E) which the Secretary in a notice published in the Fed-
eral Register before the enactment date has declared to be a
new drug subject to section 505; or
(F) with respect to which on the enactment date an action
is pending in a United States court under section 302, 303, or
304 for an alleged violation of a provision of section 301 which
enforces a requirement of section 505 or for an alleged viola-
tion of section 505(a),
is classified in class III unless the Secretary in response to a peti-
tion submitted under paragraph (2) has classified such device in
class I or II.
(2) The Secretary may initiate the reclassification of a device
classified into class III under paragraph (1) of this subsection or
the manufacturer or importer of a device classified under para-
graph (1) may petition the Secretary (in such form and manner as
he shall prescribe) for the issuance of an order classifying the de-
vice in class I or class II. Within thirty days of the filing of such
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
237
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
a petition, the Secretary shall notify the petitioner of any defi-
ciencies in the petition which prevent the Secretary from making
a decision on the petition. Except as provided in paragraph
(3)(D)(ii), within one hundred and eighty days after the filing of a
petition under this paragraph, the Secretary shall, after consulta-
tion with the appropriate panel under section 513, by order either
deny the petition or order the classification, in accordance with the
criteria prescribed by section 513(a)(1)(A) or 513(a)(1)(B), of the de-
vice in class I or class II.
(3)(A) In the case of a device which is described in paragraph
(1)(A) and which is in class III—
(i) such device shall on the enactment date be considered
a device with an approved application under section 515, and
(ii) the requirements applicable to such device before the
enactment date under section 505 shall continue to apply to
such device until changed by the Secretary as authorized by
this Act.
(B) In the case of a device which is described in paragraph
(1)(B) and which is in class III, an application for such device shall
be considered as having been filed under section 515 on the enact-
ment date. The period in which the Secretary shall act on such ap-
plication in accordance with section 515(d)(1) shall be one hundred
and eighty days from the enactment date (or such greater period
as the Secretary and the applicant may agree upon after the Sec-
retary has made the finding required by section 515(d)(1)(B)(i)) less
the number of days in the period beginning on the date an applica-
tion for such device was filed under section 505 and ending on the
enactment date. After the expiration of such period such device is
required, unless exempt under subsection (g), to have in effect an
approved application under section 515.
(C) A device which is described in paragraph (1)(C) and which
is in class III shall be considered a new drug until the expiration
of the ninety-day period beginning on the date of the promulgation
of regulations under subsection (g) of this section. After the expira-
tion of such period such device is required, unless exempt under
subsection (g), to have in effect an approved application under sec-
tion 515.
(D)(i) Except as provided in clauses (ii) and (iii), a device which
is described in subparagraph (D), (E), or (F) of paragraph (1) and
which is in class III is required, unless exempt under subsection
(g) of this section, to have on and after sixty days after the enact-
ment date in effect an approved application under section 515.
(ii) If—
(I) a petition is filed under paragraph (2) for a device de-
scribed in subparagraph (D), (E), or (F) of paragraph (1), or
(II) an application for premarket approval is filed under
section 515 for such a device,
within the sixty-day period beginning on the enactment date (or
within such greater period as the Secretary, after making the find-
ing required under section 515(d)(1)(B), and the petitioner or appli-
cant may agree upon), the Secretary shall act on such petition or
application in accordance with paragraph (2) or section 515 except
that the period within which the Secretary must act on the petition
or application shall be within the one hundred and twenty-day pe-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
238
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
riod beginning on the date the petition or application is filed. If
such a petition or application is filed within such sixty-day (or
greater) period, clause (i) of this subparagraph shall not apply to
such device before the expiration of such one hundred and twenty-
day period, or if such petition is denied or such application is de-
nied approval, before the date of such denial, whichever occurs
first.
(iii) In the case of a device which is described in subparagraph
(E) of paragraph (1), which the Secretary in a notice published in
the Federal Register after March 31, 1976, declared to be a new
drug subject to section 505, and which is in class III—
(I) the device shall, after eighteen months after the enact-
ment date, have in effect an approved application under sec-
tion 515 unless exempt under subsection (g) of this section, and
(II) the Secretary may, during the period beginning one
hundred and eighty days after the enactment date and ending
eighteen months after such date, restrict the use of the device
to investigational use by experts qualified by scientific training
and experience to investigate the safety and effectiveness of
such device, and to investigational use in accordance with the
requirements applicable under regulations under subsection (g)
of this section to investigational use of devices granted an ex-
emption under such subsection.
If the requirements under subsection (g) of this section are made
applicable to the investigational use of such a device, they shall be
made applicable in such a manner that the device shall be made
reasonably available to physicians meeting appropriate qualifica-
tions prescribed by the Secretary.
ø(4) Repealed by Pub. L. 105–115, November 21, 1997.¿
(5)(A) Before December 1, 1991, the Secretary shall by order
require manufacturers of devices described in paragraph (1), which
are subject to revision of classification under subparagraph (B), to
submit to the Secretary a summary of and citation to any informa-
tion known or otherwise available to the manufacturers respecting
the devices, including adverse safety or effectiveness information
which has not been submitted under section 519. The Secretary
may require a manufacturer to submit the adverse safety or effec-
tiveness data for which a summary and citation were submitted, if
such data are available to the manufacturer.
(B) Except as provided in subparagraph (C), after the issuance
of an order under subparagraph (A) but before December 1, 1992,
the Secretary shall publish a regulation in the Federal Register for
each device which is classified in class III under paragraph (1) re-
vising the classification of the device so that the device is classified
into class I or class II, unless the regulation requires the device to
remain in class III. In determining whether to revise the classifica-
tion of a device or to require a device to remain in class III, the
Secretary shall apply the criteria set forth in section 513(a). Before
the publication of a regulation requiring a device to remain in class
III or revising its classification, the Secretary shall publish a pro-
posed regulation respecting the classification of a device under this
subparagraph and provide an opportunity for the submission of
comments on any such regulation. No regulation under this sub-
paragraph requiring a device to remain in class III or revising its
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
239
Sec. 520
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
classification may take effect before the expiration of 90 days from
the date of the publication in the Federal Register of the proposed
regulation.
(C) The Secretary may by notice published in the Federal Reg-
ister extend the period prescribed by subparagraph (B) for a device
for an additional period not to exceed 1 year.
Humanitarian Device Exemption
(m)(1) To the extent consistent with the protection of the public
health and safety and with ethical standards, it is the purpose of
this subsection to encourage the discovery and use of devices in-
tended to benefit patients in the treatment and diagnosis of dis-
eases or conditions that affect fewer than 4,000 individuals in the
United States.
(2) The Secretary may grant a request for an exemption from
the effectiveness requirements of sections 514 and 515 for a device
for which the Secretary finds that—
(A) the device is designed to treat or diagnose a disease or
condition that affects fewer than 4,000 individuals in the
United States,
(B) the device would not be available to a person with a
disease or condition referred to in subparagraph (A) unless the
Secretary grants such an exemption and there is no com-
parable device, other than under this exemption, available to
treat or diagnose such disease or condition, and
(C) the device will not expose patients to an unreasonable
or significant risk of illness or injury and the probable benefit
to health from the use of the device outweighs the risk of in-
jury or illness from its use, taking into account the probable
risks and benefits of currently available devic or alternative
forms of treatment.
The request shall be in the form of an application submitted to the
Secretary. Not later than 75 days after the date of the receipt of
the application, the Secretary shall issue an order approving or de-
nying the application.
(3) No person granted an exemption under paragraph (2) with
respect to a device may sell the device for an amount that exceeds
the costs of research and development, fabrication, and distribution
of the device.
(4) Devices granted an exemption under paragraph (2) may
only be used—
(A) in facilities that have established, in accordance with
regulations of the Secretary, a local institutional review com-
mittee to supervise clinical testing of devices in the facilities,
and
(B) if, before the use of a device, an institutional review
committee approves the use in the treatment or diagnosis of a
disease or condition referred to in paragraph (2)(A), unless a
physician determines in an emergency situation that approval
from a local institutional review committee can not be obtained
in time to prevent serious harm or death to a patient.
In a case described in subparagraph (B) in which a physician uses
a device without an approval from an institutional review com-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
240
Sec. 521
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
mittee, the physician shall, after the use of the device, notify the
chairperson of the local institutional review committee of such use.
Such notification shall include the identification of the patient in-
volved, the date on which the device was used, and the reason for
the use.
(5) The Secretary may require a person granted an exemption
under paragraph (2) to demonstrate continued compliance with the
requirements of this subsection if the Secretary believes such dem-
onstration to be necessary to protect the public health or if the Sec-
retary has reason to believe that the criteria for the exemption are
no longer met.
(6) The Secretary may suspend or withdraw an exemption from
the effectiveness requirements of sections 514 and 515 for a hu-
manitarian device only after providing notice and an opportunity
for an informal hearing.
STATE AND LOCAL REQUIREMENTS RESPECTING DEVICES
General Rule
SEC. 521. ø21 U.S.C. 360k¿ (a) Except as provided in sub-
section (b), no State or political subdivision of a State may estab-
lish or continue in effect with respect to a device intended for
human use any requirement—
(1) which is different from, or in addition to, any require-
ment applicable under this Act to the device, and
(2) which relates to the safety or effectiveness of the device
or to any other matter included in a requirement applicable to
the device under this Act.
Exempt Requirements
(b) Upon application of a State or a political subdivision there-
of, the Secretary may, by regulation promulgated after notice and
opportunity for an oral hearing, exempt from subsection (a), under
such conditions as may be prescribed in such regulation, a require-
ment of such State or political subdivision applicable to a device in-
tended for human use if—
(1) the requirement is more stringent than a requirement
under this Act which would be applicable to the device if an
exemption were not in effect under this subsection; or
(2) the requirement—
(A) is required by compelling local conditions, and
(B) compliance with the requirement would not cause
the device to be in violation of any applicable requirement
under this Act.
POSTMARKET SURVEILLANCE
SEC. 522. ø21 U.S.C. 360l¿ (a) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary
may by order require a manufacturer to conduct postmarket sur-
veillance for any device of the manufacturer which is a class II or
class III device the failure of which would be reasonably likely to
have serious adverse health consequences or which is intended to
be—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
241
Sec. 523
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(1) implanted in the human body for more than one year,
or
(2) a life sustaining or life supporting device used outside
a device user facility.
SURVEILLANCE
APPROVAL.—Each manufacturer required to
conduct a surveillance of a device shall, within 30 days of receiving
an order from the Secretary prescribing that the manufacturer is
required under this section to conduct such surveillance, submit,
for the approval of the Secretary, a plan for the required surveil-
lance. The Secretary, within 60 days of the receipt of such plan,
shall determine if the person designated to conduct the surveillance
has appropriate qualifications and experience to undertake such
surveillance and if the plan will result in the collection of useful
data that can reveal unforeseen adverse events or other informa-
tion necessary to protect the public health. The Secretary, in con-
sultation with the manufacturer, may by order require a prospec-
tive surveillance period of up to 36 months. Any determination by
the Secretary that a longer period is necessary shall be made by
mutual agreement between the Secretary and the manufacturer or,
if no agreement can be reached, after the completion of a dispute
resolution process as described in section 562.
SEC. 523. ø21 U.S.C. 360m¿ ACCREDITED PERSONS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—
(1) REVIEW
AND
CLASSIFICATION
OF
DEVICES.—Not later
than 1 year after the date of the enactment of the Food and
Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997, the Secretary
shall, subject to paragraph (3), accredit persons for the purpose
of reviewing reports submitted under section 510(k) and mak-
ing recommendations to the Secretary regarding the initial
classification of devices under section 513(f)(1).
(2) REQUIREMENTS REGARDING REVIEW.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—In making a recommendation to the
Secretary under paragraph (1), an accredited person shall
notify the Secretary in writing of the reasons for the rec-
ommendation.
(B) TIME PERIOD FOR REVIEW.—Not later than 30 days
after the date on which the Secretary is notified under
subparagraph (A) by an accredited person with respect to
a recommendation of an initial classification of a device,
the Secretary shall make a determination with respect to
the initial classification.
(C) SPECIAL RULE.—The Secretary may change the ini-
tial classification under section 513(f)(1) that is rec-
ommended under paragraph (1) by an accredited person,
and in such case shall provide to such person, and the per-
son who submitted the report under section 510(k) for the
device, a statement explaining in detail the reasons for the
change.
(3) CERTAIN DEVICES.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—An accredited person may not be
used to perform a review of—
(i) a class III device;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
242
Sec. 523
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(ii) a class II device which is intended to be per-
manently implantable or life sustaining or life sup-
porting; or
(iii) a class II device which requires clinical data
in the report submitted under section 510(k) for the
device, except that the number of class II devices to
which the Secretary applies this clause for a year, less
the number of such reports to which clauses (i) and (ii)
apply, may not exceed 6 percent of the number that is
equal to the total number of reports submitted to the
Secretary under such section for such year less the
number of such reports to which such clauses apply
for such year.
(B) ADJUSTMENT.—In determining for a year the ratio
described in subparagraph (A)(iii), the Secretary shall not
include in the numerator class III devices that the Sec-
retary reclassified into class II, and the Secretary shall in-
clude in the denominator class II devices for which reports
under section 510(k) were not required to be submitted by
reason of the operation of section 510(m).
(b) ACCREDITATION.—
(1) PROGRAMS.—The Secretary shall provide for such ac-
creditation through programs administered by the Food and
Drug Administration, other government agencies, or by other
qualified nongovernment organizations.
(2) ACCREDITATION.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 180 days after the
date of the enactment of the Food and Drug Administra-
tion Modernization Act of 1997, the Secretary shall estab-
lish and publish in the Federal Register criteria to accredit
or deny accreditation to persons who request to perform
the duties specified in subsection (a). The Secretary shall
respond to a request for accreditation within 60 days of the
receipt of the request. The accreditation of such person
shall specify the particular activities under subsection (a)
for which such person is accredited.
(B) WITHDRAWAL OF ACCREDITATION.—The Secretary
may suspend or withdraw accreditation of any person ac-
credited under this paragraph, after providing notice and
an opportunity for an informal hearing, when such person
is substantially not in compliance with the requirements of
this section or poses a threat to public health or fails to
act in a manner that is consistent with the purposes of
this section.
(C) PERFORMANCE AUDITING.—To ensure that persons
accredited under this section will continue to meet the
standards of accreditation, the Secretary shall—
(i) make onsite visits on a periodic basis to each
accredited person to audit the performance of such
person; and
(ii) take such additional measures as the Sec-
retary determines to be appropriate.
(D) ANNUAL REPORT.—The Secretary shall include in
the annual report required under section 903(g) the names
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
243
Sec. 523
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
of all accredited persons and the particular activities
under subsection (a) for which each such person is accred-
ited and the name of each accredited person whose accredi-
tation has been withdrawn during the year.
(3) QUALIFICATIONS.—An accredited person shall, at a min-
imum, meet the following requirements:
(A) Such person may not be an employee of the Fed-
eral Government.
(B) Such person shall be an independent organization
which is not owned or controlled by a manufacturer, sup-
plier, or vendor of devices and which has no organiza-
tional, material, or financial affiliation with such a manu-
facturer, supplier, or vendor.
(C) Such person shall be a legally constituted entity
permitted to conduct the activities for which it seeks ac-
creditation.
(D) Such person shall not engage in the design, manu-
facture, promotion, or sale of devices.
(E) The operations of such person shall be in accord-
ance with generally accepted professional and ethical busi-
ness practices and shall agree in writing that as a min-
imum it will—
(i) certify that reported information accurately re-
flects data reviewed;
(ii) limit work to that for which competence and
capacity are available;
(iii) treat information received, records, reports,
and recommendations as proprietary information;
(iv) promptly respond and attempt to resolve com-
plaints regarding its activities for which it is accred-
ited; and
(v) protect against the use, in carrying out sub-
section (a) with respect to a device, of any officer or
employee of the person who has a financial conflict of
interest regarding the device, and annually make
available to the public disclosures of the extent to
which the person, and the officers and employees of
the person, have maintained compliance with require-
ments under this clause relating to financial conflicts
of interest.
(4) SELECTION
OF
ACCREDITED
PERSONS.—The Secretary
shall provide each person who chooses to use an accredited per-
son to receive a section 510(k) report a panel of at least two
or more accredited persons from which the regulated person
may select one for a specific regulatory function.
(5) COMPENSATION OF ACCREDITED PERSONS.—Compensa-
tion for an accredited person shall be determined by agreement
between the accredited person and the person who engages the
services of the accredited person, and shall be paid by the per-
son who engages such services.
(c) DURATION.—The authority provided by this section termi-
nates October 1, 2007.
(d) REPORT.—Not later than January 10, 2007, the Secretary
shall conduct a study based on the experience under the program
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
244
Sec. 525
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
under this section and submit to the Committee on Energy and
Commerce of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on
Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate, a report de-
scribing the findings of the study. The objectives of the study shall
include determining—
(1) the number of devices reviewed under this section;
(2) the number of devices reviewed under this section that
were ultimately cleared by the Secretary;
(3) the number of devices reviewed under this section that
were ultimately not cleared by the Secretary;
(4) the average time period for a review under this section
(including the time it takes for the Secretary to review a rec-
ommendation of an accredited person under subsection (a) and
determine the initial device classification);
(5) the average time period identified in paragraph (4)
compared to the average time period for review of devices sole-
ly by the Secretary pursuant to section 510(k);
(6) if there is a difference in the average time period under
paragraph (4) and the average time period under paragraph
(5), the reasons for such difference;
(7) whether the quality of reviews under this section for
devices for which no guidance has been issued is qualitatively
inferior to reviews by the Secretary for devices for which no
guidance has been issued;
(8) whether the quality of reviews under this section of de-
vices for which no guidance has been issued is qualitatively in-
ferior to reviews under this section of devices for which guid-
ance has been issued;
(9) whether this section has in any way jeopardized or im-
proved the public health;
(10) any impact of this section on resources available to
the Secretary to review reports under section 510(k); and
(11) any suggestions for continuation, modification (includ-
ing contraction or expansion of device eligibility), or termi-
nation of this section that the Secretary determines to be ap-
propriate.
SUBCHAPTER B—DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES OR CONDITIONS
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR INVESTIGATIONS OF DRUGS FOR RARE
DISEASES OR CONDITIONS
SEC. 525. ø21 U.S.C. 360aa¿ (a) The sponsor of a drug for a
disease or condition which is rare in the States may request the
Secretary to provide written recommendations for the nonclinical
and clinical investigations which must be conducted with the drug
before—
(1) it may be approved for such disease or condition under
section 505, or
(2) if the drug is a biological product, it may be licensed
for such disease or condition under section 351 of the Public
Health Service Act.
If the Secretary has reason to believe that a drug for which a re-
quest is made under this section is a drug for a disease or condition
which is rare in the States, the Secretary shall provide the person
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
245
Sec. 526
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
making the request written recommendations for the nonclinical
and clinical investigations which the Secretary believes, on the
basis of information available to the Secretary at the time of the
request under this section, would be necessary for approval of such
drug for such disease or condition under section 505 or licensing of
such drug for such disease or condition under section 351 of the
Public Health Service Act.
(b) The Secretary shall by regulation promulgate procedures
for the implementation of subsection (a).
DESIGNATION OF DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES OR CONDITIONS
SEC. 526. ø21 U.S.C. 360bb¿ (a)(1) The manufacturer or the
sponsor of a drug may request the Secretary to designate the drug
as a drug for a rare disease or condition. A request for designation
of a drug shall be made before the submission of an application
under section 505(b) for the drug, or the submission of an applica-
tion for licensing of the drug under section 351 of the Public Health
Service Act. If the Secretary finds that a drug for which a request
is submitted under this subsection is being or will be investigated
for a rare disease or condition and—
(A) if an application for such drug is approved under sec-
tion 505, or
(B) if a license for such drug is issued under section 351
of the Public Health Service Act,
the approval, certification, or license would be for use for such dis-
ease or condition, the Secretary shall designate the drug as a drug
for such disease or condition. A request for a designation of a drug
under this subsection shall contain the consent of the applicant to
notice being given by the Secretary under subsection (b) respecting
the designation of the drug.
(2) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term rare disease or con-
dition’’ means any disease or condition which (A) affects less than
200,000 persons in the United States, or (B) affects more than
200,000 in the United States and for which there is no reasonable
expectation that the cost of developing and making available in the
United States a drug for such disease or condition will be recovered
from sales in the United States of such drug. Determinations under
the preceding sentence with respect to any drug shall be made on
the basis of the facts and circumstances as of the date the request
for designation of the drug under this subsection is made.
(b) A designation of a drug under subsection (a) shall be sub-
ject to the condition that—
(1) if an application was approved for the drug under sec-
tion 505(b) or a license was issued for the drug under section
351 of the Public Health Service Act, the manufacturer of the
drug will notify the Secretary of any discontinuance of the pro-
duction of the drug at least one year before discontinuance,
and
(2) if an application has not been approved for the drug
under section 505(b) or a license has not been issued for the
drug under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act and
if preclinical investigations or investigations under section
505(i) are being conducted with the drug, the manufacturer or
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
246
Sec. 527
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
sponsor of the drug will notify the Secretary of any decision to
discontinue active pursuit of approval of an application under
section 505(b) or approval of a license under section 351 of the
Public Health Service Act.
(c) Notice respecting the designation of a drug under sub-
section (a) shall be made available to the public.
(d) The Secretary shall by regulation promulgate procedures
for the implementation of subsection (a).
PROTECTION FOR DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES OR CONDITIONS
SEC. 527. ø21 U.S.C. 360cc¿ (a) Except as provided in sub-
section (b), if the Secretary—
(1) approves an application filed pursuant to section 505,
or
(2) issues a license under section 351 of the Public Health
Service Act
for a drug designated under section 526 for a rare disease or condi-
tion, the Secretary may not approve another application under sec-
tion 505 or issue another license under section 351 of the Public
Health Service Act for such drug for such disease or condition for
a person who is not the holder of such approved application or of
such license until the expiration of seven years from the date of the
approval of the approved application or the issuance of the license.
Section 505(c)(2) does not apply to the refusal to approve an appli-
cation under the preceding sentence.
(b) If an application filed pursuant to section 505 is approved
for a drug designated under section 526 for a rare disease or condi-
tion or if a license is issued under section 351 of the Public Health
Service Act for such a drug, the Secretary may, during the seven-
year period beginning on the date of the application approval or of
the issuance of the license, approve another application under sec-
tion 505 or issue a license under section 351 of the Public Health
Service Act, for such drug for such disease or condition for a person
who is not the holder of such approved application or of such li-
cense if—
(1) the Secretary finds, after providing the holder notice
and opportunity for the submission of views, that in such pe-
riod the holder of the approved application or of the license
cannot assure the availability of sufficient quantities of the
drug to meet the needs of persons with the disease or condition
for which the drug was designated; or
(2) such holder provides the Secretary in writing the con-
sent of such holder for the approval of other applications or the
issuance of other licenses before the expiration of such seven-
year period.
OPEN PROTOCOLS FOR INVESTIGATIONS OF DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
OR CONDITIONS
SEC. 528. ø21 U.S.C. 360dd¿ If a drug is designated under sec-
tion 526 as a drug for a rare disease or condition and if notice of
a claimed exemption under section 505(i) or regulations issued
thereunder is filed for such drug, the Secretary shall encourage the
sponsor of such drug to design protocols for clinical investigations
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
247
Sec. 532
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
of the drug which may be conducted under the exemption to permit
the addition to the investigations of persons with the disease or
condition who need the drug to treat the disease or condition and
who cannot be satisfactorily treated by available alternative drugs.
SUBCHAPTER C—ELECTRONIC PRODUCT RADIATION CONTROL
DEFINITIONS
SEC. 531. ø21 U.S.C. 360hh¿ As used in this subchapter—
(1) the term electronic product radiation’’ means—
(A) any ionizing or non-ionizing electromagnetic or
particulate radiation, or
(B) any sonic, infrasonic, or ultrasonic wave, which is
emitted from an electronic product as the result of the op-
eration of an electronic circuit in such product;
(2) the term electronic product’’ means (A) any manufac-
tured or assembled product which, when in operation, (i) con-
tains or acts as part of an electronic circuit and (ii) emits (or
in the absence of effective shielding or other controls would
emit) electronic product radiation, or (B) any manufactured or
assembled article which is intended for use as a component,
part, or accessory of a product described in clause (A) and
which when in operation emits (or in the absence of effective
shielding or other controls would emit) such radiation;
(3) the term manufacturer’’ means any person engaged in
the business of manufacturing, assembling, or importing of
electronic products;
(4) the term commerce’’ means (A) commerce between any
place in any State and any place outside thereof; and (B) com-
merce wholly within the District of Columbia; and
(5) the term State’’ includes the District of Columbia, the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands,
the Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa.
ELECTRONIC PRODUCT RADIATION CONTROL PROGRAM
SEC. 532. ø21 U.S.C. 360ii¿ (a) The Secretary shall establish
and carry out an electronic product radiation control program de-
signed to protect the public health and safety from electronic prod-
uct radiation. As a part of such program, he shall—
(1) pursuant to section 534, develop and administer per-
formance standards for electronic products;
, conduct, coordinate, and support research, development,
training, and operational activities to minimize the emissions
of and the exposure of people to, unnecessary electronic prod-
uct radiation;
(3) maintain liaison with and receive information from
other Federal and State departments and agencies with related
interests, professional organizations, industry, industry and
labor associations, and other organizations on present and fu-
ture potential electronic product radiation;
(4) study and evaluate emissions of, and conditions of ex-
posure to, electronic product radiation and intense magnetic
fields;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
248
Sec. 533
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(5) develop, test, and evaluate the effectiveness of proce-
dures and techniques for minimizing exposure to electronic
product radiation; and
(6) consult and maintain liaison with the Secretary of
Commerce, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Labor,
the Atomic Energy Commission, and other appropriate Federal
departments and agencies on (A) techniques, equipment, and
programs for testing and evaluating electronic product radi-
ation, and (B) the development of performance standards pur-
suant to section 534 to control such radiation emissions.
(b) In carrying out the purposes of subsection (a), the Secretary
is authorized to—
(1)(A) collect and make available, through publications and
other appropriate means, the results of, and other information
concerning, research and studies relating to the nature and ex-
tent of the hazards and control of electronic product radiation;
and (B) make such recommendations relating to such hazards
and control as he considers appropriate;
(2) make grants to public and private agencies, organiza-
tions, and institutions, and to individuals for the purposes stat-
ed in paragraphs (2), (4), and (5) of subsection (a) of this sec-
tion;
(3) contract with public or private agencies, institutions,
and organizations, and with individuals, without regard to sec-
tion 3324 of title 31, United States Code, and section 3709 of
the Revised Statutes of the United States (41 U.S.C. 5); and
(4) procure (by negotiation or otherwise) electronic prod-
ucts for research and testing purposes, and sell or otherwise
dispose of such products.
(c)(1) Each recipient of assistance under this subchapter pursu-
ant to grants or contracts entered into under other than competi-
tive bidding procedures shall keep such records as the Secretary
shall prescribe, including records which fully disclose the amount
and disposition by such recipient of the proceeds of such assistance,
the total cost of the project or undertaking in connection with
which such assistance is given or used, and the amount of that por-
tion of the cost of the project or undertaking supplied by other
sources, and such other records as will facilitate an effective audit.
(2) The Secretary and the Comptroller General of the United
States, or any of their duly authorized representatives, shall have
access for the purpose of audit and examination to any books, docu-
ments, papers, and records of the recipient that are pertinent to
the grants or contracts entered into under this subchapter under
other than competitive bidding procedures.
STUDIES BY THE SECRETARY
SEC. 533. ø21 U.S.C. 360jj¿ (a) The Secretary shall conduct the
following studies, and shall make a report or reports of the results
of such studies to the Congress on or before January 1, 1970, and
from time to time thereafter as he may find necessary, together
with such recommendations for legislation as he may deem appro-
priate:
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
249
Sec. 534
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(1) A study of present State and Federal control of health haz-
ards from electronic product radiation and other types of ionizing
radiation, which study shall include, but not be limited to—
(A) control of health hazards from radioactive materials
other than materials regulated under the Atomic Energy Act
of 1954;
(B) any gaps and inconsistencies in present controls;
(C) the need for controlling the sale of certain used elec-
tronic products, particularly antiquated X-ray equipment, with-
out upgrading such products to meet the standards for new
products or separate standards for used products;
(D) measures to assure consistent and effective control of
the aforementioned health hazards;
(E) measures to strengthen radiological health programs of
State governments; and
(F) the feasibility of authorizing the Secretary to enter into
arrangements with individual States or groups of States to de-
fine their respective functions and responsibilities for the con-
trol of electronic product radiation and other ionizing radiation;
(2) A study to determine the necessity for the development of
standards for the use of nonmedical electronic products for com-
mercial and industrial purposes; and
(3) A study of the development of practicable procedures for the
detection and measurement of electronic product radiation which
may be emitted from electronic products manufactured or imported
prior to the effective date of any applicable standard established
pursuant to this subchapter.
(b) In carrying out these studies, the Secretary shall invite the
participation of other Federal departments and agencies having re-
lated responsibilities and interests, State governments—particu-
larly those of States which regulate radioactive materials under
section 274 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended, and in-
terested professional, labor, and industrial organizations. Upon re-
quest from congressional committees interested in these studies,
the Secretary shall keep these committees currently informed as to
the progress of the studies and shall permit the committees to send
observers to meetings of the study groups.
(c) The Secretary or his designee shall organize the studies and
the participation of the invited participants as he deems best. Any
dissent from the findings and recommendations of the Secretary
shall be included in the report if so requested by the dissenter.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS
SEC. 534. ø21 U.S.C. 360kk¿ (a)(1) The Secretary shall by reg-
ulation prescribe performance standards for electronic products to
control the emission of electronic product radiation from such prod-
ucts if he determines that such standards are necessary for the
protection of the public health and safety. Such standards may in-
clude provisions for the testing of such products and the measure-
ment of their electronic product radiation emissions, may require
the attachment of warning signs and labels, and may require the
provision of instructions for the installation, operation, and use of
such products. Such standards may be prescribed from time to time
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
250
Sec. 534
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
whenever such determinations are made, but the first of such
standards shall be prescribed prior to January 1, 1970. In the de-
velopment of such standards, the Secretary shall consult with Fed-
eral and State departments and agencies having related respon-
sibilities or interests and with appropriate professional organiza-
tions and interested persons, including representatives of indus-
tries and labor organizations which would be affected by such
standards, and shall give consideration to—
(A) the latest available scientific and medical data in the
field of electronic product radiation;
(B) the standards currently recommended by (i) other Fed-
eral agencies having responsibilities relating to the control and
measurement of electronic product radiation, and (ii) public or
private groups having an expertise in the field of electronic
product radiation;
(C) the reasonableness and technical feasibility of such
standards as applied to a particular electronic product;
(D) the adaptability of such standards to the need for uni-
formity and reliability of testing and measuring procedures
and equipment; and
(E) in the case of a component, or accessory described in
paragraph (2)(B) of section 531, the performance of such article
in the manufactured or assembled product for which it is de-
signed.
(2) The Secretary may prescribe different and individual per-
formance standards, to the extent appropriate and feasible, for dif-
ferent electronic products so as to recognize their different oper-
ating characteristics and uses.
(3) The performance standards prescribed under this section
shall not apply to any electronic product which is intended solely
for export if (A) such product and the outside of any shipping con-
tainer used in the export of such product are labeled or tagged to
show that such product is intended for export, and (B) such product
meets all the applicable requirements of the country to which such
product is intended for export.
(4) The Secretary may by regulation amend or revoke any per-
formance standard prescribed under this section.
(5) The Secretary may exempt from the provisions of this sec-
tion any electronic product intended for use by departments or
agencies of the United States provided such department or agency
has prescribed procurement specifications governing emissions of
electronic product radiation and provided further that such product
is of a type used solely or predominantly by departments or agen-
cies of the United States.
(b) The provisions of subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5 of the
United States Code (relating to the administrative procedure for
rulemaking), and of chapter 7 of such title (relating to judicial re-
view), shall apply with respect to any regulation prescribing,
amending, or revoking any standard prescribed under this section.
(c) Each regulation prescribing, amending, or revoking a stand-
ard shall specify the date on which it shall take effect which, in the
case of any regulation prescribing, or amending any standard, may
not be sooner than one year or not later than two years after the
date on which such regulation is issued, unless the Secretary finds,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
251
Sec. 534
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
for good cause shown, that an earlier or later effective date is in
the public interest and publishes in the Federal Register his reason
for such finding, in which case such earlier or later date shall
apply.
(d)(1) In a case of actual controversy as to the validity of any
regulation issued under this section prescribing, amending, or re-
voking a performance standard, any person who will be adversely
affected by such regulation when it is effective may at any time
prior to the sixtieth day after such regulation is issued file a peti-
tion with the United States court of appeals for the circuit wherein
such person resides or has his principal place of business, for a ju-
dicial review of such regulation. A copy of the petition shall be
forthwith transmitted by the clerk of the court to the Secretary or
other officer designated by him for that purpose. The Secretary
thereupon shall file in the court the record of the proceedings on
which the Secretary based the regulation, as provided in section
2112 of title 28 of the United States Code.
(2) If the petitioner applies to the court for leave to adduce ad-
ditional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of the court that
such additional evidence is material and that there were reason-
able grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence in the pro-
ceeding before the Secretary, the court may order such additional
evidence (and evidence in rebuttal thereof) to be taken before the
Secretary, and to be adduced upon the hearing, in such manner
and upon such terms and conditions as to the court may seem
proper. The Secretary may modify his findings, or make new find-
ings, by reason of the additional evidence so taken, and he shall
file such modified or new findings, and his recommendations, if
any, for the modification or setting aside of his original regulation,
with the return of such additional evidence.
(3) Upon the filing of the petition referred to in paragraph (1)
of this subsection, the court shall have jurisdiction to review the
regulation in accordance with chapter 7 of title 5 of the United
States Code and to grant appropriate relief as provided in such
chapter.
(4) The judgment of the court affirming or setting aside, in
whole or in part, any such regulation of the Secretary shall be
final, subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States
upon certiorari or certification as provided in section 1254 of title
28 of the United States Code.
(5) Any action instituted under this subsection shall survive,
notwithstanding any change in the person occupying the office of
Secretary or any vacancy in such office.
(6) The remedies provided for in this subsection shall be in ad-
dition to and not in substitution for any other remedies provided
by law.
(e) A certified copy of the transcript of the record and adminis-
trative proceedings under this section shall be furnished by the
Secretary to any interested party at his request, and payment of
the costs thereof, and shall be admissible in any criminal, exclusion
of imports, or other proceeding arising under or in respect of this
subchapter, irrespective of whether proceedings with respect to the
regulation have previously been initiated or become final under
this section.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
252
Sec. 535
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(f)(1)(A) The Secretary shall establish a Technical Electronic
Product Radiation Safety Standards Committee (hereafter in this
subchapter referred to as the Committee’’) which he shall consult
before prescribing any standard under this section. The Committee
shall be appointed by the Secretary, after consultation with public
and private agencies concerned with the technical aspect of elec-
tronic product radiation safety, and shall be composed of fifteen
members each of whom shall be technically qualified by training
and experience in one or more fields of science or engineering ap-
plicable to electronic product radiation safety, as follows:
(i) Five members shall be selected from governmental
agencies, including State and Federal Governments;
(ii) Five members shall be selected from the affected indus-
tries after consultation with industry representatives; and
(iii) Five members shall be selected from the general pub-
lic, of which at least one shall be a representative of organized
labor.
(B) The Committee may propose electronic product radiation
safety standards to the Secretary for his consideration. All pro-
ceedings of the Committee shall be recorded and the record of each
such proceeding shall be available for public inspection.
(2) Payments to members of the Committee who are not offi-
cers or employees of the United States pursuant to subsection (c)
of section 208 of the Public Health Service Act shall not render
members of the Committee officers or employees of the United
States for any purpose.
(g) The Secretary shall review and evaluate on a continuing
basis testing programs carried out by industry to assure the ade-
quacy of safeguards against hazardous electronic product radiation
and to assure that electronic products comply with standards pre-
scribed under this section.
(h) Every manufacturer of an electronic product to which is ap-
plicable a standard in effect under this section shall furnish to the
distributor or dealer at the time of delivery of such product, in the
form of a label or tag permanently affixed to such product or in
such manner as approved by the Secretary, the certification that
such product conforms to all applicable standards under this sec-
tion. Such certification shall be based upon a test, in accordance
with such standard, of the individual article to which it is attached
or upon a testing program which is in accord with good manufac-
turing practice and which has not been disapproved by the Sec-
retary (in such manner as he shall prescribe by regulation) on the
grounds that it does not assure the adequacy of safeguards against
hazardous electronic product radiation or that it does not assure
that electronic products comply with the standards prescribed
under this section.
NOTIFICATION OF DEFECTS IN, AND REPAIR OR REPLACEMENT OF,
ELECTRONIC PRODUCTS
SEC. 535. ø21 U.S.C. 360ll¿ (a)(1) Every manufacturer of elec-
tronic products, who discovers that an electronic product produced,
assembled, or imported by him has a defect which relates to the
safety of use of such product by reason of the emission of electronic
product radiation, or that an electronic product produced, assem-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
253
Sec. 535
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
bled, or imported by him on or after the effective date of an appli-
cable standard prescribed pursuant to section 534 fails to comply
with such standard, shall immediately notify the Secretary of such
defect or failure to comply if such product has left the place of man-
ufacture and shall (except as authorized by paragraph (2)) with
reasonable promptness furnish notification of such defect or failure
to the persons (where known to the manufacturer) specified in sub-
section (b) of this section.
(2) If, in the opinion of such manufacturer, the defect or failure
to comply is not such as to create a significant risk of injury, in-
cluding genetic injury, to any person, he may, at the time of giving
notice to the Secretary of such defect or failure to comply, apply to
the Secretary for an exemption from the requirement of notice to
the persons specified in subsection (b). If such application states
reasonable grounds for such exemption, the Secretary shall afford
such manufacturer an opportunity to present his views and evi-
dence in support of the application, the burden of proof being on
the manufacturer. If, after such presentation, the Secretary is sat-
isfied that such defect or failure to comply is not such as to create
a significant risk of injury, including genetic injury, to any person,
he shall exempt such manufacturer from the requirement of notice
to the persons specified in subsection (b) of this section and from
the requirements of repair or replacement imposed by subsection (f)
of this section.
(b) The notification (other than to the Secretary) required by
paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this section shall be
accomplished—
(1) by certified mail to the first purchaser of such product
for purposes other than resale, and to any subsequent trans-
feree of such product; and
(2) by certified mail or other more expeditious means to
the dealers or distributors of such manufacturer to whom such
product was delivered.
(c) The notifications required by paragraph (1) of subsection (a)
of this section shall contain a clear description of such defect or
failure to comply with an applicable standard, an evaluation of the
hazard reasonably related to such defect or failure to comply, and
a statement of the measures to be taken to repair such defect. In
the case of a notification to a person referred to in subsection (b)
of this section, the notification shall also advise the person of his
rights under subsection (f) of this section.
(d) Every manufacturer of electronic products shall furnish to
the Secretary a true or representative copy of all notices, bulletins,
and other communications to the dealers or distributors of such
manufacturer or to purchasers (or subsequent transferees) of elec-
tronic products of such manufacturer regarding any such defect in
such product or any such failure to comply with a standard applica-
ble to such product. The Secretary shall disclose to the public so
much of the information contained in such notice or other informa-
tion obtained under section 537 as he deems will assist in carrying
out the purposes of this subchapter, but he shall not disclose any
information which contains or relates to a trade secret or other
matter referred to in section 1905 of title 18 of the United States
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
254
Sec. 535
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
Code unless he determines that it is necessary to carry out the pur-
poses of this subchapter.
(e) If through testing, inspection, investigation, or research car-
ried out pursuant to this subchapter, or examination of reports
submitted pursuant to section 537, or otherwise, the Secretary de-
termines that any electronic product—
(1) does not comply with an applicable standard prescribed
pursuant to section 534; or
(2) contains a defect which relates to the safety of use of
such product by reason of the emission of electronic product ra-
diation;
he shall immediately notify the manufacturer of such product of
such defect or failure to comply. The notice shall contain the find-
ings of the Secretary and shall include all information upon which
the findings are based. The Secretary shall afford such manufac-
turer an opportunity to present his views and evidence in support
thereof, to establish that there is no failure of compliance or that
the alleged defect does not exist or does not relate to safety of use
of the product by reason of the emission of such radiation hazard.
If after such presentation by the manufacturer the Secretary deter-
mines that such product does not comply with an applicable stand-
ard prescribed pursuant to section 534, or that it contains a defect
which relates to the safety of use of such product by reason of the
emission of electronic product radiation, the Secretary shall direct
the manufacturer to furnish the notification specified in subsection
(c) of this section to the persons specified in paragraphs (1) and (2)
of subsection (b) of this section (where known to the manufacturer),
unless the manufacturer has applied for an exemption from the re-
quirement of such notification on the ground specified in paragraph
(2) of subsection (a) and the Secretary is satisfied that such non-
compliance or defect is not such as to create a significant risk of
injury, including genetic injury, to any person.
(f) If any electronic product is found under subsection (a) or (e)
to fail to comply with an applicable standard prescribed under this
subchapter or to have a defect which relates to the safety of use
of such product, and the notification specified in subsection (c) is
required to be furnished on account of such failure or defect, the
manufacturer of such product shall (1) without charge, bring such
product into conformity with such standard or remedy such defect
and provide reimbursement for any expenses for transportation of
such product incurred in connection with having such product
brought into conformity or having such defect remedied, (2) replace
such product with a like or equivalent product which complies with
each applicable standard prescribed under this subchapter and
which has no defect relating to the safety of its use, or (3) make
a refund of the cost of such product. The manufacturer shall take
the action required by this subsection in such manner, and with re-
spect to such persons, as the Secretary by regulations shall pre-
scribe.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
255
Sec. 536
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out the date of the enactment of this subchapter’’ and insert October
18, 1968’’.
(g) This section shall not apply to any electronic product that
was manufactured before the date of the enactment of this sub-
chapter 1.
IMPORTS
SEC. 536. ø21 U.S.C. 360mm¿ (a) Any electronic product of-
fered for importation into the United States which fails to comply
with an applicable standard prescribed under this subchapter, or to
which is not affixed a certification in the form of a label or tag in
conformity with section 534(h) shall be refused admission into the
United States. The Secretary of the Treasury shall deliver to the
Secretary of Health and Human Services, upon the latter’s request,
samples of electronic products which are being imported or offered
for import into the United States, giving notice thereof to the
owner or consignee, who may have a hearing before the Secretary
of Health and Human Services. If it appears from an examination
of such samples or otherwise that any electronic product fails to
comply with applicable standards prescribed pursuant to section
534, then, unless subsection (b) of this section applies and is com-
plied with, (1) such electronic product shall be refused admission,
and (2) the Secretary of the Treasury shall cause the destruction
of such electronic product unless such article is exported, under
regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, within 90
days after the date of notice of refusal of admission or within such
additional time as may be permitted by such regulations.
(b) If it appears to the Secretary of Health and Human Serv-
ices that any electronic product refused admission pursuant to sub-
section (a) of this section can be brought into compliance with ap-
plicable standards prescribed pursuant to section 534, final deter-
mination as to admission of such electronic product may be de-
ferred upon filing of timely written application by the owner or con-
signee and the execution by him of a good and sufficient bond pro-
viding for the payment of such liquidated damages in the event of
default as the Secretary of Health and Human Services may by
regulation prescribe. If such application is filed and such bond is
executed the Secretary of Health and Human Services may, in ac-
cordance with rules prescribed by him, permit the applicant to per-
form such operations with respect to such electronic product as
may be specified in the notice of permission.
(c) All expenses (including travel, per diem or subsistence, and
salaries of officers or employees of the United States) in connection
with the destruction provided for in subsection (a) of this section
and the supervision of operations provided for in subsection (b) of
this section, and all expenses in connection with the storage, cart-
age, or labor with respect to any electronic product refused admis-
sion pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall be paid by the
owner or consignee, and, in event of default, shall constitute a lien
against any future importations made by such owner or consignee.
(d) It shall be the duty of every manufacturer offering an elec-
tronic product for importation into the United States to designate
in writing an agent upon whom service of all administrative and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
256
Sec. 537
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
judicial processes, notices, orders, decisions, and requirements may
be made for and on behalf of said manufacturer, and to file such
designation with the Secretary, which designation may from time
to time be changed by like writing, similarly filed. Service of all ad-
ministrative and judicial processes, notices, orders, decisions, and
requirements may be made upon said manufacturer by service
upon such designated agent at his office or usual place of residence
with like effect as if made personally upon said manufacturer, and
in default of such designation of such agent, service of process, no-
tice, order, requirement, or decision in any proceeding before the
Secretary or in any judicial proceeding for enforcement of this sub-
chapter or any standards prescribed pursuant to this subchapter
may be made by posting such process, notice, order, requirement,
or decision in the Office of the Secretary or in a place designated
by him by regulation.
INSPECTION AND REPORTS
SEC. 537. ø21 U.S.C. 360nn¿ (a) If the Secretary finds for good
cause that the methods, tests, or programs related to electronic
product radiation safety in a particular factory, warehouse, or es-
tablishment in which electronic products are manufactured or held,
may not be adequate or reliable, officers or employees duly des-
ignated by the Secretary, upon presenting appropriate credentials
and a written notice to the owner, operator, or agent in charge, are
thereafter authorized (1) to enter, at reasonable times, any area in
such factory, warehouse, or establishment in which the manufac-
turer’s tests (or testing programs) required by section 534(h) are
carried out, and (2) to inspect, at reasonable times and within rea-
sonable limits and in a reasonable manner, the facilities and proce-
dures within such area which are related to electronic product radi-
ation safety. Each such inspection shall be commenced and com-
pleted with reasonable promptness. In addition to other grounds
upon which good cause may be found for purposes of this sub-
section, good cause will be considered to exist in any case where
the manufacturer has introduced into commerce any electronic
product which does not comply with an applicable standard pre-
scribed under this subchapter and with respect to which no exemp-
tion from the notification requirements has been granted by the
Secretary under section 535(a)(2) or 535(e).
(b) Every manufacturer of electronic products shall establish
and maintain such records (including testing records), make such
reports, and provide such information, as the Secretary may rea-
sonably require to enable him to determine whether such manufac-
turer has acted or is acting in compliance with this subchapter and
standards prescribed pursuant to this subchapter and shall, upon
request of an officer or employee duly designated by the Secretary,
permit such officer or employee to inspect appropriate books, pa-
pers, records, and documents relevant to determining whether such
manufacturer has acted or is acting in compliance with standards
prescribed pursuant to this subchapter.
(c) Every manufacturer of electronic products shall provide to
the Secretary such performance data and other technical data re-
lated to safety as may be required to carry out the purposes of this
subchapter. The Secretary is authorized to require the manufac-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
257
Sec. 538
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
turer to give such notification of such performance and technical
data at the time of original purchase to the ultimate purchaser of
the electronic product, as he determines necessary to carry out the
purposes of this subchapter after consulting with the affected in-
dustry.
(d) Accident and investigation reports made under this sub-
chapter by any officer, employee, or agent of the Secretary shall be
available for use in any civil, criminal, or other judicial proceeding
arising out of such accident. Any such officer, employee, or agent
may be required to testify in such proceedings as to the fact devel-
oped in such investigations. Any such report shall be made avail-
able to the public in a manner which need not identify individuals.
All reports on research projects, demonstration projects, and other
related activities shall be public information.
(e) The Secretary or his representative shall not disclose any
information reported to or otherwise obtained by him, pursuant to
subsection (a) or (b) of this section, which concerns any information
which contains or relates to a trade secret or other matter referred
to in section 1905 of title 18 of the United States Code, except that
such information may be disclosed to other officers or employees of
the Department and of other agencies concerned with carrying out
this subchapter or when relevant in any proceeding under this sub-
chapter. Nothing in this section shall authorize the withholding of
information by the Secretary, or by any officers or employees under
his control, from the duly authorized committees of the Congress.
(f) The Secretary may by regulation (1) require dealers and dis-
tributors of electronic products, to which there are applicable
standards prescribed under this subchapter and the retail prices of
which is not less than $50, to furnish manufacturers of such prod-
ucts such information as may be necessary to identify and locate,
for purposes of section 535, the first purchasers of such products
for purposes other than resale, and (2) require manufacturers to
preserve such information. Any regulation establishing a require-
ment pursuant to clause (1) of the preceding sentence shall (A) au-
thorize such dealers and distributors to elect, in lieu of imme-
diately furnishing such information to the manufacturer, to hold
and preserve such information until advised by the manufacturer
or Secretary that such information is needed by the manufacturer
for purposes of section 535, and (B) provide that the dealer or dis-
tributor shall, upon making such election, give prompt notice of
such election (together with information identifying the notifier and
the product) to the manufacturer and shall, when advised by the
manufacturer or Secretary, of the need therefor for the purposes of
section 535, immediately furnish the manufacturer with the re-
quired information. If a dealer or distributor discontinues the deal-
ing in or distribution of electronic products, he shall turn the infor-
mation over to the manufacturer. Any manufacturer receiving in-
formation pursuant to this subsection concerning first purchasers
of products for purposes other than resale shall treat it as confiden-
tial and may use it only if necessary for the purpose of notifying
persons pursuant to section 535(a).
PROHIBITED ACTS
SEC. 538. ø21 U.S.C. 360oo¿ (a) It shall be unlawful—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
258
Sec. 539
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(1) for any manufacturer to introduce, or to deliver for in-
troduction, into commerce, or to import into the United States,
any electronic product which does not comply with an applica-
ble standard prescribed pursuant to section 534;
(2) for any person to fail to furnish any notification or
other material or information required by section 535 or 537;
or to fail to comply with the requirements of section 535(f);
(3) for any person to fail or to refuse to establish or main-
tain records required by this subchapter or to permit access by
the Secretary or any of his duly authorized representatives to,
or the copying of, such records, or to permit entry or inspec-
tion, as required by or pursuant to section 537;
(4) for any person to fail or to refuse to make any report
required pursuant to section 537(b) or to furnish or preserve
any information required pursuant to section 537(f); or
(5) for any person (A) to fail to issue a certification as re-
quired by section 534(h), or (B) to issue such a certification
when such certification is not based upon a test or testing pro-
gram meeting the requirements of section 534(h) or when the
issuer, in the exercise of due care, would have reason to know
that such certification is false or misleading in a material re-
spect.
(b) The Secretary may exempt any electronic product, or class
thereof, from all or part of subsection (a), upon such conditions as
he may find necessary to protect the public health or welfare, for
the purpose of research, investigations, studies, demonstrations, or
training, or for reasons of national security.
ENFORCEMENT
SEC. 539. ø21 U.S.C. 360pp¿ (a) The district courts of the
United States shall have jurisdiction, for cause shown, to restrain
violations of section 538 and to restrain dealers and distributors of
electronic products from selling or otherwise disposing of electronic
products which do not conform to an applicable standard prescribed
pursuant to section 534 except when such products are disposed of
by returning them to the distributor or manufacturer from whom
they were obtained. The district courts of the United States shall
also have jurisdiction in accordance with section 1355 of title 28 of
the United States Code to enforce the provisions of subsection (b)
of this section.
(b)(1) Any person who violates section 538 shall be subject to
a civil penalty of not more than $1,000. For purposes of this sub-
section, any such violation shall with respect to each electronic
product involved, or with respect to each act or omission made un-
lawful by section 538, constitute a separate violation, except that
the maximum civil penalty imposed on any person under this sub-
section for any related series of violations shall not exceed
$300,000.
(2) Any such civil penalty may on application be remitted or
mitigated by the Secretary. In determining the amount of such
penalty, or whether it should be remitted or mitigated and in what
amount, the appropriateness of such penalty to the size of the busi-
ness of the person charged and the gravity of the violation shall be
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
259
Sec. 542
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
considered. The amount of such penalty, when finally determined,
may be deducted from any sums owing by the United States to the
person charged.
(c) Actions under subsections (a) and (b) of this section may be
brought in the district court of the United States for the district
wherein any act or omission or transaction constituting the viola-
tion occurred, or in such court for the district where the defendant
is found or transacts business, and process in such cases may be
served in any other district of which the defendant is an inhabitant
or wherever the defendant may be found.
(d) Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as requiring
the Secretary to report for the institution of proceedings minor vio-
lations of this subchapter whenever he believes that the public in-
terest will be adequately served by a suitable written notice or
warning.
(e) Except as provided in the first sentence of section 542, com-
pliance with this subchapter or any regulations issued thereunder
shall not relieve any person from liability at common law or under
statutory law.
(f) The remedies provided for in this subchapter shall be in ad-
dition to and not in substitution for any other remedies provided
by law.
øSec. 540 repealed by P.L. 105–362, § 601(a)(2)(A).¿
FEDERAL-STATE COOPERATION
SEC. 541. ø21 U.S.C. 360rr¿ The Secretary is authorized (1) to
accept from State and local authorities engaged in activities related
to health or safety or consumer protection, on a reimbursable basis
or otherwise, any assistance in the administration and enforcement
of this subchapter which he may request and which they may be
able and willing to provide and, if so agreed, may pay in advance
or otherwise for the reasonable cost of such assistance, and (2) he
may, for the purpose of conducting examinations, investigations,
and inspections, commission any officer or employee of any such
authority as an officer of the Department.
EFFECT ON STATE STANDARDS
SEC. 542. ø21 U.S.C. 360ss¿ Whenever any standard pre-
scribed pursuant to section 534 with respect to an aspect of per-
formance of an electronic product is in effect, no State or political
subdivision of a State shall have any authority either to establish,
or to continue in effect, any standard which is applicable to the
same aspect of performance of such product and which is not iden-
tical to the Federal standard. Nothing in this subchapter shall be
construed to prevent the Federal Government or the government of
any State or political subdivision thereof from establishing a re-
quirement with respect to emission of radiation from electronic
products procured for its own use if such requirement imposes a
more restrictive standard than that required to comply with the
otherwise applicable Federal standard.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
260
Sec. 551
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 This subchapter was added by section 401(a) of P.L. 105–115. Subsections (d) and (e) of such
section provides the following:
(d) EFFECTIVE DATE.—The amendments made by this section shall take effect 1 year after the
date of enactment of this Act, or upon the Secretary’s issuance of final regulations pursuant to
subsection (c), whichever is sooner.
(e) SUNSET.—The amendments made by this section cease to be effective September 30, 2006,
or 7 years after the date on which the Secretary promulgates the regulations described in sub-
section (c), whichever is later.
SUBCHAPTER D—DISSEMINATION OF TREATMENT INFORMATION 1
SEC. 551.
ø21 U.S.C. 360aaa¿ REQUIREMENTS FOR DISSEMINATION OF
TREATMENT INFORMATION ON DRUGS OR DEVICES.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Notwithstanding sections 301(d), 502(f), and
505, and section 351 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C.
262), a manufacturer may disseminate to—
(1) a health care practitioner;
(2) a pharmacy benefit manager;
(3) a health insurance issuer;
(4) a group health plan; or
(5) a Federal or State governmental agency;
written information concerning the safety, effectiveness, or benefit
of a use not described in the approved labeling of a drug or device
if the manufacturer meets the requirements of subsection (b).
(b) SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.—A manufacturer may dissemi-
nate information under subsection (a) on a new use only if—
(1)(A) in the case of a drug, there is in effect for the drug
an application filed under subsection (b) or (j) of section 505 or
a biologics license issued under section 351 of the Public
Health Service Act; or
(B) in the case of a device, the device is being commercially
distributed in accordance with a regulation under subsection
(d) or (e) of section 513, an order under subsection (f) of such
section, or the approval of an application under section 515;
(2) the information meets the requirements of section 552;
(3) the information to be disseminated is not derived from
clinical research conducted by another manufacturer or if it
was derived from research conducted by another manufacturer,
the manufacturer disseminating the information has the per-
mission of such other manufacturer to make the dissemination;
(4) the manufacturer has, 60 days before such dissemina-
tion, submitted to the Secretary—
(A) a copy of the information to be disseminated; and
(B) any clinical trial information the manufacturer has
relating to the safety or effectiveness of the new use, any
reports of clinical experience pertinent to the safety of the
new use, and a summary of such information;
(5) the manufacturer has complied with the requirements
of section 554 (relating to a supplemental application for such
use);
(6) the manufacturer includes along with the information
to be disseminated under this subsection—
(A) a prominently displayed statement that discloses—
(i) that the information concerns a use of a drug
or device that has not been approved or cleared by the
Food and Drug Administration;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
261
Sec. 552
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(ii) if applicable, that the information is being dis-
seminated at the expense of the manufacturer;
(iii) if applicable, the name of any authors of the
information who are employees of, consultants to, or
have received compensation from, the manufacturer,
or who have a significant financial interest in the
manufacturer;
(iv) the official labeling for the drug or device and
all updates with respect to the labeling;
(v) if applicable, a statement that there are prod-
ucts or treatments that have been approved or cleared
for the use that is the subject of the information being
disseminated pursuant to subsection (a)(1); and
(vi) the identification of any person that has pro-
vided funding for the conduct of a study relating to the
new use of a drug or device for which such information
is being disseminated; and
(B) a bibliography of other articles from a scientific
reference publication or scientific or medical journal that
have been previously published about the use of the drug
or device covered by the information disseminated (unless
the information already includes such bibliography).
(c) ADDITIONAL INFORMATION.—If the Secretary determines,
after providing notice of such determination and an opportunity for
a meeting with respect to such determination, that the information
submitted by a manufacturer under subsection (b)(3)(B), with re-
spect to the use of a drug or device for which the manufacturer in-
tends to disseminate information, fails to provide data, analyses, or
other written matter that is objective and balanced, the Secretary
may require the manufacturer to disseminate—
(1) additional objective and scientifically sound information
that pertains to the safety or effectiveness of the use and is
necessary to provide objectivity and balance, including any in-
formation that the manufacturer has submitted to the Sec-
retary or, where appropriate, a summary of such information
or any other information that the Secretary has authority to
make available to the public; and
(2) an objective statement of the Secretary, based on data
or other scientifically sound information available to the Sec-
retary, that bears on the safety or effectiveness of the new use
of the drug or device.
SEC. 552. ø21 U.S.C. 360aaa–1¿ INFORMATION AUTHORIZED TO BE DIS-
SEMINATED.
(a) AUTHORIZED INFORMATION.—A manufacturer may dissemi-
nate information under section 551 on a new use only if the
information—
(1) is in the form of an unabridged—
(A) reprint or copy of an article, peer-reviewed by ex-
perts qualified by scientific training or experience to evalu-
ate the safety or effectiveness of the drug or device in-
volved, which was published in a scientific or medical jour-
nal (as defined in section 556(5)), which is about a clinical
investigation with respect to the drug or device, and which
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
262
Sec. 553
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
would be considered to be scientifically sound by such ex-
perts; or
(B) reference publication, described in subsection (b),
that includes information about a clinical investigation
with respect to the drug or device that would be considered
to be scientifically sound by experts qualified by scientific
training or experience to evaluate the safety or effective-
ness of the drug or device that is the subject of such a clin-
ical investigation; and
(2) is not false or misleading and would not pose a signifi-
cant risk to the public health.
(b) REFERENCE PUBLICATION.—A reference publication referred
to in subsection (a)(1)(B) is a publication that—
(1) has not been written, edited, excerpted, or published
specifically for, or at the request of, a manufacturer of a drug
or device;
(2) has not been edited or significantly influenced by such
a manufacturer;
(3) is not solely distributed through such a manufacturer
but is generally available in bookstores or other distribution
channels where medical textbooks are sold;
(4) does not focus on any particular drug or device of a
manufacturer that disseminates information under section 551
and does not have a primary focus on new uses of drugs or de-
vices that are marketed or under investigation by a manufac-
turer supporting the dissemination of information; and
(5) presents materials that are not false or misleading.
SEC. 553. ø21 U.S.C. 360aaa–2¿ ESTABLISHMENT OF LIST OF ARTICLES
AND PUBLICATIONS DISSEMINATED AND LIST OF PRO-
VIDERS THAT RECEIVED ARTICLES AND REFERENCE
PUBLICATIONS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—A manufacturer may disseminate informa-
tion under section 551 on a new use only if the manufacturer pre-
pares and submits to the Secretary biannually—
(1) a list containing the titles of the articles and reference
publications relating to the new use of drugs or devices that
were disseminated by the manufacturer to a person described
in section 551(a) for the 6-month period preceding the date on
which the manufacturer submits the list to the Secretary; and
(2) a list that identifies the categories of providers (as de-
scribed in section 551(a)) that received the articles and ref-
erence publications for the 6-month period described in para-
graph (1).
(b) RECORDS.—A manufacturer that disseminates information
under section 551 shall keep records that may be used by the man-
ufacturer when, pursuant to section 555, such manufacturer is re-
quired to take corrective action and shall be made available to the
Secretary, upon request, for purposes of ensuring or taking correc-
tive action pursuant to such section. Such records, at the Sec-
retary’s discretion, may identify the recipient of information pro-
vided pursuant to section 551 or the categories of such recipients.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
263
Sec. 554
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
SEC. 554. ø21 U.S.C. 360aaa–3¿ REQUIREMENT REGARDING SUBMISSION
OF SUPPLEMENTAL APPLICATION FOR NEW USE; EXEMP-
TION FROM REQUIREMENT.
(a) IN GENERAL.—A manufacturer may disseminate informa-
tion under section 551 on a new use only if—
(1)(A) the manufacturer has submitted to the Secretary a
supplemental application for such use; or
(B) the manufacturer meets the condition described in sub-
section (b) or (c) (relating to a certification that the manufac-
turer will submit such an application); or
(2) there is in effect for the manufacturer an exemption
under subsection (d) from the requirement of paragraph (1).
(b) CERTIFICATION ON SUPPLEMENTAL APPLICATION; CONDITION
IN CASE
OF COMPLETED STUDIES.—For purposes of subsection
(a)(1)(B), a manufacturer may disseminate information on a new
use if the manufacturer has submitted to the Secretary an applica-
tion containing a certification that—
(1) the studies needed for the submission of a supple-
mental application for the new use have been completed; and
(2) the supplemental application will be submitted to the
Secretary not later than 6 months after the date of the initial
dissemination of information under section 551.
(c) CERTIFICATION ON SUPPLEMENTAL APPLICATION; CONDITION
IN CASE OF PLANNED STUDIES.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(B), a
manufacturer may disseminate information on a new use if—
(A) the manufacturer has submitted to the Secretary
an application containing—
(i) a proposed protocol and schedule for conducting
the studies needed for the submission of a supple-
mental application for the new use; and
(ii) a certification that the supplemental applica-
tion will be submitted to the Secretary not later than
36 months after the date of the initial dissemination
of information under section 551 (or, as applicable, not
later than such date as the Secretary may specify pur-
suant to an extension under paragraph (3)); and
(B) the Secretary has determined that the proposed
protocol is adequate and that the schedule for completing
such studies is reasonable.
(2) PROGRESS REPORTS ON STUDIES.—A manufacturer that
submits to the Secretary an application under paragraph (1)
shall submit to the Secretary periodic reports describing the
status of the studies involved.
(3) EXTENSION OF TIME REGARDING PLANNED STUDIES.—The
period of 36 months authorized in paragraph (1)(A)(ii) for the
completion of studies may be extended by the Secretary if—
(A) the Secretary determines that the studies needed
to submit such an application cannot be completed and
submitted within 36 months; or
(B) the manufacturer involved submits to the Sec-
retary a written request for the extension and the Sec-
retary determines that the manufacturer has acted with
due diligence to conduct the studies in a timely manner,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
264
Sec. 554
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
except that an extension under this subparagraph may not
be provided for more than 24 additional months.
(d) EXEMPTION FROM REQUIREMENT OF SUPPLEMENTAL APPLI-
CATION.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—For purposes of subsection (a)(2), a man-
ufacturer may disseminate information on a new use if—
(A) the manufacturer has submitted to the Secretary
an application for an exemption from meeting the require-
ment of subsection (a)(1); and
(B)(i) the Secretary has approved the application in ac-
cordance with paragraph (2); or
(ii) the application is deemed under paragraph (3)(A)
to have been approved (unless such approval is terminated
pursuant to paragraph (3)(B)).
(2) CONDITIONS
FOR
APPROVAL.—The Secretary may ap-
prove an application under paragraph (1) for an exemption if
the Secretary makes a determination described in subpara-
graph (A) or (B), as follows:
(A) The Secretary makes a determination that, for rea-
sons defined by the Secretary, it would be economically
prohibitive with respect to such drug or device for the
manufacturer to incur the costs necessary for the submis-
sion of a supplemental application. In making such deter-
mination, the Secretary shall consider (in addition to any
other considerations the Secretary finds appropriate)—
(i) the lack of the availability under law of any pe-
riod during which the manufacturer would have exclu-
sive marketing rights with respect to the new use in-
volved; and
(ii) the size of the population expected to benefit
from approval of the supplemental application.
(B) The Secretary makes a determination that, for rea-
sons defined by the Secretary, it would be unethical to con-
duct the studies necessary for the supplemental applica-
tion. In making such determination, the Secretary shall
consider (in addition to any other considerations the Sec-
retary finds appropriate) whether the new use involved is
the standard of medical care for a health condition.
(3) TIME FOR CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION; DEEMED AP-
PROVAL.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall approve or deny
an application under paragraph (1) for an exemption not
later than 60 days after the receipt of the application. If
the Secretary does not comply with the preceding sentence,
the application is deemed to be approved.
(B) TERMINATION OF DEEMED APPROVAL.—If pursuant
to a deemed approval under subparagraph (A) a manufac-
turer disseminates written information under section 551
on a new use, the Secretary may at any time terminate
such approval and under section 555(b)(3) order the manu-
facturer to cease disseminating the information.
(e) REQUIREMENTS
REGARDING
APPLICATIONS.—Applications
under this section shall be submitted in the form and manner pre-
scribed by the Secretary.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
265
Sec. 555
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
SEC. 555. ø21 U.S.C. 360aaa–4¿ CORRECTIVE ACTIONS; CESSATION OF
DISSEMINATION.
(a) POSTDISSEMINATION DATA REGARDING SAFETY AND EFFEC-
TIVENESS.—
(1) CORRECTIVE ACTIONS.—With respect to data received by
the Secretary after the dissemination of information under sec-
tion 551 by a manufacturer has begun (whether received pur-
suant to paragraph (2) or otherwise), if the Secretary deter-
mines that the data indicate that the new use involved may
not be effective or may present a significant risk to public
health, the Secretary shall, after consultation with the manu-
facturer, take such action regarding the dissemination of the
information as the Secretary determines to be appropriate for
the protection of the public health, which may include ordering
that the manufacturer cease the dissemination of the informa-
tion.
(2) RESPONSIBILITIES
OF
MANUFACTURERS
TO
SUBMIT
DATA.—After a manufacturer disseminates information under
section 551, the manufacturer shall submit to the Secretary a
notification of any additional knowledge of the manufacturer
on clinical research or other data that relate to the safety or
effectiveness of the new use involved. If the manufacturer is in
possession of the data, the notification shall include the data.
The Secretary shall by regulation establish the scope of the re-
sponsibilities of manufacturers under this paragraph, including
such limits on the responsibilities as the Secretary determines
to be appropriate.
(b) CESSATION OF DISSEMINATION.—
(1) FAILURE OF MANUFACTURER TO COMPLY WITH REQUIRE-
MENTS.—The Secretary may order a manufacturer to cease the
dissemination of information pursuant to section 551 if the
Secretary determines that the information being disseminated
does not comply with the requirements established in this sub-
chapter. Such an order may be issued only after the Secretary
has provided notice to the manufacturer of the intent of the
Secretary to issue the order and (unless paragraph (2)(B) ap-
plies) has provided an opportunity for a meeting with respect
to such intent. If the failure of the manufacturer constitutes a
minor violation of this subchapter, the Secretary shall delay
issuing the order and provide to the manufacturer an oppor-
tunity to correct the violation.
(2) SUPPLEMENTAL
APPLICATIONS.—The Secretary may
order a manufacturer to cease the dissemination of information
pursuant to section 551 if—
(A) in the case of a manufacturer that has submitted
a supplemental application for a new use pursuant to sec-
tion 554(a)(1), the Secretary determines that the supple-
mental application does not contain adequate information
for approval of the new use for which the application was
submitted;
(B) in the case of a manufacturer that has submitted
a certification under section 554(b), the manufacturer has
not, within the 6-month period involved, submitted the
supplemental application referred to in the certification; or
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
266
Sec. 556
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(C) in the case of a manufacturer that has submitted
a certification under section 554(c) but has not yet sub-
mitted the supplemental application referred to in the cer-
tification, the Secretary determines, after an informal
hearing, that the manufacturer is not acting with due dili-
gence to complete the studies involved.
(3) TERMINATION OF DEEMED APPROVAL OF EXEMPTION RE-
GARDING
SUPPLEMENTAL
APPLICATIONS.—If 
under 
section
554(d)(3) the Secretary terminates a deemed approval of an ex-
emption, the Secretary may order the manufacturer involved to
cease disseminating the information. A manufacturer shall
comply with an order under the preceding sentence not later
than 60 days after the receipt of the order.
(c) CORRECTIVE ACTIONS BY MANUFACTURERS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—In any case in which under this section
the Secretary orders a manufacturer to cease disseminating in-
formation, the Secretary may order the manufacturer to take
action to correct the information that has been disseminated,
except as provided in paragraph (2).
(2) TERMINATION OF DEEMED APPROVAL OF EXEMPTION RE-
GARDING SUPPLEMENTAL APPLICATIONS.—In the case of an order
under subsection (b)(3) to cease disseminating information, the
Secretary may not order the manufacturer involved to take ac-
tion to correct the information that has been disseminated un-
less the Secretary determines that the new use described in
the information would pose a significant risk to the public
health.
SEC. 556. ø21 U.S.C. 360aaa–5¿ DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this subchapter:
(1) The term health care practitioner’’ means a physician,
or other individual who is a provider of health care, who is li-
censed under the law of a State to prescribe drugs or devices.
(2) The terms health insurance issuer’’ and group health
plan’’ have the meaning given such terms under section 2791
of the Public Health Service Act.
(3) The term manufacturer’’ means a person who manufac-
tures a drug or device, or who is licensed by such person to dis-
tribute or market the drug or device.
(4) The term new use’’—
(A) with respect to a drug, means a use that is not in-
cluded in the labeling of the approved drug; and
(B) with respect to a device, means a use that is not
included in the labeling for the approved or cleared device.
(5) The term scientific or medical journal’’ means a sci-
entific or medical publication—
(A) that is published by an organization—
(i) that has an editorial board;
(ii) that utilizes experts, who have demonstrated
expertise in the subject of an article under review by
the organization and who are independent of the orga-
nization, to review and objectively select, reject, or
provide comments about proposed articles; and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
267
Sec. 561
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(iii) that has a publicly stated policy, to which the
organization adheres, of full disclosure of any conflict
of interest or biases for all authors or contributors in-
volved with the journal or organization;
(B) whose articles are peer-reviewed and published in
accordance with the regular peer-review procedures of the
organization;
(C) that is generally recognized to be of national scope
and reputation;
(D) that is indexed in the Index Medicus of the Na-
tional Library of Medicine of the National Institutes of
Health; and
(E) that is not in the form of a special supplement that
has been funded in whole or in part by one or more manu-
facturers.
SEC. 557. ø21 U.S.C. 360aaa–6¿ RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
(a) UNSOLICITED REQUEST.—Nothing in section 551 shall be
construed as prohibiting a manufacturer from disseminating infor-
mation in response to an unsolicited request from a health care
practitioner.
(b) DISSEMINATION
OF INFORMATION
ON DRUGS
OR DEVICES
NOT EVIDENCE OF INTENDED USE.—Notwithstanding subsection (a),
(f), or (o) of section 502, or any other provision of law, the dissemi-
nation of information relating to a new use of a drug or device, in
accordance with section 551, shall not be construed by the Sec-
retary as evidence of a new intended use of the drug or device that
is different from the intended use of the drug or device set forth
in the official labeling of the drug or device. Such dissemination
shall not be considered by the Secretary as labeling, adulteration,
or misbranding of the drug or device.
(c) PATENT PROTECTION.—Nothing in section 551 shall affect
patent rights in any manner.
(d) AUTHORIZATION FOR DISSEMINATION OF ARTICLES AND FEES
FOR REPRINTS OF ARTICLES.—Nothing in section 551 shall be con-
strued as prohibiting an entity that publishes a scientific journal
(as defined in section 556(5)) from requiring authorization from the
entity to disseminate an article published by such entity or charg-
ing fees for the purchase of reprints of published articles from such
entity.
SUBCHAPTER E—GENERAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO DRUGS AND
DEVICES
SEC. 561. ø21 U.S.C. 360bbb¿ EXPANDED ACCESS TO UNAPPROVED
THERAPIES AND DIAGNOSTICS.
(a) EMERGENCY SITUATIONS.—The Secretary may, under appro-
priate conditions determined by the Secretary, authorize the ship-
ment of investigational drugs or investigational devices for the di-
agnosis, monitoring, or treatment of a serious disease or condition
in emergency situations.
(b) INDIVIDUAL PATIENT ACCESS TO INVESTIGATIONAL PRODUCTS
INTENDED FOR SERIOUS DISEASES.—Any person, acting through a
physician licensed in accordance with State law, may request from
a manufacturer or distributor, and any manufacturer or distributor
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
268
Sec. 561
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
may, after complying with the provisions of this subsection, provide
to such physician an investigational drug or investigational device
for the diagnosis, monitoring, or treatment of a serious disease or
condition if—
(1) the licensed physician determines that the person has
no comparable or satisfactory alternative therapy available to
diagnose, monitor, or treat the disease or condition involved,
and that the probable risk to the person from the investiga-
tional drug or investigational device is not greater than the
probable risk from the disease or condition;
(2) the Secretary determines that there is sufficient evi-
dence of safety and effectiveness to support the use of the in-
vestigational drug or investigational device in the case de-
scribed in paragraph (1);
(3) the Secretary determines that provision of the inves-
tigational drug or investigational device will not interfere with
the initiation, conduct, or completion of clinical investigations
to support marketing approval; and
(4) the sponsor, or clinical investigator, of the investiga-
tional drug or investigational device submits to the Secretary
a clinical protocol consistent with the provisions of section
505(i) or 520(g), including any regulations promulgated under
section 505(i) or 520(g), describing the use of the investiga-
tional drug or investigational device in a single patient or a
small group of patients.
(c) TREATMENT INVESTIGATIONAL NEW DRUG APPLICATIONS AND
TREATMENT INVESTIGATIONAL DEVICE EXEMPTIONS.—Upon submis-
sion by a sponsor or a physician of a protocol intended to provide
widespread access to an investigational drug or investigational de-
vice for eligible patients (referred to in this subsection as an ex-
panded access protocol’’), the Secretary shall permit such investiga-
tional drug or investigational device to be made available for ex-
panded access under a treatment investigational new drug applica-
tion or treatment investigational device exemption if the Secretary
determines that—
(1) under the treatment investigational new drug applica-
tion or treatment investigational device exemption, the inves-
tigational drug or investigational device is intended for use in
the diagnosis, monitoring, or treatment of a serious or imme-
diately life-threatening disease or condition;
(2) there is no comparable or satisfactory alternative ther-
apy available to diagnose, monitor, or treat that stage of dis-
ease or condition in the population of patients to which the in-
vestigational drug or investigational device is intended to be
administered;
(3)(A) the investigational drug or investigational device is
under investigation in a controlled clinical trial for the use de-
scribed in paragraph (1) under an investigational drug applica-
tion in effect under section 505(i) or investigational device ex-
emption in effect under section 520(g); or
(B) all clinical trials necessary for approval of that use of
the investigational drug or investigational device have been
completed;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
269
Sec. 562
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(4) the sponsor of the controlled clinical trials is actively
pursuing marketing approval of the investigational drug or in-
vestigational device for the use described in paragraph (1) with
due diligence;
(5) in the case of an investigational drug or investigational
device described in paragraph (3)(A), the provision of the inves-
tigational drug or investigational device will not interfere with
the enrollment of patients in ongoing clinical investigations
under section 505(i) or 520(g);
(6) in the case of serious diseases, there is sufficient evi-
dence of safety and effectiveness to support the use described
in paragraph (1); and
(7) in the case of immediately life-threatening diseases, the
available scientific evidence, taken as a whole, provides a rea-
sonable basis to conclude that the investigational drug or in-
vestigational device may be effective for its intended use and
would not expose patients to an unreasonable and significant
risk of illness or injury.
A protocol submitted under this subsection shall be subject to the
provisions of section 505(i) or 520(g), including regulations promul-
gated under section 505(i) or 520(g). The Secretary may inform na-
tional, State, and local medical associations and societies, voluntary
health associations, and other appropriate persons about the avail-
ability of an investigational drug or investigational device under
expanded access protocols submitted under this subsection. The in-
formation provided by the Secretary, in accordance with the pre-
ceding sentence, shall be the same type of information that is re-
quired by section 402(j)(3) of the Public Health Service Act.
(d) TERMINATION.—The Secretary may, at any time, with re-
spect to a sponsor, physician, manufacturer, or distributor de-
scribed in this section, terminate expanded access provided under
this section for an investigational drug or investigational device if
the requirements under this section are no longer met.
(e) DEFINITIONS.—In this section, the terms investigational
drug’’, investigational device’’, treatment investigational new drug
application’’, and treatment investigational device exemption’’ shall
have the meanings given the terms in regulations prescribed by the
Secretary.
SEC. 562. ø21 U.S.C. 360bbb–1¿ DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
If, regarding an obligation concerning drugs or devices under
this Act or section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, there is
a scientific controversy between the Secretary and a person who is
a sponsor, applicant, or manufacturer and no specific provision of
the Act involved, including a regulation promulgated under such
Act, provides a right of review of the matter in controversy, the
Secretary shall, by regulation, establish a procedure under which
such sponsor, applicant, or manufacturer may request a review of
such controversy, including a review by an appropriate scientific
advisory panel described in section 505(n) or an advisory committee
described in section 515(g)(2)(B). Any such review shall take place
in a timely manner. The Secretary shall promulgate such regula-
tions within 1 year after the date of the enactment of the Food and
Drug Administration Modernization Act of 1997.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
270
Sec. 563
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
SEC. 563. ø21 U.S.C. 360bbb–2¿ CLASSIFICATION OF PRODUCTS.
(a) REQUEST.—A person who submits an application or submis-
sion (including a petition, notification, and any other similar form
of request) under this Act for a product, may submit a request to
the Secretary respecting the classification of the product as a drug,
biological product, device, or a combination product subject to sec-
tion 503(g) or respecting the component of the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration that will regulate the product. In submitting the re-
quest, the person shall recommend a classification for the product,
or a component to regulate the product, as appropriate.
(b) STATEMENT.—Not later than 60 days after the receipt of the
request described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall determine
the classification of the product under subsection (a), or the compo-
nent of the Food and Drug Administration that will regulate the
product, and shall provide to the person a written statement that
identifies such classification or such component, and the reasons
for such determination. The Secretary may not modify such state-
ment except with the written consent of the person, or for public
health reasons based on scientific evidence.
(c) INACTION OF SECRETARY.—If the Secretary does not provide
the statement within the 60-day period described in subsection (b),
the recommendation made by the person under subsection (a) shall
be considered to be a final determination by the Secretary of such
classification of the product, or the component of the Food and
Drug Administration that will regulate the product, as applicable,
and may not be modified by the Secretary except with the written
consent of the person, or for public health reasons based on sci-
entific evidence.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.005
December 19, 2002 
271
CHAPTER VI—COSMETICS
ADULTERATED COSMETICS
SEC. 601. ø21 U.S.C. 361¿ A cosmetic shall be deemed to be
adulterated—
(a) If it bears or contains any poisonous or deleterious sub-
stance which may render it injurious to users under the conditions
of use prescribed in the labeling thereof, or, under such conditions
of use as are customary or usual, except that this provision shall
not apply to coal-tar hair dye, the label of which bears the fol-
lowing legend conspicuously displayed thereon: ‘‘Caution—This
product contains ingredients which may cause skin irritation on
certain individuals and a preliminary test according to accom-
panying directions should first be made. This product must not be
used for dyeing the eyelashes or eyebrows; to do so may cause
blindness.’’, and the labeling of which bears adequate directions for
such preliminary testing. For the purposes of this paragraph and
paragraph (e) the term ‘‘hair dye’’ shall not include eyelash dyes or
eyebrow dyes.
(b) If it consists in whole or in part of any filthy, putrid, or de-
composed substance.
(c) If it has been prepared, packed, or held under insanitary
conditions whereby it may have become contaminated with filth, or
whereby it may have been rendered injurious to health.
(d) If its container is composed, in whole or in part, of any poi-
sonous or deleterious substance which may render the contents in-
jurious to health.
(e) If it is not a hair dye and it is, or it bears or contains, a
color additive which is unsafe within the meaning of section 721(a).
MISBRANDED COSMETICS
SEC. 602. ø21 U.S.C. 362¿ A cosmetic shall be deemed to be
misbranded—
(a) If its labeling is false or misleading in any particular.
(b) If in package form unless it bears a label containing (1) the
name and place of business of the manufacturer, packer, or dis-
tributor; and (2) an accurate statement of the quantity of the con-
tents in terms of weight, measure, or numerical count: Provided,
That under clause (2) of this paragraph reasonable variations shall
be permitted, and exemptions as to small packages shall be estab-
lished, by regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
(c) If any word, statement, or other information required by or
under authority of this Act to appear on the label or labeling is not
prominently placed thereon with such conspicuousness (as com-
pared with other words, statements, designs, or devices in the la-
beling) and in such terms as to render it likely to be read and un-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.006
December 19, 2002 
272
Sec. 603
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
derstood by the ordinary individual under customary conditions of
purchase and use.
(d) If its container is so made, formed, or filled as to be mis-
leading.
(e) If it is a color additive, unless its packaging and labeling
are in conformity with such packaging and labeling requirements,
applicable to such color additive, as may be contained in regula-
tions issued under section 721. This paragraph shall not apply to
packages of color additives which, with respect to their use for cos-
metics, are marketed and intended for use only in or on hair dyes
(as defined in the last sentence of section 601(a)).
(f) If its packaging or labeling is in violation of an applicable
regulation issued pursuant to section 3 or 4 of the Poison Preven-
tion Packaging Act of 1970.
REGULATIONS MAKING EXEMPTIONS
SEC. 603. ø21 U.S.C. 363¿ The Secretary shall promulgate reg-
ulations exempting from any labeling requirement of this Act cos-
metics which are, in accordance with the practice of the trade, to
be processed, labeled, or repacked in substantial quantities at es-
tablishments other than those where originally processed or
packed, on condition that such cosmetics are not adulterated or
misbranded under the provisions of this Act upon removal from
such processing, labeling, or repacking establishment.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.006
December 19, 2002 
273
1 Section 3(b) of P.L. 103–396 attempted to amend section 701(e)(1) by striking ‘‘or maple
syrup (regulated under section 168.140 of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations).’’. The amend-
ment probably should have stricken ‘‘or maple sirup (regulated under section 168.140 of title
21, Code of Federal Regulations)’’.
CHAPTER VII—GENERAL AUTHORITY
SUBCHAPTER A—GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
REGULATIONS AND HEARINGS
SEC. 701. ø21 U.S.C. 371¿ (a) The authority to promulgate reg-
ulations for the efficient enforcement of this Act, except as other-
wise provided in this section, is hereby vested in the Secretary.
(b) The Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Health
and Human Services shall jointly prescribe regulations for the effi-
cient enforcement of the provisions of section 801, except as other-
wise provided therein. Such regulations shall be promulgated in
such manner and take effect at such time, after due notice, as the
Secretary of Health and Human Services shall determine.
(c) Hearings authorized or required by this Act shall be con-
ducted by the Secretary or such officer or employee as he may des-
ignate for the purpose.
(d) The definitions and standards of identity promulgated in
accordance with the provisions of this Act shall be effective for the
purposes of the enforcement of this Act, notwithstanding such defi-
nitions and standards as may be contained in other laws of the
United States and regulations promulgated thereunder.
(e)(1) Any action for the issuance, amendment, or repeal of any
regulation under section 403(j), 404(a), 406, 501(b), or 502 (d) or (h)
of this Act, and any action for the amendment or repeal of any defi-
nition and standard of identity under section 401 of this Act for
any dairy product (including products regulated under parts 131,
133 and 135 of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations) or maple
sirup (regulated under section 168.140 of title 21, Code of Federal
Regulations) 1 shall be begun by a proposal made (A) by the Sec-
retary on his own initiative, or (B) by petition of any interested
persons, showing reasonable grounds therefor, filed with the Sec-
retary. The Secretary shall publish such proposal and shall afford
all interested persons an opportunity to present their views there-
on, orally or in writing. As soon as practicable thereafter, the Sec-
retary shall by order act upon such proposal and shall make such
order public. Except as provided in paragraph (2), the order shall
become effective at such time as may be specified therein, but not
prior to the day following the last day on which objections may be
filed under such paragraph.
(2) On or before the thirtieth day after the date on which an
order entered under paragraph (1) is made public, any person who
will be adversely affected by such order if placed in effect may file
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
274
Sec. 701
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
objections thereto with the Secretary, specifying with particularity
the provisions of the order deemed objectionable, stating the
grounds therefor, and requesting a public hearing upon such objec-
tions. Until final action upon such objections is taken by the Sec-
retary under paragraph (3), the filing of such objections shall oper-
ate to stay the effectiveness of those provisions of the order to
which the objections are made. As soon as practicable after the
time for filing objections has expired the Secretary shall publish a
notice in the Federal Register specifying those parts of the order
which have been stayed by the filing of objections and, if no objec-
tions have been filed, stating that fact.
(3) As soon as practicable after such request for a public hear-
ing, the Secretary, after due notice, shall hold such a public hear-
ing for the purpose of receiving evidence relevant and material to
the issues raised by such objections. At the hearing, any interested
person may be heard in person or by representative. As soon as
practicable after completion of the hearing, the Secretary shall by
order act upon such objections and make such order public. Such
order shall be based only on substantial evidence of record at such
hearing and shall set forth, as part of the order, detailed findings
of fact on which the order is based. The Secretary shall specify in
the order the date on which it shall take effect, except that it shall
not be made to take effect prior to the ninetieth day after its publi-
cation unless the Secretary finds that emergency conditions exist
necessitating an earlier effective date, in which event the Secretary
shall specify in the order his findings as to such conditions.
(f)(1) In a case of actual controversy as to the validity of any
order under subsection (e), any person who will be adversely af-
fected by such order if placed in effect may at any time prior to the
ninetieth day after such order is issued file a petition with the Cir-
cuit Court of Appeals of the United States for the circuit wherein
such person resides or has his principal place of business, for a ju-
dicial review of such order. A copy of the petition shall be forthwith
transmitted by the clerk of the court to the Secretary or other offi-
cer designated by him for that purpose. The Secretary thereupon
shall file in the court the record of the proceedings on which the
Secretary based his order, as provided in section 2112 of title 28,
United States Code.
(2) If the petitioner applies to the court for leave to adduce ad-
ditional evidence, and shows to the satisfaction of the court that
such additional evidence is material and that there were reason-
able grounds for the failure to adduce such evidence in the pro-
ceeding before the Secretary the court may order such additional
evidence (and evidence in rebuttal thereof) to be taken before the
Secretary, and to be adduced upon the hearing, in such manner
and upon such terms and conditions as to the court may seem
proper. The Secretary may modify his findings as to the facts, or
make new findings, by reason of the additional evidence, so taken,
and he shall file such modified or new findings, and his rec-
ommendation, if any, for the modification or setting aside of his
original order, with the return of such additional evidence.
(3) Upon the filing of the petition referred to in paragraph (1)
of this subsection, the court shall have jurisdiction to affirm the
order, or to set it aside in whole or in part, temporarily or perma-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
275
Sec. 701
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
nently. If the order of the Secretary refuses to issue, amend, or re-
peal a regulation and such order is not in accordance with law the
court shall by its judgment order the Secretary to take action with
respect to such regulation, in accordance with law. The findings of
the Secretary as to the facts, if supported by substantial evidence,
shall be conclusive.
(4) The judgment of the court affirming or setting aside, in
whole or in part, any such order of the Secretary shall be final,
subject to review by the Supreme Court of the United States upon
certiorari or certification as provided in section 1254 of title 28,
United States Code.
(5) Any action instituted under this subsection shall survive
notwithstanding any change in the person occupying the office of
Secretary or any vacancy in such office.
(6) The remedies provided for in this subsection shall be in ad-
dition to and not in substitution for any other remedies provided
by law.
(g) A certified copy of the transcript of the record and pro-
ceedings under subsection (e) shall be furnished by the Secretary
to any interested party at his request, and payment of the costs
thereof, and shall be admissible in any criminal libel for condemna-
tion, exclusion of imports, or other proceeding arising under or in
respect of this Act, irrespective of whether proceedings with respect
to the order have previously been instituted or become final under
subsection (f).
(h)(1)(A) The Secretary shall develop guidance documents with
public participation and ensure that information identifying the ex-
istence of such documents and the documents themselves are made
available to the public both in written form and, as feasible,
through electronic means. Such documents shall not create or con-
fer any rights for or on any person, although they present the
views of the Secretary on matters under the jurisdiction of the
Food and Drug Administration.
(B) Although guidance documents shall not be binding on the
Secretary, the Secretary shall ensure that employees of the Food
and Drug Administration do not deviate from such guidances with-
out appropriate justification and supervisory concurrence. The Sec-
retary shall provide training to employees in how to develop and
use guidance documents and shall monitor the development and
issuance of such documents.
(C) For guidance documents that set forth initial interpreta-
tions of a statute or regulation, changes in interpretation or policy
that are of more than a minor nature, complex scientific issues, or
highly controversial issues, the Secretary shall ensure public par-
ticipation prior to implementation of guidance documents, unless
the Secretary determines that such prior public participation is not
feasible or appropriate. In such cases, the Secretary shall provide
for public comment upon implementation and take such comment
into account.
(D) For guidance documents that set forth existing practices or
minor changes in policy, the Secretary shall provide for public com-
ment upon implementation.
(2) In developing guidance documents, the Secretary shall en-
sure uniform nomenclature for such documents and uniform inter-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
276
Sec. 702
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
nal procedures for approval of such documents. The Secretary shall
ensure that guidance documents and revisions of such documents
are properly dated and indicate the nonbinding nature of the docu-
ments. The Secretary shall periodically review all guidance docu-
ments and, where appropriate, revise such documents.
(3) The Secretary, acting through the Commissioner, shall
maintain electronically and update and publish periodically in the
Federal Register a list of guidance documents. All such documents
shall be made available to the public.
(4) The Secretary shall ensure that an effective appeals mecha-
nism is in place to address complaints that the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration is not developing and using guidance documents in ac-
cordance with this subsection.
(5) Not later than July 1, 2000, the Secretary after evaluating
the effectiveness of the Good Guidance Practices document, pub-
lished in the Federal Register at 62 Fed. Reg. 8961, shall promul-
gate a regulation consistent with this subsection specifying the
policies and procedures of the Food and Drug Administration for
the development, issuance, and use of guidance documents.
EXAMINATIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS
SEC. 702. ø21 U.S.C. 372¿ (a)(1) The Secretary is authorized to
conduct examinations and investigations for the purposes of this
Act through officers and employees of the Department or through
any health, food, or drug officer or employee of any State, Terri-
tory, or political subdivision thereof, duly commissioned by the Sec-
retary as an officer of the Department.
(2)(A) In addition to the authority established in paragraph (1),
the Secretary, pursuant to a memorandum of understanding be-
tween the Secretary and the head of another Federal department
or agency, is authorized to conduct examinations and investigations
for the purposes of this Act through the officers and employees of
such other department or agency, subject to subparagraph (B).
Such a memorandum shall include provisions to ensure adequate
training of such officers and employees to conduct the examinations
and investigations. The memorandum of understanding shall con-
tain provisions regarding reimbursement. Such provisions may, at
the sole discretion of the head of the other department or agency,
require reimbursement, in whole or in part, from the Secretary for
the examinations or investigations performed under this section by
the officers or employees of the other department or agency.
(B) A memorandum of understanding under subparagraph (A)
between the Secretary and another Federal department or agency
is effective only in the case of examinations or inspections at facili-
ties or other locations that are jointly regulated by the Secretary
and such department or agency.
(C) For any fiscal year in which the Secretary and the head of
another Federal department or agency carries out one or more ex-
aminations or inspections under a memorandum of understanding
under subparagraph (A), the Secretary and the head of such de-
partment or agency shall with respect to their respective depart-
ments or agencies submit to the committees of jurisdiction (author-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
277
Sec. 702
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
izing and appropriating) in the House of Representatives and the
Senate a report that provides, for such year—
(i) the number of officers or employees that carried out one
or more programs, projects, or activities under such memo-
randum;
(ii) the number of additional articles that were inspected
or examined as a result of such memorandum; and
(iii) the number of additional examinations or investiga-
tions that were carried out pursuant to such memorandum.
(3) In the case of food packed in the Commonwealth of Puerto
Rico or a Territory the Secretary shall attempt to make inspection
of such food at the first point of entry within the United States,
when in his opinion and with due regard to the enforcement of all
the provisions of this Act, the facilities at his disposal will permit
of such inspection.
(4) For the purposes of this subsection, the term ‘‘United
States’’ means the States and the District of Columbia.
(b) Where a sample of a food, drug, or cosmetic is collected for
analysis under this Act the Secretary shall, upon request, provide
a part of such official sample for examination or analysis by any
person named on the label of the article, or the owner thereof, or
his attorney or agent; except that the Secretary is authorized, by
regulations, to make such reasonable exceptions from, and impose
such reasonable terms and conditions relating to, the operation of
this subsection as he finds necessary for the proper administration
of the provisions of this Act.
(c) For purposes of enforcement of this Act, records of any de-
partment or independent establishment in the executive branch of
the Government shall be open to inspection by any official of the
Department duly authorized by the Secretary to make such inspec-
tion.
(d) The Secretary is authorized and directed, upon request
from the Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual Property
and Director of the United States Patent and Trademark Office, to
furnish full and complete information with respect to such ques-
tions relating to drugs as the Director may submit concerning any
patent application. The Secretary is further authorized, upon re-
ceipt of any such request, to conduct or cause to be conducted, such
research as may be required.
(e) Any officer or employee of the Department designated by
the Secretary to conduct examinations, investigations, or inspec-
tions under this Act relating to counterfeit drugs may, when so au-
thorized by the Secretary—
(1) carry firearms;
(2) execute and serve search warrants and arrest war-
rants;
(3) execute seizure by process issued pursuant to libel
under section 304;
(4) make arrests without warrant for offenses under this
Act with respect to such drugs if the offense is committed in
his presence or, in the case of a felony, if he has probable cause
to believe that the person so arrested has committed, or is com-
mitting, such offense; and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
278
Sec. 703
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should be ‘‘this paragraph’’.
(5) make, prior to the institution of libel proceedings under
section 304(a)(2), seizures of drugs or containers or of equip-
ment, punches, dies, plates, stones, labeling, or other things, if
they are, or he has reasonable grounds to believe that they are,
subject to seizure and condemnation under such section
304(a)(2). In the event of seizure pursuant to this paragraph
(5) 1, libel proceedings under section 304(a)(2) shall be insti-
tuted promptly and the property seized be placed under the ju-
risdiction of the court.
RECORDS OF INTERSTATE SHIPMENT
SEC. 703. ø21 U.S.C. 373¿ For the purpose of enforcing the pro-
visions of this Act, carriers engaged in interstate commerce, and
persons receiving food, drugs, devices, or cosmetics in interstate
commerce or holding such articles so received, shall, upon the re-
quest of an officer or employee duly designated by the Secretary,
permit such officer or employee, at reasonable times, to have access
to and to copy all records showing the movement in interstate com-
merce of any food, drug, device, or cosmetic, or the holding thereof
during or after such movement, and the quantity, shipper, and con-
signee thereof; and it shall be unlawful for any such carrier or per-
son to fail to permit such access to and copying of any such record
so requested when such request is accompanied by a statement in
writing specifying the nature or kind of food, drug, device, or cos-
metic to which such request relates, except that evidence obtained
under this section, or any evidence which is directly or indirectly
derived from such evidence, shall not be used in a criminal pros-
ecution of the person from whom obtained, and except that carriers
shall not be subject to the other provisions of this Act by reason
of their receipt, carriage, holding, or delivery of food, drugs, de-
vices, or cosmetics in the usual course of business as carriers.
FACTORY INSPECTION
SEC. 704. ø21 U.S.C. 374¿ (a)(1) For purposes of enforcement
of this Act, officers or employees duly designated by the Secretary,
upon presenting appropriate credentials and a written notice to the
owner, operator, or agent in charge, are authorized (A) to enter, at
reasonable times, any factory, warehouse, or establishment in
which food, drugs, devices, or cosmetics are manufactured, proc-
essed, packed, or held, for introduction into interstate commerce or
after such introduction, or to enter any vehicle, being used to trans-
port or hold such food, drugs, devices, or cosmetics in interstate
commerce; and (B) to inspect, at reasonable times and within rea-
sonable limits and in a reasonable manner, such factory, ware-
house, establishment, or vehicle and all pertinent equipment, fin-
ished and unfinished materials, containers, and labeling therein. In
the case of any person (excluding farms and restaurants) who man-
ufactures, processes, packs, transports, distributes, holds, or im-
ports foods, the inspection shall extend to all records and other in-
formation described in section 414 when the Secretary has a rea-
sonable belief that an article of food is adulterated and presents a
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
279
Sec. 704
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should read ‘‘section 505(i) or (k),’’. See the amendment made by section
125(b)(2)(L) of Public Law 105–115.
threat of serious adverse health consequences or death to humans
or animals, subject to the limitations established in section 414(d).
In the case of any factory, warehouse, establishment, or consulting
laboratory in which prescription drugs, nonprescription drugs in-
tended for human use, or restricted devices are manufactured,
processed, packed, or held, inspection shall extend to all things
therein (including records, files, papers, processes, controls, and fa-
cilities) bearing on whether prescription drugs, nonprescription
drugs intended for human use, or restricted devices which are adul-
terated or misbranded within the meaning of this Act, or which
may not be manufactured, introduced into interstate commerce, or
sold, or offered for sale by reason of any provision of this Act, have
been or are being manufactured, processed, packed, transported, or
held in any such place, or otherwise bearing on violation of this
Act. No inspection authorized by the preceding sentence or by para-
graph (3) shall extend to financial data, sales data other than ship-
ment data, pricing data, personnel data (other than data as to
qualifications of technical and professional personnel performing
functions subject to this Act), and research data (other than data
relating to new drugs, antibiotic drugs, and devices and subject to
reporting and inspection under regulations lawfully issued pursu-
ant to section 505(i) or (k) 1 section 519, or 520(g), and data relat-
ing to other drugs or devices which in the case of a new drug would
be subject to reporting or inspection under lawful regulations
issued pursuant to section 505(j)). A separate notice shall be given
for each such inspection, but a notice shall not be required for each
entry made during the period covered by the inspection. Each such
inspection shall be commenced and completed with reasonable
promptness.
(2) The provisions of the third sentence of paragraph (1) shall
not apply to—
(A) pharmacies which maintain establishments in conform-
ance with any applicable local laws regulating the practice of
pharmacy and medicine and which are regularly engaged in
dispensing prescription drugs or devices, upon prescriptions of
practitioners licensed to administer such drugs or devices to
patients under the care of such practitioners in the course of
their professional practice, and which do not, either through a
subsidiary or otherwise, manufacture, prepare, propagate, com-
pound, or process drugs or devices for sale other than in the
regular course of their business of dispensing or selling drugs
or devices at retail;
(B) practitioners licensed by law to prescribe or administer
drugs, or prescribe or use devices, as the case may be, and who
manufacture, prepare, propagate, compound, or process drugs,
or manufacture or process devices solely for use in the course
of their professional practice;
(C) persons who manufacture, prepare, propagate, com-
pound, or process drugs, or manufacture or process devices
solely for use in research, teaching, or chemical analysis and
not for sale;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
280
Sec. 704
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(D) such other classes of persons as the Secretary may by
regulation exempt from the application of this section upon a
finding that inspection as applied to such classes of persons in
accordance with this section is not necessary for the protection
of the public health.
(3) An officer or employee making an inspection under para-
graph (1) for purposes of enforcing the requirements of section 412
applicable to infant formulas shall be permitted, at all reasonable
times, to have access to and to copy and verify any records—
(A) bearing on whether the infant formula manufactured
or held in the facility inspected meets the requirements of sec-
tion 412, or
(B) required to be maintained under section 412.
(b) Upon completion of any such inspection of a factory, ware-
house, consulting laboratory, or other establishment, and prior to
leaving the premises, the officer or employee making the inspection
shall give to the owner, operator, or agent in charge a report in
writing setting forth any conditions or practices observed by him
which, in his judgment, indicate that any food, drug, device, or cos-
metic in such establishment (1) consists in whole or in part of any
filthy, putrid, or decomposed substance, or (2) has been prepared,
packed, or held under insanitary conditions whereby it may have
become contaminated with filth, or whereby it may have been ren-
dered injurious to health. A copy of such report shall be sent
promptly to the Secretary.
(c) If the officer or employee making any such inspection of a
factory, warehouse, or other establishment has obtained any sam-
ple in the course of the inspection, upon completion of the inspec-
tion and prior to leaving the premises he shall give to the owner,
operator, or agent in charge a receipt describing the samples ob-
tained.
(d) Whenever in the course of any such inspection of a factory
or other establishment where food is manufactured, processed, or
packed, the officer or employee making the inspection obtains a
sample of any such food, and an analysis is made of such sample
for the purpose of ascertaining whether such food consists in whole
or in part of any filthy, putrid, or decomposed substance, or is oth-
erwise unfit for food, a copy of the results of such analysis shall
be furnished promptly to the owner, operator, or agent in charge.
(e) Every person required under section 519 or 520(g) to main-
tain records and every person who is in charge or custody of such
records shall, upon request of an officer or employee designated by
the Secretary, permit such officer or employee at all reasonable
times to have access to, and to copy and verify, such records.
(f)(1) An accredited person described in paragraph (3) shall
maintain records documenting the training qualifications of the
person and the employees of the person, the procedures used by the
person for handling confidential information, the compensation ar-
rangements made by the person, and the procedures used by the
person to identify and avoid conflicts of interest. Upon the request
of an officer or employee designated by the Secretary, the person
shall permit the officer or employee, at all reasonable times, to
have access to, to copy, and to verify, the records.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
281
Sec. 704
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(2) Within 15 days after the receipt of a written request from
the Secretary to an accredited person described in paragraph (3) for
copies of records described in paragraph (1), the person shall
produce the copies of the records at the place designated by the
Secretary.
(3) For purposes of paragraphs (1) and (2), an accredited per-
son described in this paragraph is a person who—
(A) is accredited under subsection (g); or
(B) is accredited under section 523.
(g)(1) Not later than one year after the date of the enactment
of this subsection, the Secretary shall, subject to the provisions of
this subsection, accredit persons for the purpose of conducting in-
spections of establishments that manufacture, prepare, propagate,
compound, or process class II or class III devices that are required
in section 510(h), or inspections of such establishments required to
register pursuant to section 510(i). The owner or operator of such
an establishment that is eligible under paragraph (6) may, from
the list published under paragraph (4), select an accredited person
to conduct such inspections.
(2) Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this
subsection, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register cri-
teria to accredit or deny accreditation to persons who request to
perform the duties specified in paragraph (1). Thereafter, the Sec-
retary shall inform those requesting accreditation, within 60 days
after the receipt of such request, whether the request for accredita-
tion is adequate for review, and the Secretary shall promptly act
on the request for accreditation. Any resulting accreditation shall
state that such person is accredited to conduct inspections at device
establishments identified in paragraph (1). The accreditation of
such person shall specify the particular activities under this sub-
section for which such person is accredited. In the first year fol-
lowing the publication in the Federal Register of criteria to accredit
or deny accreditation to persons who request to perform the duties
specified in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall accredit no more
than 15 persons who request to perform duties specified in para-
graph (1).
(3) An accredited person shall, at a minimum, meet the fol-
lowing requirements:
(A) Such person may not be an employee of the Federal
Government.
(B) Such person shall be an independent organization
which is not owned or controlled by a manufacturer, supplier,
or vendor of articles regulated under this Act and which has
no organizational, material, or financial affiliation (including a
consultative affiliation) with such a manufacturer, supplier, or
vendor.
(C) Such person shall be a legally constituted entity per-
mitted to conduct the activities for which it seeks accreditation.
(D) Such person shall not engage in the design, manufac-
ture, promotion, or sale of articles regulated under this Act.
(E) The operations of such person shall be in accordance
with generally accepted professional and ethical business prac-
tices, and such person shall agree in writing that at a min-
imum the person will—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
282
Sec. 704
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(i) certify that reported information accurately reflects
data reviewed, inspection observations made, other mat-
ters that relate to or may influence compliance with this
Act, and recommendations made during an inspection or at
an inspection’s closing meeting;
(ii) limit work to that for which competence and capac-
ity are available;
(iii) treat information received, records, reports, and
recommendations as confidential commercial or financial
information or trade secret information, except such infor-
mation may be made available to the Secretary;
(iv) promptly respond and attempt to resolve com-
plaints regarding its activities for which it is accredited;
and
(v) protect against the use, in carrying out paragraph
(1), of any officer or employee of the accredited person who
has a financial conflict of interest regarding any product
regulated under this Act, and annually make available to
the public disclosures of the extent to which the accredited
person, and the officers and employees of the person, have
maintained compliance with requirements under this
clause relating to financial conflicts of interest.
(4) The Secretary shall publish on the Internet site of the Food
and Drug Administration a list of persons who are accredited under
paragraph (2). Such list shall be updated to ensure that the iden-
tity of each accredited person, and the particular activities for
which the person is accredited, is known to the public. The updat-
ing of such list shall be no later than one month after the accredi-
tation of a person under this subsection or the suspension or with-
drawal of accreditation, or the modification of the particular activi-
ties for which the person is accredited.
(5)(A) To ensure that persons accredited under this subsection
continue to meet the standards of accreditation, the Secretary shall
(i) audit the performance of such persons on a periodic basis
through the review of inspection reports and inspections by persons
designated by the Secretary to evaluate the compliance status of a
device establishment and the performance of accredited persons,
and (ii) take such additional measures as the Secretary determines
to be appropriate.
(B) The Secretary may withdraw accreditation of any person
accredited under paragraph (2), after providing notice and an op-
portunity for an informal hearing, when such person is substan-
tially not in compliance with the standards of accreditation, or
poses a threat to public health or fails to act in a manner that is
consistent with the purposes of this subsection. The Secretary may
suspend the accreditation of such person during the pendency of
the process under the preceding sentence.
(6)(A) Subject to subparagraphs (B) and (C), a device establish-
ment is eligible for inspections by persons accredited under para-
graph (2) if the following conditions are met:
(i) The Secretary classified the results of the most recent
inspection of the establishment pursuant to subsection (h) or (i)
of section 510 as ‘‘no action indicated’’ or ‘‘voluntary action in-
dicated’’.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
283
Sec. 704
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(ii) With respect to each inspection to be conducted by an
accredited person—
(I) the owner or operator of the establishment submits
to the Secretary a notice requesting clearance to use such
a person to conduct the inspection, and the Secretary pro-
vides such clearance; and
(II) such notice identifies the accredited person whom
the establishment has selected to conduct the inspection,
and the Secretary agrees to the selected accredited person.
(iii) With respect to the devices that are manufactured,
prepared, propagated, compounded, or processed by the estab-
lishment, at least one of such devices is marketed in the
United States, and the following additional conditions are met:
(I) At least one of such devices is marketed, or is in-
tended to be marketed, in one or more foreign countries,
one of which countries certifies, accredits, or otherwise rec-
ognizes the person accredited under paragraph (2) and
identified under subclause (II) of this clause.
(II) The owner or operator of the establishment sub-
mits to the Secretary a statement that the law of a country
in which such a device is marketed, or is intended to be
marketed, recognizes an inspection of the establishment by
the Secretary, and not later than 30 days after receiving
such statement, the Secretary informs the owner or oper-
ator of the establishment that the owner or operator may
submit a notice requesting clearance under clause (ii).
(iv)(I) In the case of an inspection to be conducted pursu-
ant to 510(h), persons accredited under paragraph (2) did not
conduct the two immediately preceding inspections of the es-
tablishment, except that the establishment may petition the
Secretary for a waiver of such condition. Such a waiver may
be granted only if the petition states a commercial reason for
the waiver; the Secretary determines that the public health
would be served by granting the waiver; and the Secretary has
conducted an inspection of the establishment during the four-
year period preceding the date on which the notice under
clause (ii) is submitted to the Secretary. Such a waiver is
deemed to be granted only if the petition states a commercial
reason for the waiver; the Secretary has not determined that
the public health would be served by granting the waiver; and
the owner or operator of the device establishment has re-
quested in writing, not later than 18 months following the
most recent inspection of such establishment by a person ac-
credited under paragraph (2), that the Secretary inspect the es-
tablishment and the Secretary has not conducted an inspection
within 30 months after the most recent inspection. With re-
spect to such a waiver that is granted or deemed to be granted,
no additional such waiver may be granted until after the Sec-
retary has conducted an inspection of the establishment.
(II) In the case of an inspection to be conducted pursuant
to 510(i), the Secretary periodically conducts inspections of the
establishment.
(B)(i) The Secretary shall respond to a notice under subpara-
graph (A) from a device establishment not later than 30 days after
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
284
Sec. 704
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
the Secretary receives the notice. Through such response, the Sec-
retary shall (I) provide clearance under such subparagraph, and
agree to the selection of an accredited person, or (II) make a re-
quest under clause (ii). If the Secretary fails to respond to the no-
tice within such 30-day period, the establishment is deemed to
have such clearance, and to have the agreement of the Secretary
for such selection.
(ii) The request referred to in clause (i)(II) is—
(I) a request to the device establishment involved to sub-
mit to the Secretary compliance data in accordance with clause
(iii); or
(II) a request to the establishment, or to the accredited
person identified in the notice under subparagraph (A), for in-
formation concerning the relationship between the establish-
ment and such accredited person, including information about
the number of inspections of the establishment, or other estab-
lishments owned or operated by the owner or operator of the
establishment, that have been conducted by the accredited per-
son.
The Secretary may make both such requests.
(iii) The compliance data to be submitted by a device establish-
ment under clause (ii) are data describing whether the quality con-
trols of the establishment have been sufficient for ensuring con-
sistent compliance with current good manufacturing practice with-
in the meaning of section 501(h), and data otherwise describing
whether the establishment has consistently been in compliance
with sections 501 and 502 and other applicable provisions of this
Act. Such data shall include complete reports of inspections regard-
ing good manufacturing practice or other quality control audits
that, during the preceding two-year period, were conducted at the
establishment by persons other than the owner or operator of the
establishment, together with all other compliance data the Sec-
retary deems necessary. Data under the preceding sentence shall
demonstrate to the Secretary whether the establishment has facili-
tated consistent compliance by promptly correcting any compliance
problems identified in such inspections.
(iv) Not later than 60 days after receiving compliance data
under clause (iii) from a device establishment, the Secretary shall
provide or deny clearance under subparagraph (A). The Secretary
may deny clearance if the Secretary determines that the establish-
ment has failed to demonstrate consistent compliance for purposes
of clause (iii). The Secretary shall provide to the establishment a
statement of such reasons for such determination. If the Secretary
fails to provide such statement to the establishment within such
60-day period, the establishment is deemed to have such clearance.
(v)(I) A request to an accredited person under clause (ii)(II)
may not seek any information that is not required to be maintained
by such person in records under subsection (f)(1). Not later than 60
days after receiving the information sought by the request, the Sec-
retary shall agree to, or reject, the selection of such person by the
device establishment involved. The Secretary may reject the selec-
tion if the Secretary provides to the establishment a statement of
the reasons for such rejection. Reasons for the rejection may in-
clude that the establishment or the accredited person, as the case
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
285
Sec. 704
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
may be, has failed to fully respond to the request, or that the Sec-
retary has concerns regarding the relationship between the estab-
lishment and such accredited person. If within such 60-day period
the Secretary fails to agree to or reject the selection in accordance
with this subclause, the Secretary is deemed to have agreed to the
selection.
(II) If the Secretary rejects the selection of an accredited per-
son by a device establishment, the establishment may make an ad-
ditional selection of an accredited person by submitting to the Sec-
retary a notice that identifies the additional selection. Clauses (i)
and (ii), and subclause (I) of this clause, apply to the selection of
an accredited person through a notice under the preceding sentence
in the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions
apply to a selection of an accredited person through a notice under
subparagraph (A).
(vi) In the case of a device establishment that under clause (iv)
is denied clearance under subparagraph (A), or whose selection of
an accredited person is rejected under clause (v), the Secretary
shall designate a person to review the findings of the Secretary
under such clause if, during the 30-day period beginning on the
date on which the establishment receives the findings, the estab-
lishment requests the review. The review shall commence not later
than 30 days after the establishment requests the review, unless
the Secretary and the establishment otherwise agree.
(C)(i) In the case of a device establishment for which the Sec-
retary classified the results of the most recent inspection of the es-
tablishment by a person accredited under paragraph (2) as ‘‘official
action indicated’’, the establishment, if otherwise eligible under
subparagraph (A), is eligible for further inspections by persons ac-
credited under such paragraph if (I) the Secretary issues a written
statement to the owner or operator of the establishment that the
violations leading to such classification have been resolved, and (II)
the Secretary, either upon the Secretary’s own initiative or a peti-
tion of the owner or operator of the establishment, notifies the es-
tablishment that it has clearance to use an accredited person for
the inspections. The Secretary shall respond to such petition within
30 days after the receipt of the petition.
(ii) If the Secretary denies a petition under clause (i), the de-
vice establishment involved may, after the expiration of one year
after such denial, again petition the Secretary for a determination
of eligibility for inspection by persons accredited by the Secretary
under paragraph (2). If the Secretary denies such petition, the Sec-
retary shall provide the establishment with such reasons for such
denial within 60 days after the denial. If, as of the expiration of
48 months after the receipt of the first petition, the establishment
has not been inspected by the Secretary in accordance with section
510(h), or has not during such period been inspected pursuant to
section 510(i), as applicable, the establishment is eligible for fur-
ther inspections by accredited persons.
(7)(A) Persons accredited under paragraph (2) to conduct in-
spections shall record in writing their inspection observations and
shall present the observations to the device establishment’s des-
ignated representative and describe each observation. Additionally,
such accredited person shall prepare an inspection report (includ-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
286
Sec. 704
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ing for inspections classified as ‘‘no action indicated’’) in a form and
manner consistent with such reports prepared by employees and of-
ficials designated by the Secretary to conduct inspections.
(B) At a minimum, an inspection report under subparagraph
(A) shall identify the persons responsible for good manufacturing
practice compliance at the inspected device establishment, the
dates of the inspection, the scope of the inspection, and shall de-
scribe in detail each observation identified by the accredited per-
son, identify other matters that relate to or may influence compli-
ance with this Act, and describe any recommendations during the
inspection or at the inspection’s closing meeting.
(C) An inspection report under subparagraph (A) shall be sent
to the Secretary and to the designated representative of the in-
spected device establishment at the same time, but under no cir-
cumstances later than three weeks after the last day of the inspec-
tion. The report to the Secretary shall be accompanied by all writ-
ten inspection observations previously provided to the designated
representative of the establishment.
(D) Any statement or representation made by an employee or
agent of a device establishment to a person accredited under para-
graph (2) to conduct inspections shall be subject to section 1001 of
title 18, United States Code.
(E) If at any time during an inspection by an accredited person
the accredited person discovers a condition that could cause or con-
tribute to an unreasonable risk to the public health, the accredited
person shall immediately notify the Secretary of the identification
of the device establishment subject to inspection and such condi-
tion.
(8) Compensation for an accredited person shall be determined
by agreement between the accredited person and the person who
engages the services of the accredited person, and shall be paid by
the person who engages such services.
(9) Nothing in this subsection affects the authority of the Sec-
retary to inspect any device establishment pursuant to this Act.
(10)(A) For fiscal year 2005 and each subsequent fiscal year, no
device establishment may be inspected during the fiscal year in-
volved by a person accredited under paragraph (2) if—
(i) of the amounts appropriated for salaries and expenses
of the Food and Drug Administration for the preceding fiscal
year (referred to in this subparagraph as the ‘‘first prior fiscal
year’’), the amount obligated by the Secretary for inspections
of device establishments by the Secretary was less than the ad-
justed base amount applicable to such first prior fiscal year;
and
(ii) of the amounts appropriated for salaries and expenses
of the Food and Drug Administration for the fiscal year pre-
ceding the first prior fiscal year (referred to in this subpara-
graph as the ‘‘second prior fiscal year’’), the amount obligated
by the Secretary for inspections of device establishments by the
Secretary was less than the adjusted base amount applicable
to such second prior fiscal year.
(B)(i) Subject to clause (ii), the Comptroller General of the
United States shall determine the amount that was obligated by
the Secretary for fiscal year 2002 for compliance activities of the
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
287
Sec. 704
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
Food and Drug Administration with respect to devices (referred to
in this subparagraph as the ‘‘compliance budget’’), and of such
amount, the amount that was obligated for inspections by the Sec-
retary of device establishments (referred to in this subparagraph as
the ‘‘inspection budget’’).
(ii) For purposes of determinations under clause (i), the Comp-
troller General shall not include in the compliance budget or the
inspection budget any amounts obligated for inspections of device
establishments conducted as part of the process of reviewing appli-
cations under section 515.
(iii) Not later than March 31, 2003, the Comptroller General
shall complete the determinations required in this subparagraph
and submit to the Secretary and the Congress a reporting describ-
ing the findings made through such determinations.
(C) For purposes of this paragraph:
(i) The term ‘‘base amount’’ means the inspection budget
determined under subparagraph (B) for fiscal year 2002.
(ii) The term ‘‘adjusted base amount’’, in the case of appli-
cability to fiscal year 2003, means an amount equal to the base
amount increased by 5 percent.
(iii) The term ‘‘adjusted base amount’’, with respect to ap-
plicability to fiscal year 2004 or any subsequent fiscal year,
means the adjusted based amount applicable to the preceding
year increased by 5 percent.
(11) The authority provided by this subsection terminates on
October 1, 2012.
(12) No later than four years after the enactment of this sub-
section the Comptroller General shall report to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives and the
Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions of the
Senate—
(A) the number of inspections pursuant to subsections (h)
and (i) of section 510 conducted by accredited persons and the
number of inspections pursuant to such subsections conducted
by Federal employees;
(B) the number of persons who sought accreditation under
this subsection, as well as the number of persons who were ac-
credited under this subsection;
(C) the reasons why persons who sought accreditation, but
were denied accreditation, were denied;
(D) the number of audits conducted by the Secretary of ac-
credited persons, the quality of inspections conducted by ac-
credited persons, whether accredited persons are meeting their
obligations under this Act, and whether the number of audits
conducted is sufficient to permit these assessments;
(E) whether this subsection is achieving the goal of ensur-
ing more information about device establishment compliance is
being presented to the Secretary, and whether that information
is of a quality consistent with information obtained by the Sec-
retary pursuant to subsection (h) or (i) of section 510;
(F) whether this subsection is advancing efforts to allow
device establishments to rely upon third-party inspections for
purposes of compliance with the laws of foreign governments;
and
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
288
Sec. 705
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 See the Revolving Fund provision in the Appendix on page 547.
(G) whether the Congress should continue, modify, or ter-
minate the program under this subsection.
(13) The Secretary shall include in the annual report required
under section 903(g) the names of all accredited persons and the
particular activities under this subsection for which each such per-
son is accredited and the name of each accredited person whose ac-
creditation has been withdrawn during the year.
(14) Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection, this sub-
section does not have any legal effect on any agreement described
in section 803(b) between the Secretary and a foreign country.
PUBLICITY
SEC. 705. ø21 U.S.C. 375¿ (a) The Secretary shall cause to be
published from time to time reports summarizing all judgments,
decrees, and court orders which have been rendered under this Act,
including the nature of the charge and the disposition thereof.
(b) The Secretary may also cause to be disseminated informa-
tion regarding food, drugs, devices, or cosmetics in situations in-
volving, in the opinion of the Secretary, imminent danger to health,
or gross deception of the consumer. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to prohibit the Secretary from collecting, reporting, and
illustrating the results of the investigations of the Department.
SEAFOOD INSPECTION
SEC. 706. 1 ø21 U.S.C. 376¿ The Secretary, upon application of
any packer of any seafood for shipment or sale within the jurisdic-
tion of this Act, may, at his discretion, designate inspectors to ex-
amine and inspect such food and the production, packing, and la-
beling thereof. If on such examination and inspection compliance is
found with the provisions of this Act and regulations promulgated
thereunder, the applicant shall be authorized or required to mark
the food as provided by regulation to show such compliance. Serv-
ices under this section shall be rendered only upon payment by the
applicant of fees fixed by regulation in such amounts as may be
necessary to provide, equip, and maintain an adequate and effi-
cient inspection service. Receipts from such fees shall be covered
into the Treasury and shall be available to the Secretary for ex-
penditures incurred in carrying out the purposes of this section, in-
cluding expenditures for salaries of additional inspectors when nec-
essary to supplement the number of inspectors for whose salaries
Congress has appropriated. The Secretary is hereby authorized to
promulgate regulations governing the sanitary and other conditions
under which the service herein provided shall be granted and
maintained and for otherwise carrying out the purposes of this sec-
tion. Any person who forges, counterfeits, simulates, or falsely rep-
resents, or without proper authority uses any mark, stamp, tag,
label, or other identification devices authorized or required by the
provisions of this section or regulations thereunder, shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor, and shall on conviction thereof be subject to im-
prisonment for not more than one year or a fine of not less than
$1,000 nor more than $5,000 or both such imprisonment and fine.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
289
Sec. 707
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ADVERTISING OF CERTAIN FOODS
SEC. 707. ø21 U.S.C. 378¿ (a)(1) Except as provided in sub-
section (c), before the Secretary may initiate any action under
chapter III—
(A) with respect to any food which the Secretary deter-
mines is misbranded under section 403(a)(2) because of its ad-
vertising, or
(B) with respect to a food’s advertising which the Secretary
determines causes the food to be so misbranded,
the Secretary shall, in accordance with paragraph (2), notify in
writing the Federal Trade Commission of the action the Secretary
proposes to take respecting such food or advertising.
(2) The notice required by paragraph (1) shall—
(A) contain (i) a description of the action the Secretary pro-
poses to take and of the advertising which the Secretary has
determined causes a food to be misbranded, (ii) a statement of
the reasons for the Secretary’s determination that such adver-
tising has caused such food to be misbranded, and
(B) be accompanied by the records, documents, and other
written materials which the Secretary determines supports his
determination that such food is misbranded because of such
advertising.
(b)(1) If the Secretary notifies the Federal Trade Commission
under subsection (a) of action proposed to be taken under chapter
III with respect to a food or food advertising and the Commission
notifies the Secretary in writing, within the 30-day period begin-
ning on the date of the receipt of such notice, that—
(A) it has initiated under the Federal Trade Commission
Act an investigation of such advertising to determine if it is
prohibited by such Act or any order or rule under such Act,
(B) it has commenced (or intends to commence) a civil ac-
tion under section 5, 13, or 19 with respect to such advertising
or the Attorney General has commenced (or intends to com-
mence) a civil action under section 5 with respect to such ad-
vertising,
(C) it has issued and served (or intends to issue and serve)
a complaint under section 5(b) of such Act respecting such ad-
vertising, or
(D) pursuant to section 16(b) of such Act it has made a cer-
tification to the Attorney General respecting such advertising,
the Secretary may not, except as provided by paragraph (2), ini-
tiate the action described in the Secretary’s notice to the Federal
Trade Commission.
(2) If, before the expiration of the 60-day period beginning on
the date the Secretary receives a notice described in paragraph (1)
from the Federal Trade Commission in response to a notice of the
Secretary under subsection (a)—
(A) the Commission or the Attorney General does not com-
mence a civil action described in subparagraph (B) of para-
graph (1) of this subsection respecting the advertising de-
scribed in the Secretary’s notice,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
290
Sec. 708
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(B) the Commission does not issue and serve a complaint
described in subparagraph (C) of such paragraph respecting
such advertising, or
(C) the Commission does not (as described in subpara-
graph (D) of such paragraph) make a certification to the Attor-
ney General respecting such advertising, or, if the Commission
does make such a certification to the Attorney General respect-
ing such advertising, the Attorney General, before the expira-
tion of such period, does not cause appropriate criminal pro-
ceedings to be brought against such advertising,
the Secretary may, after the expiration of such period, initiate the
action described in the notice to the Commission pursuant to sub-
section (a). The Commission shall promptly notify the Secretary of
the commencement by the Commission of such a civil action, the
issuance and service by it of such a complaint, or the causing by
the Attorney General of criminal proceedings to be brought against
such advertising.
(c) The requirements of subsections (a) and (b) do not apply
with respect to action under chapter III with respect to any food
or food advertising if the Secretary determines that such action is
required to eliminate an imminent hazard to health.
(d) For the purpose of avoiding unnecessary duplication, the
Secretary shall coordinate any action taken under chapter III be-
cause of advertising which the Secretary determines causes a food
to be misbranded with any action of the Federal Trade Commission
under the Federal Trade Commission Act with respect to such ad-
vertising.
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
SEC. 708. ø21 U.S.C. 379¿ The Secretary may provide any in-
formation which is exempt from disclosure pursuant to subsection
(a) of section 552 of title 5, United States Code, by reason of sub-
section (b)(4) of such section to a person other than an officer or
employee of the Department if the Secretary determines such other
person requires the information in connection with an activity
which is undertaken under contract with the Secretary, which re-
lates to the administration of this Act, and with respect to which
the Secretary (or an officer or employee of the Department) is not
prohibited from using such information. The Secretary shall re-
quire as a condition to the provision of information under this sec-
tion that the person receiving it take such security precautions re-
specting the information as the Secretary may by regulation pre-
scribe.
PRESUMPTION
SEC. 709. ø21 U.S.C. 379a¿ In any action to enforce the re-
quirements of this Act respecting a device, food, drug, or cosmetic
the connection with interstate commerce required for jurisdiction in
such action shall be presumed to exist.
SEC. 710. ø21 U.S.C. 379b¿ CONSOLIDATED ADMINISTRATIVE AND LAB-
ORATORY FACILITY.
(a) AUTHORITY.—The Secretary, in consultation with the Ad-
ministrator of the General Services Administration, shall enter into
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
291
Sec. 721
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 See the Revolving Fund provision in the Appendix on page 547.
contracts for the design, construction, and operation of a consoli-
dated Food and Drug Administration administrative and laboratory
facility.
(b) AWARDING OF CONTRACT.—The Secretary shall solicit con-
tract proposals under subsection (a) from interested parties. In
awarding contracts under such subsection, the Secretary shall re-
view such proposals and give priority to those alternatives that are
the most cost effective for the Federal Government and that allow
for the use of donated land, federally owned property, or lease-pur-
chase arrangements. A contract under this subsection shall not be
entered into unless such contract results in a net cost savings to
the Federal Government over the duration of the contract, as com-
pared to the Government purchase price including borrowing by
the Secretary of the Treasury.
(c) DONATIONS.—In carrying out this section, the Secretary
shall have the power, in connection with real property, buildings,
and facilities, to accept on behalf of the Food and Drug Administra-
tion gifts or donations of services or property, real or personal, as
the Secretary determines to be necessary.
(d) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—There are authorized
to be appropriated to carry out this section $100,000,000 for fiscal
year 1991, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the sub-
sequent fiscal years, to remain available until expended.
SEC. 711. ø21 U.S.C. 379d¿ AUTOMATION OF FOOD AND DRUG ADMINIS-
TRATION.
(a) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary, acting through the Commis-
sioner of Food and Drugs, shall automate appropriate activities of
the Food and Drug Administration to ensure timely review of ac-
tivities regulated under this Act.
(b) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—There are authorized
to be appropriated each fiscal year such sums as are necessary to
carry out this section.
SUBCHAPTER B—COLORS
LISTING AND CERTIFICATION OF COLOR ADDITIVES FOR FOODS, DRUGS,
AND COSMETICS
When Color Additives Deemed Unsafe
SEC. 721. 1 ø21 U.S.C. 379e¿ (a) A color additive shall, with re-
spect to any particular use (for which it is being used or intended
to be used or is represented as suitable) in or on food or drugs or
devices or cosmetics be deemed unsafe for the purposes of the ap-
plication of section 402(c), section 501(a)(4), or section 601(e), as
the case may be unless—
(1)(A) there is in effect, and such additive and such use are
in conformity with, a regulation issued under subsection (b) of
this section listing such additive for such use, including any
provision of such regulation prescribing the conditions under
which such additive may be safely used, and (B) such additive
either (i) is from a batch certified, in accordance with regula-
tions issued pursuant to subsection (c), for such use, or (ii) has,
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
292
Sec. 721
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
with respect to such use, been exempted by the Secretary from
the requirement of certification; or
(2) such additive and such use thereof conform to the
terms of an exemption which is in effect pursuant to subsection
(f) of this section.
While there are in effect regulations under subsections (b) and (c)
of this section relating to a color additive or an exemption pursuant
to subsection (f) with respect to such additive, an article shall not,
by reason of bearing or containing such additive in all respects in
accordance with such regulations or such exemption, be considered
adulterated within the meaning of clause (1) of section 402(a) if
such article is a food, or within the meaning of section 601(a) if
such article is a cosmetic other than a hair dye (as defined in the
last sentence of section 601(a)). A color additive for use in or on a
device shall be subject to this section only if the color additive
comes in direct contact with the body of man or other animals for
a significant period of time. The Secretary may by regulation des-
ignate the uses of color additives in or on devices which are subject
to this section.
Listing of Colors
(b)(1) The Secretary shall, by regulation, provide for separately
listing color additives for use in or on food, color additives for use
in or on drugs or devices, and color additives for use in or on cos-
metics, if and to the extent that such additives are suitable and
safe for any such use when employed in accordance with such regu-
lations.
(2)(A) Such regulations may list any color additive for use gen-
erally in or on food, or in or on drugs or devices, or in or on cos-
metics, if the Secretary finds that such additive is suitable and
may safely be employed for such general use.
(B) If the data before the Secretary do not establish that the
additive satisfies the requirements for listing such additive on the
applicable list pursuant to subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, or
if the proposal is for listing such additive for a more limited use
or uses, such regulations may list such additive only for any more
limited use or uses for which it is suitable and may safely be em-
ployed.
(3) Such regulations shall, to the extent deemed necessary by
the Secretary to assure the safety of the use or uses for which a
particular color additive is listed, prescribe the conditions under
which such additive may be safely employed for such use or uses
(including, but not limited to, specifications, hereafter in this sec-
tion referred to as tolerance limitations, as to the maximum quan-
tity or quantities which may be used or permitted to remain in or
on the article or articles in or on which it is used; specifications as
to the manner in which such additive may be added to or used in
or on such article or articles; and directions or other labeling or
packaging requirements for such additive).
(4) The Secretary shall not list a color additive under this sec-
tion for a proposed use unless the data before him establish that
such use, under the conditions of use specified in the regulations,
will be safe: Provided, however, That a color additive shall be
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
293
Sec. 721
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
deemed to be suitable and safe for the purpose of listing under this
subsection for use generally in or on food, while there is in effect
a published finding of the Secretary declaring such substance ex-
empt from the term ‘‘food additive’’ because of its being generally
recognized by qualified experts as safe for its intended use, as pro-
vided in section 201(s).
(5)(A) In determining, for the purposes of this section, whether
a proposed use of a color additive is safe, the Secretary shall con-
sider, among other relevant factors—
(i) the probable consumption of, or other relevant exposure
from, the additive and of any substance formed in or on food,
drugs or devices, or cosmetics because of the use of the addi-
tive;
(ii) the cumulative effect, if any, of such additive in the
diet of man or animals, taking into account the same or any
chemically or pharmacologically related substance or sub-
stances in such diet;
(iii) safety factors which, in the opinion of experts qualified
by scientific training and experience to evaluate the safety of
color additives for the use or uses for which the additive is pro-
posed to be listed, are generally recognized as appropriate for
the use of animal experimentation data; and
(iv) the availability of any needed practicable methods of
analysis for determining the identity and quantity of (I) the
pure dye and all intermediates and other impurities contained
in such color additive, (II) such additive in or on any article of
food, drug or devices, or cosmetic, and (III) any substance
formed in or on such article because of the use of such addi-
tive.
(B) A color additive (i) shall be deemed unsafe, and shall not
be listed, for any use which will or may result in ingestion of all
or part of such additive, if the additive is found by the Secretary
to induce cancer when ingested by man or animal, or if it is found
by the Secretary, after tests which are appropriate for the evalua-
tion of the safety of additives for use in food, to induce cancer in
man or animal, and (ii) shall be deemed unsafe, and shall not be
listed, for any use which will not result in ingestion of any part of
such additive, if, after tests which are appropriate for the evalua-
tion of the safety of additives for such use, or after other relevant
exposure of man or animal to such additive, it is found by the Sec-
retary to induce cancer in man or animal: Provided, That clause (i)
of this subparagraph (B) shall not apply with respect to the use of
a color additive as an ingredient of feed for animals which are
raised for food production, if the Secretary finds that, under the
conditions of use and feeding specified in proposed labeling and
reasonably certain to be followed in practice, such additive will not
adversely affect the animals for which such feed is intended, and
that no residue of the additive will be found (by methods of exam-
ination prescribed or approved by the Secretary by regulations,
which regulations shall not be subject to subsection (d)) in any edi-
ble portion of such animals after slaughter or in any food yielded
by or derived from the living animal.
(C)(i) In any proceeding for the issuance, amendment, or repeal
of a regulation listing a color additive, whether commenced by a
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
294
Sec. 721
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should be ‘‘this subparagraph’’.
proposal of the Secretary on his own initiative or by a proposal con-
tained in a petition, the petitioner, or any other person who will
be adversely affected by such proposal or by the Secretary’s order
issued in accordance with paragraph (1) of section 701(e) if placed
in effect, may request, within the time specified in this subpara-
graph, that the petition or order thereon, or the Secretary’s pro-
posal, be referred to an advisory committee for a report and rec-
ommendations with respect to any matter arising under subpara-
graph (B) of this paragraph, which is involved in such proposal or
order and which requires the exercise of scientific judgment. Upon
such request, or if the Secretary within such time deems such a re-
ferral necessary, the Secretary shall forthwith appoint an advisory
committee under subparagraph (D) of this paragraph and shall
refer to it, together with all the data before him, such matter aris-
ing under subparagraph (B) for study thereof and for a report and
recommendations on such matter. A person who has filed a petition
or who has requested the referral of a matter to an advisory com-
mittee pursuant to this subparagraph (C) 1, as well as representa-
tives of the Department, shall have the right to consult with such
advisory committee in connection with the matter referred to it.
The request for referral under this subparagraph, or the Sec-
retary’s referral on his own initiative, may be made at any time be-
fore, or within thirty days after, publication of an order of the Sec-
retary acting upon the petition or proposal.
(ii) Within sixty days after the date of such referral, or within
an additional thirty days if the committee deems such additional
time necessary, the committee shall, after independent study of the
data furnished to it by the Secretary and other data before it, cer-
tify to the Secretary a report and recommendations, together with
all underlying data and a statement of the reasons or basis for the
recommendations. A copy of the foregoing shall be promptly sup-
plied by the Secretary to any person who has filed a petition, or
who has requested such referral to the advisory committee. Within
thirty days after such certification, and after giving due consider-
ation to all data then before him, including such report, rec-
ommendation, underlying data, and statement, and to any prior
order issued by him in connection with such matter, the Secretary
shall by order confirm or modify any order therefore issued or, if
no such prior order has been issued, shall by order act upon the
petition or other proposal.
(iii) Where—
(I) by reason of subparagraph (B) of this paragraph, the
Secretary has initiated a proposal to remove from listing a
color additive previously listed pursuant to this section; and
(II) a request has been made for referral of such proposal
to an advisory committee;
the Secretary may not act by order on such proposal until the advi-
sory committee has made a report and recommendations to him
under clause (ii) of this subparagraph and he has considered such
recommendations, unless the Secretary finds that emergency condi-
tions exist necessitating the issuance of an order notwithstanding
this clause.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
295
Sec. 721
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘the daily equivalent of the rate specified at the time of such serv-
ice for grade GS-18 of the General Schedule,’’ and insert in lieu thereof ‘‘the daily equivalent
of the rate of pay for level 4 of the Senior Executive Schedule under section 5382 of title 5,
United States Code,’’.
(D) The advisory committee referred to in subparagraph (C) of
this paragraph shall be composed of experts selected by the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences, qualified in the subject matter referred
to the committee and of adequately diversified professional back-
ground, except that in the event of the inability or refusal of the
National Academy of Sciences to act, the Secretary shall select the
members of the committee. The size of the committee shall be de-
termined by the Secretary. Members of any advisory committee es-
tablished under this Act, while attending conferences or meetings
of their committees or otherwise serving at the request of the Sec-
retary, shall be entitled to receive compensation at rates to be fixed
by the Secretary but at rates not exceeding the daily equivalent of
the rate specified at the time of such service for grade GS–18 of
the General Schedule 1, including traveltime; and while away from
their homes or regular places of business they may be allowed trav-
el expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized
by section 5703 of title 5 of the United States Code for persons in
the Government service employed intermittently. The members
shall not be subject to any other provisions of law regarding the ap-
pointment and compensation of employees of the United States.
The Secretary shall furnish the committee with adequate clerical
and other assistance, and shall by rules and regulations prescribe
the procedure to be followed by the committee.
(6) The Secretary shall not list a color additive under this sub-
section for a proposed use if the data before him show that such
proposed use would promote deception of the consumer in violation
of this Act or would otherwise result in misbranding or adultera-
tion within the meaning of this Act.
(7) If, in the judgment of the Secretary, a tolerance limitation
is required in order to assure that a proposed use of a color addi-
tive will be safe, the Secretary—
(A) shall not list the additive for such use if he finds that
the data before him do not establish that such additive, if used
within a safe tolerance limitation, would achieve the intended
physical or other technical effect; and
(B) shall not fix such tolerance limitation at a level higher
than he finds to be reasonably required to accomplish the in-
tended physical or other technical effect.
(8) If, having regard to the aggregate quantity of color additive
likely to be consumed in the diet or to be applied to the human
body, the Secretary finds that the data before him fail to show that
it would be safe and otherwise permissible to list a color additive
(or pharmacologically related color additives) of all uses proposed
therefor and at the levels of concentration proposed, the Secretary
shall, in determining for which use or uses such additive (or such
related additives) shall be or remain listed, or how the aggregate
allowable safe tolerance for such additive or additives shall be allo-
cated by him among the uses under consideration, take into ac-
count, among other relevant factors (and subject to the paramount
criterion of safety), (A) the relative marketability of the articles in-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
296
Sec. 721
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
volved as affected by the proposed uses of the color additive (or of
such related additives) in or on such articles, and the relative de-
pendence of the industries concerned on such uses; (B) the relative
aggregate amounts of such color additive which he estimates would
be consumed in the diet or applied to the human body by reason
of the various uses and levels of concentration proposed; and (C)
the availability, if any, of other color additives suitable and safe for
one or more of the uses proposed.
Certification of Colors
(c) The Secretary shall further, by regulation, provide (1) for
the certification, with safe diluents or without diluents, of batches
of color additives listed pursuant to subsection (b) and conforming
to the requirements for such additives established by regulations
under such subsection and this subsection, and (2) for exemption
from the requirement of certification in the case of any such addi-
tive, or any listing or use thereof, for which he finds such require-
ment not to be necessary in the interest of the protection of the
public health: Provided, That, with respect to any use in or on food
for which a listed color additive is deemed to be safe by reason of
the proviso to paragraph (4) of subsection (b), the requirement of
certification shall be deemed not to be necessary in the interest of
public health protection.
Procedure for Issuance, Amendment, or Repeal of Regulations
(d) The provisions of section 701 (e), (f), and (g) of this Act
shall, subject to the provisions of subparagraph (C) of subsection
(b)(5) of this section, apply to and in all respects govern pro-
ceedings for the issuance, amendment, or repeal of regulations
under subsection (b) or (c) of this section (including judicial review
of the Secretary’s action in such proceedings) and the admissibility
of transcripts of the record of such proceedings in other pro-
ceedings, except that—
(1) if the proceeding is commenced by the filing of a peti-
tion, notice of the proposal made by the petition shall be pub-
lished in general terms by the Secretary within thirty days
after such filing, and the Secretary’s order (required by para-
graph (1) of section 701(e)) acting upon such proposal shall, in
the absence of prior referral (or request for referral) to an advi-
sory committee, be issued within ninety days after the date of
such filing, except that the Secretary may (prior to such nine-
tieth day) by written notice to the petitioner, extend such nine-
ty-day period to such time (not more than one hundred and
eighty days after the date of filing of the petition) as the Sec-
retary deems necessary to enable him to study and investigate
the petition;
(2) any report, recommendations, underlying data, and
reasons certified to the Secretary by an advisory committee ap-
pointed pursuant to subparagraph (D) of subsection (b)(5) of
this section, shall be made a part of the record of any hearing
if relevant and material, subject to the provisions of section
7(c) of the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C., sec.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
297
Sec. 731
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Probably should strike out ‘‘section 7(c) of the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C., sec.
1006(c))’’ and insert ‘‘section 556(d) of title 5, United States Code’’.
1006(c)) 1. The advisory committee shall designate a member to
appear and testify at any such hearing with respect to the re-
port and recommendations of such committee upon request of
the Secretary, the petitioner, or the officer conducting the hear-
ing, but this shall not preclude any other member of the advi-
sory committee from appearing and testifying at such hearing;
(3) the Secretary’s order after public hearing (acting upon
objections filed to an order made prior to hearings) shall be
subject to the requirements of section 409(f)(2); and
(4) the scope of judicial review of such order shall be in ac-
cordance with the fourth sentence of paragraph (2), and with
the provisions of paragraph (3), of section 409(g).
Fees
(e) The admitting to listing and certification of color additives,
in accordance with regulations prescribed under this Act, shall be
performed only upon payment of such fees, which shall be specified
in such regulations, as may be necessary to provide, maintain, and
equip an adequate service for such purposes.
Exemptions
(f) The Secretary shall by regulations (issued without regard to
subsection (d)) provide for exempting from the requirements of this
section any color additive or any specific type of use thereof, and
any article of food, drug or device, or cosmetic bearing or con-
taining such additive, intended solely for investigational use by
qualified experts when in his opinion such exemption is consistent
with the public health.
NOTE.—Section 201 of the Labor-Federal Security Appropria-
tion Act, 1944 (21 U.S.C. 377), provides that the Secretary in car-
rying into effect this Act ‘‘is authorized to cooperate with associa-
tions and scientific societies in the revision of the United States
Pharmacopeia and in the development of methods of analysis and
mechanical and physical tests necessary to carry out the work of
the Food and Drug Administration.’’
SUBCHAPTER C—FEES
PART 1—FREEDOM OF INFORMATION FEES
SEC. 731. ø21 U.S.C. 379f¿ RECOVERY AND RETENTION OF FEES FOR
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION REQUESTS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary, acting through the Commis-
sioner of Food and Drugs, may—
(1) set and charge fees, in accordance with section
552(a)(4)(A) of title 5, United States Code, to recover all rea-
sonable costs incurred in processing requests made under sec-
tion 552 of title 5, United States Code, for records obtained or
created under this Act or any other Federal law for which re-
sponsibility for administration has been delegated to the Com-
missioner by the Secretary;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
298
Sec. 735
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 In accordance with section 105 of the Prescription Drug User Fee Act of 1992 (P.L. 102–571)
part 2 shall not be in effect after October 1, 2002.
(2) retain all fees charged for such requests; and
(3) establish an accounting system and procedures to con-
trol receipts and expenditures of fees received under this sec-
tion.
(b) USE
OF FEES.—The Secretary and the Commissioner of
Food and Drugs shall not use fees received under this section for
any purpose other than funding the processing of requests de-
scribed in subsection (a)(1). Such fees shall not be used to reduce
the amount of funds made to carry out other provisions of this Act.
(c) WAIVER OF FEES.—Nothing in this section shall supersede
the right of a requester to obtain a waiver of fees pursuant to sec-
tion 552(a)(4)(A) of title 5, United States Code.
PART 2—FEES RELATING TO DRUGS 1
SEC. 735. ø21 U.S.C. 379g¿ DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this subchapter:
(1) The term ‘‘human drug application’’ means an applica-
tion for—
(A) approval of a new drug submitted under section
505(b)(1),
(B) approval of a new drug submitted under section
505(b)(2) after September 30, 1992, which requests ap-
proval of—
(i) a molecular entity which is an active ingredient
(including any salt or ester of an active ingredient), or
(ii) an indication for a use,
that had not been approved under an application sub-
mitted under section 505(b), or
(C) licensure of a biological product under section 351
of the Public Health Service Act.
Such term does not include a supplement to such an applica-
tion, does not include an application with respect to whole
blood or a blood component for transfusion, does not include an
application with respect to a bovine blood product for topical
application licensed before September 1, 1992, an allergenic ex-
tract product, or an in vitro diagnostic biologic product licensed
under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act, does not in-
clude an application with respect to a large volume parenteral
drug product approved before September 1, 1992, does not in-
clude an application for a licensure of a biological product for
further manufacturing use only, and does not include an appli-
cation or supplement submitted by a State or Federal Govern-
ment entity for a drug that is not distributed commercially.
Such term does include an application for licensure, as de-
scribed in subparagraph (D), of a large volume biological prod-
uct intended for single dose injection for intravenous use or in-
fusion.
(2) The term ‘‘supplement’’ means a request to the Sec-
retary to approve a change in a human drug application which
has been approved.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
299
Sec. 735
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(3) The term ‘‘prescription drug product’’ means a specific
strength or potency of a drug in final dosage form—
(A) for which a human drug application has been ap-
proved, and
(B) which may be dispensed only under prescription
pursuant to section 503(b).
Such term does not include whole blood or a blood component
for transfusion, does not include a bovine blood product for top-
ical application licensed before September 1, 1992, an aller-
genic extract product, or an in vitro diagnostic biologic product
licensed under section 351 of the Public Health Service Act,
does not include a large volume parenteral drug product ap-
proved before September 1, 1992, does not include a biological
product that is licensed for further manufacturing use only,
and does not include a drug that is not distributed commer-
cially and is the subject of an application or supplement sub-
mitted by a State or Federal Government entity. Such term
does include a large volume biological product intended for sin-
gle dose injection for intravenous use or infusion.
(4) The term ‘‘final dosage form’’ means, with respect to a
prescription drug product, a finished dosage form which is ap-
proved for administration to a patient without substantial fur-
ther manufacturing.
(5) The term ‘‘prescription drug establishment’’ means a
foreign or domestic place of business which is at one general
physical location consisting of one or more buildings all of
which are within five miles of each other and at which one or
more prescription drug products are manufactured in final dos-
age form. For purposes of this paragraph, the term ‘‘manufac-
tured’’ does not include packaging.
(6) The term ‘‘process for the review of human drug appli-
cations’’ means the following activities of the Secretary with re-
spect to the review of human drug applications and supple-
ments:
(A) The activities necessary for the review of human
drug applications and supplements.
(B) The issuance of action letters which approve
human drug applications or which set forth in detail the
specific deficiencies in such applications and, where appro-
priate, the actions necessary to place such applications in
condition for approval.
(C) The inspection of prescription drug establishments
and other facilities undertaken as part of the Secretary’s
review of pending human drug applications and supple-
ments.
(D) Activities necessary for the review of applications
for licensure of establishments subject to section 351 of the
Public Health Service Act and for the release of lots of bio-
logics under such section.
(E) Monitoring of research conducted in connection
with the review of human drug applications.
(7) The term ‘‘costs of resources allocated for the process
for the review of human drug applications’’ means the expenses
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
300
Sec. 736
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
incurred in connection with the process for the review of
human drug applications for—
(A) officers and employees of the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration, contractors of the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration, advisory committees, and costs related to such offi-
cers, employees, and committees and to contracts with
such contractors,
(B) management of information, and the acquisition,
maintenance, and repair of computer resources,
(C) leasing, maintenance, renovation, and repair of fa-
cilities and acquisition, maintenance, and repair of fix-
tures, furniture, scientific equipment, and other necessary
materials and supplies, and
(D) collecting fees under section 736 and accounting
for resources allocated for the review of human drug appli-
cations and supplements.
(8) The term ‘‘adjustment factor’’ applicable to a fiscal year
is the lower of—
(A) the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers
(all items; United States city average) for April of the pre-
ceding fiscal year divided by such Index for April 1997, or
(B) the total of discretionary budget authority pro-
vided for programs in the domestic category for the imme-
diately preceding fiscal year (as reported in the Office of
Management and Budget sequestration preview report, if
available, required under section 254(c) of the Balanced
Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985) divided
by such budget authority for fiscal year 1997 (as reported
in the Office of Management and Budget final sequestra-
tion report submitted after the end of the 105th Congress,
1st Session).
The terms ‘‘budget authority’’ and ‘‘category’’ in subparagraph
(B) are as defined in the Balanced Budget and Emergency Def-
icit Control Act of 1985, as in effect as of September 1, 1992.
(9) The term ‘‘affiliate’’ means a business entity that has
a relationship with a second business entity if, directly or
indirectly—
(A) one business entity controls, or has the power to
control, the other business entity; or
(B) a third party controls, or has power to control,
both of the business entities.
SEC. 736. ø21 U.S.C. 379h¿ AUTHORITY TO ASSESS AND USE DRUG FEES.
(a) TYPES OF FEES.—Beginning in fiscal year 1998, the Sec-
retary shall assess and collect fees in accordance with this section
as follows:
(1) HUMAN DRUG APPLICATION AND SUPPLEMENT FEE.—
(A) IN
GENERAL.—Each person that submits, on or
after September 1, 1992, a human drug application or a
supplement shall be subject to a fee as follows:
(i) A fee established in subsection (b) for a human
drug application for which clinical data (other than
bioavailability or bioequivalence studies) with respect
to safety or effectiveness are required for approval.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
301
Sec. 736
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(ii) A fee established in subsection (b) for a human
drug application for which clinical data with respect to
safety or effectiveness are not required or a supple-
ment for which clinical data (other than bioavailability
or bioequivalence studies) with respect to safety or ef-
fectiveness are required.
(B) PAYMENT.—The fee required by subparagraph (A)
shall be due upon submission of the application or supple-
ment.
(C) EXCEPTION FOR PREVIOUSLY FILED APPLICATION OR
SUPPLEMENT.—If a human drug application or supplement
was submitted by a person that paid the fee for such appli-
cation or supplement, was accepted for filing, and was not
approved or was withdrawn (without a waiver), the sub-
mission of a human drug application or a supplement for
the same product by the same person (or the person’s li-
censee, assignee, or successor) shall not be subject to a fee
under subparagraph (A).
(D) REFUND OF FEE IF APPLICATION REFUSED FOR FIL-
ING.—The Secretary shall refund 75 percent of the fee paid
under subparagraph (B) for any application or supplement
which is refused for filing.
(E) EXCEPTION FOR DESIGNATED ORPHAN DRUG OR INDI-
CATION.—A human drug application for a prescription drug
product that has been designated as a drug for a rare dis-
ease or condition pursuant to section 526 shall not be sub-
ject to a fee under subparagraph (A), unless the human
drug application includes an indication for other than a
rare disease or condition. A supplement proposing to in-
clude a new indication for a rare disease or condition in a
human drug application shall not be subject to a fee under
subparagraph (A), if the drug has been designated pursu-
ant to section 526 as a drug for a rare disease or condition
with regard to the indication proposed in such supplement.
(F) REFUND OF FEE IF APPLICATION WITHDRAWN.—If an
application or supplement is withdrawn after the applica-
tion or supplement was filed, the Secretary may refund the
fee or a portion of the fee if no substantial work was per-
formed on the application or supplement after the applica-
tion or supplement was filed. The Secretary shall have the
sole discretion to refund a fee or a portion of the fee under
this subparagraph. A determination by the Secretary con-
cerning a refund under this paragraph shall not be review-
able.
(2) PRESCRIPTION DRUG ESTABLISHMENT FEE.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in subparagraph
(B), each person that—
(i) is named as the applicant in a human drug ap-
plication; and
(ii) after September 1, 1992, had pending before
the Secretary a human drug application or supple-
ment,
shall be assessed an annual fee established in subsection
(b) for each prescription drug establishment listed in its
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
302
Sec. 736
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
approved human drug application as an establishment
that manufactures the prescription drug product named in
the application. The annual establishment fee shall be as-
sessed in each fiscal year in which the prescription drug
product named in the application is assessed a fee under
paragraph (3) unless the prescription drug establishment
listed in the application does not engage in the manufac-
ture of the prescription drug product during the fiscal
year. The establishment fee shall be payable on or before
January 31 of each year. Each such establishment shall be
assessed only one fee per establishment, notwithstanding
the number of prescription drug products manufactured at
the establishment. In the event an establishment is listed
in a human drug application by more than one applicant,
the establishment fee for the fiscal year shall be divided
equally and assessed among the applicants whose prescrip-
tion drug products are manufactured by the establishment
during the fiscal year and assessed product fees under
paragraph (3).
(B) EXCEPTION.—If, during the fiscal year, an appli-
cant initiates or causes to be initiated the manufacture of
a prescription drug product at an establishment listed in
its human drug application—
(i) that did not manufacture the product in the
previous fiscal year; and
(ii) for which the full establishment fee has been
assessed in the fiscal year at a time before manufac-
ture of the prescription drug product was begun;
the applicant will not be assessed a share of the establish-
ment fee for the fiscal year in which the manufacture of
the product began.
(3) PRESCRIPTION DRUG PRODUCT FEE.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in subparagraph
(B), each person—
(i) who is named as the applicant in a human
drug application for a prescription drug product which
has been submitted for listing under section 510, and
(ii) who, after September 1, 1992, had pending be-
fore the Secretary a human drug application or sup-
plement,
shall pay for each such prescription drug product the an-
nual fee established in subsection (b). Such fee shall be
payable for the fiscal year in which the product is first
submitted for listing under section 510, or is submitted for
relisting under section 510 if the product has been with-
drawn from listing and relisted. After such fee is paid for
that fiscal year, such fee shall be payable on or before Jan-
uary 31 of each year. Such fee shall be paid only once for
each product for a fiscal year in which the fee is payable.
(B) EXCEPTION.—The listing of a prescription drug
product under section 510 shall not require the person who
listed such product to pay the fee prescribed by subpara-
graph (A) if such product is the same product as a product
approved under an application filed under section 505(b)(2)
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
303
Sec. 736
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
or 505(j), under an abbreviated application filed under sec-
tion 507 (as in effect on the day before the date of enact-
ment of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization
Act of 1997), or under an abbreviated new drug application
pursuant to regulations in effect prior to the implementa-
tion of the Drug Price Competition and Patent Term Res-
toration Act of 1984.
(b) FEE AMOUNTS.—Except as provided in subsections (c), (d),
(f), and (g), the fees required under subsection (a) shall be deter-
mined and assessed as follows:
(1) APPLICATION AND SUPPLEMENT FEES.—
(A) FULL FEES.—The application fee under subsection
(a)(1)(A)(i) shall be $250,704 in fiscal year 1998, $256,338
in each of fiscal years 1999 and 2000, $267,606 in fiscal
year 2001, and $258,451 in fiscal year 2002.
(B) 
OTHER
FEES.—The 
fee 
under 
subsection
(a)(1)(A)(ii) shall be $125,352 in fiscal year 1998, $128,169
in each of fiscal years 1999 and 2000, $133,803 in fiscal
year 2001, and $129,226 in fiscal year 2002.
(2) TOTAL FEE REVENUES FOR ESTABLISHMENT FEES.—The
total fee revenues to be collected in establishment fees under
subsection (a)(2) shall be $35,600,000 in fiscal year 1998,
$36,400,000 in each of fiscal years 1999 and 2000, $38,000,000
in fiscal year 2001, and $36,700,000 in fiscal year 2002.
(3) TOTAL FEE REVENUES FOR PRODUCT FEES.—The total fee
revenues to be collected in product fees under subsection (a)(3)
in a fiscal year shall be equal to the total fee revenues collected
in establishment fees under subsection (a)(2) in that fiscal
year.
(c) ADJUSTMENTS.—
(1) INFLATION ADJUSTMENT.—The fees and total fee reve-
nues established in subsection (b) shall be adjusted by the Sec-
retary by notice, published in the Federal Register, for a fiscal
year to reflect the greater of—
(A) the total percentage change that occurred during
the preceding fiscal year in the Consumer Price Index for
all urban consumers (all items; U.S. city average), or
(B) the total percentage change for such fiscal year in
basic pay under the General Schedule in accordance with
section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, as adjusted by
any locality-based comparability payment pursuant to sec-
tion 5304 of such title for Federal employees stationed in
the District of Columbia.
The adjustment made each fiscal year by this subsection will
be added on a compounded basis to the sum of all adjustments
made each fiscal year after fiscal year 1997 under this sub-
section.
(2) ANNUAL FEE ADJUSTMENT.—Subject to the amount ap-
propriated for a fiscal year under subsection (g), the Secretary
shall, within 60 days after the end of each fiscal year begin-
ning after September 30, 1997, adjust the establishment and
product fees described in subsection (b) for the fiscal year in
which the adjustment occurs so that the revenues collected
from each of the categories of fees described in paragraphs (2)
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
304
Sec. 736
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
and (3) of subsection (b) shall be set to be equal to the reve-
nues collected from the category of application and supplement
fees described in paragraph (1) of subsection (b).
(3) LIMIT.—The total amount of fees charged, as adjusted
under this subsection, for a fiscal year may not exceed the total
costs for such fiscal year for the resources allocated for the
process for the review of human drug applications.
(d) FEE WAIVER OR REDUCTION.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall grant a waiver from
or a reduction of one or more fees assessed under subsection
(a) where the Secretary finds that—
(A) such waiver or reduction is necessary to protect
the public health,
(B) the assessment of the fee would present a signifi-
cant barrier to innovation because of limited resources
available to such person or other circumstances,
(C) the fees to be paid by such person will exceed the
anticipated present and future costs incurred by the Sec-
retary in conducting the process for the review of human
drug applications for such person,
(D) assessment of the fee for an application or a sup-
plement filed under section 505(b)(1) pertaining to a drug
containing an active ingredient would be inequitable be-
cause an application for a product containing the same ac-
tive ingredient filed by another person under section
505(b)(2) could not be assessed fees under subsection
(a)(1), or
(E) the applicant involved is a small business submit-
ting its first human drug application to the Secretary for
review.
(2) USE OF STANDARD COSTS.—In making the finding in
paragraph (1)(C), the Secretary may use standard costs.
(3) RULES RELATING TO SMALL BUSINESSES.—
(A) DEFINITION.—In paragraph (1)(E), the term ‘‘small
business’’ means an entity that has fewer than 500 em-
ployees, including employees of affiliates.
(B) WAIVER OF APPLICATION FEE.—The Secretary shall
waive under paragraph (1)(E) the application fee for the
first human drug application that a small business or its
affiliate submits to the Secretary for review. After a small
business or its affiliate is granted such a waiver, the small
business or its affiliate shall pay—
(i) application fees for all subsequent human drug
applications submitted to the Secretary for review in
the same manner as an entity that does not qualify as
a small business; and
(ii) all supplement fees for all supplements to
human drug applications submitted to the Secretary
for review in the same manner as an entity that does
not qualify as a small business.
(e) EFFECT OF FAILURE TO PAY FEES.—A human drug applica-
tion or supplement submitted by a person subject to fees under
subsection (a) shall be considered incomplete and shall not be ac-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
305
Sec. 736
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
cepted for filing by the Secretary until all fees owed by such person
have been paid.
(f) ASSESSMENT OF FEES.—
(1) LIMITATION.—Fees may not be assessed under sub-
section (a) for a fiscal year beginning after fiscal year 1997 un-
less appropriations for salaries and expenses of the Food and
Drug Administration for such fiscal year (excluding the amount
of fees appropriated for such fiscal year) are equal to or greater
than the amount of appropriations for the salaries and ex-
penses of the Food and Drug Administration for the fiscal year
1997 (excluding the amount of fees appropriated for such fiscal
year) multiplied by the adjustment factor applicable to the fis-
cal year involved.
(2) AUTHORITY.—If the Secretary does not assess fees
under subsection (a) during any portion of a fiscal year because
of paragraph (1) and if at a later date in such fiscal year the
Secretary may assess such fees, the Secretary may assess and
collect such fees, without any modification in the rate, for
human drug applications and supplements, prescription drug
establishments, and prescription drug products at any time in
such fiscal year notwithstanding the provisions of subsection
(a) relating to the date fees are to be paid.
(g) CREDITING AND AVAILABILITY OF FEES.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Fees collected for a fiscal year pursuant
to subsection (a) shall be credited to the appropriation account
for salaries and expenses of the Food and Drug Administration
and shall be available in accordance with appropriation Acts
until expended without fiscal year limitation. Such sums as
may be necessary may be transferred from the Food and Drug
Administration salaries and expenses appropriation account
without fiscal year limitation to such appropriation account for
salaries and expenses with such fiscal year limitation. The
sums transferred shall be available solely for the process for
the review of human drug applications.
(2) COLLECTIONS AND APPROPRIATION ACTS.—The fees au-
thorized by this section—
(A) shall be collected in each fiscal year in an amount
equal to the amount specified in appropriation Acts, or
otherwise made available for obligation, for such fiscal
year, and
(B) shall only be collected and available to defray in-
creases in the costs of the resources allocated for the proc-
ess for the review of human drug applications (including
increases in such costs for an additional number of full-
time equivalent positions in the Department of Health and
Human Services to be engaged in such process) over such
costs, excluding costs paid from fees collected under this
section, for fiscal year 1997 multiplied by the adjustment
factor.
(3) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—There are author-
ized to be appropriated for fees under this section—
(A) $106,800,000 for fiscal year 1998;
(B) $109,200,000 for fiscal year 1999;
(C) $109,200,000 for fiscal year 2000;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
306
Sec. 737
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 In accordance with section 107 of the Medical Device User Fee and Modernization Act of
2002 (P.L. 107–250) part 3 shall not be in effect after October 1, 2007. Such section provides:
SEC. 107. SUNSET CLAUSE.
The amendments made by this title cease to be effective October 1, 2007, except that section
103 with respect to annual reports ceases to be effective January 31, 2008.
(D) $114,000,000 for fiscal year 2001; and
(E) $110,100,000 for fiscal year 2002,
as adjusted to reflect adjustments in the total fee revenues
made under this section and changes in the total amounts col-
lected by application, supplement, establishment, and product
fees.
(4) OFFSET.—Any amount of fees collected for a fiscal year
under this section that exceeds the amount of fees specified in
appropriation Acts for such fiscal year shall be credited to the
appropriation account of the Food and Drug Administration as
provided in paragraph (1), and shall be subtracted from the
amount of fees that would otherwise be authorized to be col-
lected under this section pursuant to appropriation Acts for a
subsequent fiscal year.
(h) COLLECTION OF UNPAID FEES.—In any case where the Sec-
retary does not receive payment of a fee assessed under subsection
(a) within 30 days after it is due, such fee shall be treated as a
claim of the United States Government subject to subchapter II of
chapter 37 of title 31, United States Code.
(i) WRITTEN REQUESTS FOR WAIVERS, REDUCTIONS, AND RE-
FUNDS.—To qualify for consideration for a waiver or reduction
under subsection (d), or for a refund of any fee collected in accord-
ance with subsection (a), a person shall submit to the Secretary a
written request for such waiver, reduction, or refund not later than
180 days after such fee is due.
(j) CONSTRUCTION.—This section may not be construed to re-
quire that the number of full-time equivalent positions in the De-
partment of Health and Human Services, for officers, employers,
and advisory committees not engaged in the process of the review
of human drug applications, be reduced to offset the number of offi-
cers, employees, and advisory committees so engaged.
PART 3—FEES RELATING TO DEVICES 1
SEC. 737. ø21 U.S.C. ???¿ DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this subchapter:
(1) The term ‘‘premarket application’’ means—
(A) an application for approval of a device submitted
under section 515(c) or section 351 of the Public Health
Service Act; or
(B) a product development protocol described in sec-
tion 515(f).
Such term does not include a supplement, a premarket report,
or a premarket notification submission.
(2) The term ‘‘premarket report’’ means a report submitted
under section 515(c)(2).
(3) The term ‘‘premarket notification submission’’ means a
report submitted under section 510(k).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
307
Sec. 737
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(4)(A) The term ‘‘supplement’’, with respect to a panel-
track supplement, a 180-day supplement, a real-time supple-
ment, or an efficacy supplement, means a request to the Sec-
retary to approve a change in a device for which—
(i) an application or report has been approved under
section 515(d), or an application has been approved under
section 351 of the Public Health Service Act; or
(ii) a notice of completion has become effective under
section 515(f).
(B) The term ‘‘panel-track supplement’’ means a supple-
ment to an approved premarket application or premarket re-
port under section 515 that requests a significant change in de-
sign or performance of the device, or a new indication for use
of the device, and for which clinical data are generally nec-
essary to provide a reasonable assurance of safety and effec-
tiveness.
(C) The term ‘‘180-day supplement’’ means a supplement
to an approved premarket application or premarket report
under section 515 that is not a panel-track supplement and re-
quests a significant change in components, materials, design,
specification, software, color additives, or labeling.
(D) The term ‘‘real-time supplement’’ means a supplement
to an approved premarket application or premarket report
under section 515 that requests a minor change to the device,
such as a minor change to the design of the device, software,
manufacturing, sterilization, or labeling, and for which the ap-
plicant has requested and the agency has granted a meeting or
similar forum to jointly review and determine the status of the
supplement.
(E) The term ‘‘efficacy supplement’’ means a supplement to
an approved premarket application under section 351 of the
Public Health Service Act that requires substantive clinical
data.
(5) The term ‘‘process for the review of device applications’’
means the following activities of the Secretary with respect to
the review of premarket applications, premarket reports, sup-
plements, and premarket notification submissions:
(A) The activities necessary for the review of pre-
market applications, premarket reports, supplements, and
premarket notification submissions.
(B) The issuance of action letters that allow the mar-
keting of devices or which set forth in detail the specific
deficiencies in such applications, reports, supplements, or
submissions and, where appropriate, the actions necessary
to place them in condition for approval.
(C) The inspection of manufacturing establishments
and other facilities undertaken as part of the Secretary’s
review of pending premarket applications, premarket re-
ports, and supplements.
(D) Monitoring of research conducted in connection
with the review of such applications, reports, supplements,
and submissions.
(E) Review of device applications subject to section 351
of the Public Health Service Act for an investigational new
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
308
Sec. 737
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
drug application under section 505(i) or for an investiga-
tional device exemption under section 520(g) and activities
conducted in anticipation of the submission of such appli-
cations under section 505(i) or 520(g).
(F) The development of guidance, policy documents, or
regulations to improve the process for the review of pre-
market applications, premarket reports, supplements, and
premarket notification submissions.
(G) The development of voluntary test methods, con-
sensus standards, or mandatory performance standards
under section 514 in connection with the review of such
applications, reports, supplements, or submissions and re-
lated activities.
(H) The provision of technical assistance to device
manufacturers in connection with the submission of such
applications, reports, supplements, or submissions.
(I) Any activity undertaken under section 513 or 515(i)
in connection with the initial classification or reclassifica-
tion of a device or under section 515(b) in connection with
any requirement for approval of a device.
(J) Evaluation of postmarket studies required as a
condition of an approval of a premarket application under
section 515 or section 351 of the Public Health Service Act.
(K) Compiling, developing, and reviewing information
on relevant devices to identify safety and effectiveness
issues for devices subject to premarket applications, pre-
market reports, supplements, or premarket notification
submissions.
(6) The term ‘‘costs of resources allocated for the process
for the review of device applications’’ means the expenses in-
curred in connection with the process for the review of device
applications for—
(A) officers and employees of the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration, contractors of the Food and Drug Adminis-
tration, advisory committees, and costs related to such offi-
cers, employees, and committees and to contracts with
such contractors;
(B) management of information, and the acquisition,
maintenance, and repair of computer resources;
(C) leasing, maintenance, renovation, and repair of fa-
cilities and acquisition, maintenance, and repair of fix-
tures, furniture, scientific equipment, and other necessary
materials and supplies; and
(D) collecting fees and accounting for resources allo-
cated for the review of premarket applications, premarket
reports, supplements, and submissions.
(7) The term ‘‘adjustment factor’’ applicable to a fiscal year
is the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (all
items; United States city average) for April of the preceding
fiscal year divided by such Index for April 2002.
(8) The term ‘‘affiliate’’ means a business entity that has
a relationship with a second business entity if, directly or
indirectly—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
309
Sec. 738
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 So in law. There is no paragraph (2).
(A) one business entity controls, or has the power to
control, the other business entity; or
(B) a third party controls, or has power to control,
both of the business entities.
SEC. 738. ø21 U.S.C. ???¿ AUTHORITY TO ASSESS AND USE DEVICE FEES.
(a) TYPES OF FEES.—Beginning on the date of the enactment
of the Medical Device User Fee and Modernization Act of 2002, the
Secretary shall assess and collect fees in accordance with this sec-
tion as follows:
(1) 1 PREMARKET APPLICATION, PREMARKET REPORT, SUPPLE-
MENT, AND SUBMISSION FEE.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in subparagraph
(B) and subsection (d), each person who submits any of the
following, on or after October 1, 2002, shall be subject to
a fee established under subsection (c)(5) for the fiscal year
involved in accordance with the following:
(i) A premarket application.
(ii) For a premarket report, a fee equal to the fee
that applies under clause (i).
(iii) For a panel track supplement, a fee equal to
the fee that applies under clause (i).
(iv) For a 180-day supplement, a fee equal to 21.5
percent of the fee that applies under clause (i), subject
to any adjustment under subsection (c)(3).
(v) For a real-time supplement, a fee equal to 7.2
percent of the fee that applies under clause (i).
(vi) For an efficacy supplement, a fee equal to the
fee that applies under clause (i).
(vii) For a premarket notification submission, a
fee equal to 1.42 percent of the fee that applies under
clause (i), subject to any adjustment under subsection
(c)(3) 
and 
any 
adjustment 
under 
subsection
(e)(2)(C)(ii).
(B) EXCEPTIONS.—
(i) HUMANITARIAN DEVICE EXEMPTION.—An appli-
cation under section 520(m) is not subject to any fee
under subparagraph (A).
(ii) FURTHER MANUFACTURING USE.—No fee shall
be required under subparagraph (A) for the submis-
sion of a premarket application under section 351 of
the Public Health Service Act for a product licensed
for further manufacturing use only.
(iii) STATE OR FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SPONSORS.—
No fee shall be required under subparagraph (A) for a
premarket application, premarket report, supplement,
or premarket notification submission submitted by a
State or Federal Government entity unless the device
involved is to be distributed commercially.
(iv) PREMARKET
NOTIFICATIONS
BY
THIRD
PAR-
TIES.—No fee shall be required under subparagraph
(A) for a premarket notification submission reviewed
by an accredited person pursuant to section 523.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
310
Sec. 738
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(v) PEDIATRIC CONDITIONS OF USE.—
(I) IN
GENERAL.—No fee shall be required
under subparagraph (A) for a premarket applica-
tion, premarket report, or premarket notification
submission if the proposed conditions of use for
the device involved are solely for a pediatric popu-
lation. No fee shall be required under such sub-
paragraph for a supplement if the sole purpose of
the supplement is to propose conditions of use for
a pediatric population.
(II) SUBSEQUENT PROPOSAL OF ADULT CONDI-
TIONS OF USE.—In the case of a person who sub-
mits a premarket application or premarket report
for which, under subclause (I), a fee under sub-
paragraph (A) is not required, any supplement to
such application that proposes conditions of use
for any adult population is subject to the fee that
applies under such subparagraph for a premarket
application.
(C) PAYMENT.—The fee required by subparagraph (A)
shall be due upon submission of the premarket application,
premarket report, supplement, or premarket notification
submission except that invoices for applications submitted
between October 1, 2002, and the date of the enactment of
the Medical Device User Fee and Modernization Act of
2002 shall be payable on October 30, 2002. Applicants sub-
mitting portions of applications pursuant to section
515(c)(3) shall pay such fees upon submission of the first
portion of such applications. The fees credited to fiscal
year 2003 under this section shall include all fees payable
from October 1, 2002, through September 30, 2003.
(D) REFUNDS.—
(i) APPLICATION
REFUSED
FOR
FILING.—The Sec-
retary shall refund 75 percent of the fee paid under
subparagraph (A) for any application or supplement
that is refused for filing.
(ii) APPLICATION WITHDRAWN BEFORE FILING.—The
Secretary shall refund 75 percent of the fee paid under
subparagraph (A) for any application or supplement
that is withdrawn prior to the filing decision of the
Secretary.
(iii) APPLICATION
WITHDRAWN
BEFORE
FIRST
AC-
TION.—After receipt of a request for a refund of the fee
paid under subparagraph (A) for a premarket applica-
tion, premarket report, or supplement that is with-
drawn after filing but before a first action, the Sec-
retary may return some or all of the fee. The amount
of refund, if any, shall be based on the level of effort
already expended on the review of such application,
report, or supplement. The Secretary shall have sole
discretion to refund a fee or portion of the fee under
this subparagraph. A determination by the Secretary
concerning a refund under this paragraph shall not be
reviewable.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
311
Sec. 738
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(b) FEE REVENUE AMOUNTS.—Except as provided in sub-
sections (c), (d), (e), (g), and (h), the fees under subsection (a) shall
be established to generate the following revenue amounts:
$25,125,000 in fiscal year 2003; $27,255,000 in fiscal year 2004;
$29,785,000 in fiscal year 2005; $32,615,000 in fiscal year 2006,
and $35,000,000 in fiscal year 2007. If legislation is enacted after
the date of the enactment of the Medical Device User Fee and Mod-
ernization Act of 2002 requiring the Secretary to fund additional
costs of the retirement of Federal personnel, fee revenue amounts
under this subsection shall be increased in each year by the
amount necessary to fully fund the portion of such additional costs
that are attributable to the process for the review of device applica-
tions.
(c) ADJUSTMENTS.—
(1) INFLATION ADJUSTMENT.—The revenues established in
subsection (b) shall be adjusted by the Secretary by notice,
published in the Federal Register, for a fiscal year to reflect
the greater of—
(A) the total percentage change that occurred in the
Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (all items;
U.S. city average) for the 12 month period ending June 30
preceding the fiscal year for which fees are being estab-
lished, or
(B) the total percentage change for the previous fiscal
year in basic pay under the General Schedule in accord-
ance with section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, as
adjusted by any locality-based comparability payment pur-
suant to section 5304 of such title for Federal employees
stationed in the District of Columbia.
The adjustment made each fiscal year by this subsection shall
be added on a compounded basis to the sum of all adjustments
made each fiscal year after fiscal year 2003 under this sub-
section.
(2) WORKLOAD ADJUSTMENT.—After the fee revenues estab-
lished in subsection (b) are adjusted for a fiscal year for infla-
tion in accordance with paragraph (1), the fee revenues shall,
beginning with fiscal year 2004, be adjusted further each fiscal
year to reflect changes in the workload of the Secretary for the
process for the review of device applications. With respect to
such adjustment:
(A) The adjustment shall be determined by the Sec-
retary based on a weighted average of the change in the
total number of premarket applications, investigational
new device applications, premarket reports, supplements,
and premarket notification submissions submitted to the
Secretary. The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Reg-
ister the fee revenues and fees resulting from the adjust-
ment and the supporting methodologies.
(B) Under no circumstances shall the adjustment re-
sult in fee revenues for a fiscal year that are less than the
fee revenues for the fiscal year established in subsection
(b), as adjusted for inflation under paragraph (1).
(3) COMPENSATING ADJUSTMENT.—After the fee revenues
established in subsection (b) are adjusted for a fiscal year for
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
312
Sec. 738
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
inflation in accordance with paragraph (1), and for workload in
accordance with paragraph (2), the fee revenues shall, begin-
ning with fiscal year 2004, be adjusted further each fiscal year,
if necessary, to reflect the cumulative amount by which collec-
tions for previous fiscal years, beginning with fiscal year 2003,
fell below the cumulative revenue amounts for such fiscal years
specified in subsection (b), adjusted for such fiscal years for in-
flation in accordance with paragraph (1), and for workload in
accordance with paragraph (2).
(4) FINAL YEAR ADJUSTMENT.—For fiscal year 2007, the
Secretary may, in addition to adjustments under paragraphs
(1) and (2), further increase the fees and fee revenues estab-
lished in subsection (b) if such adjustment is necessary to pro-
vide for not more than three months of operating reserves of
carryover user fees for the process for the review of device ap-
plications for the first three months of fiscal year 2008. If such
an adjustment is necessary, the rationale for the amount of the
increase shall be contained in the annual notice establishing
fee revenues and fees for fiscal year 2007. If the Secretary has
carryover user fee balances for such process in excess of three
months of such operating reserves, the adjustment under this
paragraph shall not be made.
(5) ANNUAL FEE SETTING.—The Secretary shall, 60 days be-
fore the start of each fiscal year after September 30, 2002, es-
tablish, for the next fiscal year, and publish in the Federal
Register, fees under subsection (a), based on the revenue
amounts established under subsection (b) and the adjustment
provided under this subsection and subsection (e)(2)(C)(ii), ex-
cept that the fees established for fiscal year 2003 shall be
based on a premarket application fee of $154,000.
(6) LIMIT.—The total amount of fees charged, as adjusted
under this subsection, for a fiscal year may not exceed the total
costs for such fiscal year for the resources allocated for the
process for the review of device applications.
(d) SMALL BUSINESSES; FEE WAIVER AND FEE REDUCTION RE-
GARDING PREMARKET APPROVAL FEES.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall grant a waiver of the
fee required under subsection (a) for one premarket applica-
tion, or one premarket report, where the Secretary finds that
the applicant involved is a small business submitting its first
premarket application to the Secretary, or its first premarket
report, respectively, for review. In addition, for subsequent pre-
market applications, premarket reports, and supplements
where the Secretary finds that the applicant involved is a
small business, the fees specified in clauses (i) through (vi) of
subsection (a)(1)(A) may be paid at a reduced rate in accord-
ance with paragraph (2)(C).
(2) RULES RELATING TO PREMARKET APPROVAL FEES.—
(A) DEFINITION.—
(i) IN GENERAL.—For purposes of this subsection,
the term ‘‘small business’’ means an entity that re-
ported $30,000,000 or less of gross receipts or sales in
its most recent Federal income tax return for a taxable
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
313
Sec. 738
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
year, including such returns of all of its affiliates,
partners, and parent firms.
(ii) ADJUSTMENT.—The Secretary may adjust the
$30,000,000 threshold established in clause (i) if the
Secretary has evidence from actual experience that
this threshold results in a reduction in revenues from
premarket applications, premarket reports, and sup-
plements that is 16 percent or more than would occur
without small business exemptions and lower fee
rates. To adjust this threshold, the Secretary shall
publish a notice in the Federal Register setting out the
rationale for the adjustment, and the new threshold.
(B) EVIDENCE OF QUALIFICATION.—An applicant shall
pay the higher fees established by the Secretary each year
unless the applicant submits evidence that it qualifies for
a waiver of the fee or the lower fee rate. The applicant
shall support its claim that it meets the definition under
subparagraph (A) by submission of a copy of its most re-
cent Federal income tax return for a taxable year, and a
copy of such returns of its affiliates, partners, and parent
firms. which show an amount of gross sales or receipts
that is less than the maximum established in subpara-
graph (A). The applicant, and each of such affiliates, part-
ners, and parent firms, shall certify that the information
provided is a true and accurate copy of the actual tax
forms they submitted to the Internal Revenue Service. If
no tax forms are submitted for affiliates, partners, or par-
ent firms, the applicant shall certify that the applicant has
no affiliates, partners, or parent firms, respectively.
(C) REDUCED FEES.—Where the Secretary finds that
the applicant involved meets the definition under subpara-
graph (A), the fees established under subsection (c)(5) may
be paid at a reduced rate of 38 percent of the fee estab-
lished under such subsection for a premarket application,
a premarket report, or a supplement.
(D) REQUEST FOR FEE WAIVER OR REDUCTION.—An ap-
plicant seeking a fee waiver or reduction under this sub-
section shall submit supporting information to the Sec-
retary at least 60 days before the fee is required pursuant
to subsection (a). The decision of the Secretary regarding
whether an entity qualifies for such a waiver or reduction
is not reviewable.
(e) SMALL
BUSINESSES; FEE
REDUCTION
REGARDING
PRE-
MARKET NOTIFICATION SUBMISSIONS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Where the Secretary finds that the appli-
cant involved is a small business, the fee specified in sub-
section (a)(1)(A)(vii) may be paid at a reduced rate in accord-
ance with paragraph (2)(C).
(2) RULES RELATING TO PREMARKET NOTIFICATION SUBMIS-
SIONS.—
(A) DEFINITION.—For purposes of this subsection, the
term ‘‘small business’’ means an entity that reported
$30,000,000 or less of gross receipts or sales in its most re-
cent Federal income tax return for a taxable year, includ-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
314
Sec. 738
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
ing such returns of all of its affiliates, partners, and parent
firms.
(B) EVIDENCE OF QUALIFICATION.—An applicant shall
pay the higher fees established by the Secretary each year
unless the applicant submits evidence that it qualifies for
the lower fee rate. The applicant shall support its claim
that it meets the definition under subparagraph (A) by
submission of a copy of its most recent Federal income tax
return for a taxable year, and a copy of such returns of its
affiliates, partners, and parent firms. which show an
amount of gross sales or receipts that is less than the max-
imum established in subparagraph (A). The applicant, and
each of such affiliates, partners, and parent firms, shall
certify that the information provided is a true and accu-
rate copy of the actual tax forms they submitted to the In-
ternal Revenue Service. If no tax forms are submitted for
affiliates, partners, or parent firms, the applicant shall
certify that the applicant has no affiliates, partners, or
parent firms, respectively.
(C) REDUCED FEES.—
(i) IN GENERAL.—Where the Secretary finds that
the applicant involved meets the definition under sub-
paragraph (A), the fee for a premarket notification
submission may be paid at 80 percent of the fee that
applies under subsection (a)(1)(A)(vii), as adjusted
under clause (ii) and as established under subsection
(c)(5).
(ii) ADJUSTMENT PER FEE REVENUE AMOUNT.—For
fiscal year 2004 and each subsequent fiscal year, the
Secretary, in setting the revenue amount under sub-
section (c)(5) for premarket notification submissions,
shall determine the revenue amount that would apply
if all such submissions for the fiscal year involved paid
a fee equal to 1.42 percent of the amount that applies
under subsection (a)(1)(A)(i) for premarket applica-
tions, and shall adjust the fee under subsection
(a)(1)(A)(vii) for premarket notification submissions
such that the reduced fees collected under clause (i) of
this subparagraph, when added to fees for such sub-
missions that are not paid at the reduced rate, will
equal such revenue amount for the fiscal year.
(D) REQUEST FOR REDUCTION.—An applicant seeking a
fee reduction under this subsection shall submit sup-
porting information to the Secretary at least 60 days be-
fore the fee is required pursuant to subsection (a). The de-
cision of the Secretary regarding whether an entity quali-
fies for such a reduction is not reviewable.
(f) EFFECT OF FAILURE TO PAY FEES.—A premarket application,
premarket report, supplement, or premarket notification submis-
sion submitted by a person subject to fees under subsection (a)
shall be considered incomplete and shall not be accepted for filing
by the Secretary until all fees owed by such person have been paid.
(g) CONDITIONS.—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
315
Sec. 738
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(1) PERFORMANCE GOALS THROUGH FISCAL YEAR 2005; TER-
MINATION OF PROGRAM AFTER FISCAL YEAR 2005.—With respect
to the amount that, under the salaries and expenses account
of the Food and Drug Administration, is appropriated for a fis-
cal year for devices and radiological products:
(A)(i) For each of the fiscal years 2003 and 2004, the
Secretary is expected to meet all of the goals identified for
the fiscal year involved in any letter referred to in section
101(3) of the Medical Device User Fee and Modernization
Act of 2002 (referred to in this paragraph as ‘‘performance
goals’’) if the amount so appropriated for such fiscal year,
excluding the amount of fees appropriated for such fiscal
year, is equal to or greater than $205,720,000 multiplied
by the adjustment factor applicable to the fiscal year.
(ii) For each of the fiscal years 2003 and 2004, if the
amount so appropriated for the fiscal year involved, ex-
cluding the amount of fees appropriated for such fiscal
year, is less than the amount that applies under clause (i)
for such fiscal year, the following applies:
(I) The Secretary is expected to meet such goals to
the extent practicable, taking into account the
amounts that are available to the Secretary for such
purpose, whether from fees under subsection (a) or
otherwise.
(II) The Comptroller General of the United States
shall submit to the Congress a report describing
whether and to what extent the Secretary is meeting
the performance goals identified for such fiscal year,
and whether the Secretary will be able to meet all per-
formance goals identified for fiscal year 2005. A report
under the preceding sentence shall be submitted to the
Congress not later than July 1 of the fiscal year with
which the report is concerned.
(B)(i) For fiscal year 2005, the Secretary is expected to
meet all of the performance goals identified for the fiscal
year if the total of the amounts so appropriated for fiscal
years 2003 through 2005, excluding the amount of fees ap-
propriated for such fiscal years, is equal to or greater than
the sum of—
(I) $205,720,000 multiplied by the adjustment fac-
tor applicable to fiscal year 2003;
(II) $205,720,000 multiplied by the adjustment
factor applicable to fiscal year 2004; and
(III) $205,720,000 multiplied by the adjustment
factor applicable to fiscal year 2005.
(ii) For fiscal year 2005, if the total of the amounts so
appropriated for fiscal years 2003 through 2005, excluding
the amount of fees appropriated for such fiscal years, is
less than the sum that applies under clause (i) for fiscal
year 2005, the following applies:
(I) The Secretary is expected to meet such goals to
the extent practicable, taking into account the
amounts that are available to the Secretary for such
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
316
Sec. 738
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
purpose, whether from fees under subsection (a) or
otherwise.
(II) The Comptroller General of the United States
shall submit to the Congress a report describing
whether and to what extent the Secretary is meeting
the performance goals identified for such fiscal year,
and whether the Secretary will be able to meet all per-
formance goals identified for fiscal year 2006. The re-
port under the preceding sentence shall be submitted
to the Congress not later than July 1, 2005.
(C) For fiscal year 2006, fees may not be assessed
under subsection (a) for the fiscal year, and the Secretary
is not expected to meet any performance goals identified
for the fiscal year, if the total of the amounts so appro-
priated for fiscal years 2003 through 2006, excluding the
amount of fees appropriated for such fiscal years, is less
than the sum of—
(i) $205,720,000 multiplied by the adjustment fac-
tor applicable to fiscal year 2006; and
(ii) an amount equal to the sum that applies for
purposes of subparagraph (B)(i).
(D) For fiscal year 2007, fees may not be assessed
under subsection (a) for the fiscal year, and the Secretary
is not expected to meet any performance goals identified
for the fiscal year, if—
(i) the amount so appropriated for the fiscal year,
excluding the amount of fees appropriated for the fis-
cal year, is less than $205,720,000 multiplied by the
adjustment factor applicable to fiscal year 2007; or
(ii) pursuant to subparagraph (C), fees were not
assessed under subsection (a) for fiscal year 2006.
(2) AUTHORITY.—If the Secretary does not assess fees
under subsection (a) during any portion of a fiscal year because
of subparagraph (C) or (D) of paragraph (1) and if at a later
date in such fiscal year the Secretary may assess such fees, the
Secretary may assess and collect such fees, without any modi-
fication in the rate for premarket applications, supplements,
premarket reports, and premarket notification submissions,
and at any time in such fiscal year, notwithstanding the provi-
sions of subsection (a) relating to the date fees are to be paid.
(h) CREDITING AND AVAILABILITY OF FEES.—
(1) IN
GENERAL.—Fees authorized under subsection (a)
shall be collected and available for obligation only to the extent
and in the amount provided in advance in appropriation Acts.
Such fees are authorized to be appropriated to remain avail-
able until expended. Such sums as may be necessary may be
transferred from the Food and Drug Administration salaries
and expenses appropriation account without fiscal year limita-
tion to such appropriation account for salaries and expenses
with such fiscal year limitation. The sums transferred shall be
available solely for the process for the review of device applica-
tions.
(2) COLLECTIONS AND APPROPRIATION ACTS.—
(A) IN GENERAL.—The fees authorized by this section—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
317
Sec. 738
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(i) shall be retained in each fiscal year in an
amount not to exceed the amount specified in appro-
priation Acts, or otherwise made available for obliga-
tion, for such fiscal year, and
(ii) shall only be collected and available to defray
increases in the costs of the resources allocated for the
process for the review of device applications (including
increases in such costs for an additional number of
full-time equivalent positions in the Department of
Health and Human Services to be engaged in such
process) over such costs, excluding costs paid from fees
collected under this section, for fiscal year 2002 multi-
plied by the adjustment factor.
(B) COMPLIANCE.—The Secretary shall be considered
to have met the requirements of subparagraph (A)(ii) in
any fiscal year if the costs funded by appropriations and
allocated for the process for the review of device
applications—
(i) are not more than 3 percent below the level
specified in subparagraph (A)(ii); or
(ii)(I) are more than 3 percent below the level
specified in subparagraph (A)(ii), and fees assessed for
a subsequent fiscal year are decreased by the amount
in excess of 3 percent by which such costs fell below
the level specified in such subparagraph; and
(II) such costs are not more than 5 percent below
the level specified in such subparagraph.
(3) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—There are author-
ized to be appropriated for fees under this section—
(A) $25,125,000 for fiscal year 2003;
(B) $27,255,000 for fiscal year 2004;
(C) $29,785,000 for fiscal year 2005;
(D) $32,615,000 for fiscal year 2006; and
(E) $35,000,000 for fiscal year 2007,
as adjusted to reflect adjustments in the total fee revenues
made under this section and changes in the total amounts col-
lected by application fees.
(4) OFFSET.—Any amount of fees collected for a fiscal year
under this section that exceeds the amount of fees specified in
appropriation Acts for such fiscal year shall be credited to the
appropriation account of the Food and Drug Administration as
provided in paragraph (1), and shall be subtracted from the
amount of fees that would otherwise be authorized to be col-
lected under this section pursuant to appropriation Acts for a
subsequent fiscal year.
(i) COLLECTION OF UNPAID FEES.—In any case where the Sec-
retary does not receive payment of a fee assessed under subsection
(a) within 30 days after it is due, such fee shall be treated as a
claim of the United States Government subject to subchapter II of
chapter 37 of title 31, United States Code.
(j) WRITTEN REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.—To qualify for consider-
ation for a refund under subsection (a)(1)(D), a person shall submit
to the Secretary a written request for such refund not later than
180 days after such fee is due.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
318
Sec. 741
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(k) CONSTRUCTION.—This section may not be construed to re-
quire that the number of full-time equivalent positions in the De-
partment of Health and Human Services, for officers, employees,
and advisory committees not engaged in the process of the review
of device applications, be reduced to offset the number of officers,
employees, and advisory committees so engaged.
SUBCHAPTER D—INFORMATION AND EDUCATION
SEC. 741. ø21 U.S.C. 379k¿ INFORMATION SYSTEM.
The Secretary shall establish and maintain an information sys-
tem to track the status and progress of each application or submis-
sion (including a petition, notification, or other similar form of re-
quest) submitted to the Food and Drug Administration requesting
agency action.
SEC. 742. ø21 U.S.C. 379l¿ EDUCATION.
(a) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall conduct training and
education programs for the employees of the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration relating to the regulatory responsibilities and policies
established by this Act, including programs for—
(1) scientific training;
(2) training to improve the skill of officers and employees
authorized to conduct inspections under section 704;
(3) training to achieve product specialization in such in-
spections; and
(4) training in administrative process and procedure and
integrity issues.
(b) INTRAMURAL
FELLOWSHIPS
AND
OTHER
TRAINING
PRO-
GRAMS.—The Secretary, acting through the Commissioner, may,
through fellowships and other training programs, conduct and sup-
port intramural research training for predoctoral and postdoctoral
scientists and physicians.
SUBCHAPTER E—ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT REVIEW
SEC. 746. ø21 U.S.C. 379o¿ ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an environmental
impact statement prepared in accordance with the regulations pub-
lished in part 25 of title 21, Code of Federal Regulations (as in ef-
fect on August 31, 1997) in connection with an action carried out
under (or a recommendation or report relating to) this Act, shall be
considered to meet the requirements for a detailed statement under
section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
(42 U.S.C. 4332(2)(C)).
SUBCHAPTER
F—NATIONAL
UNIFORMITY
FOR
NONPRESCRIPTION
DRUGS AND PREEMPTION FOR LABELING OR PACKAGING OF COS-
METICS
SEC. 751. ø21 U.S.C. 379r¿ NATIONAL UNIFORMITY FOR NONPRESCRIP-
TION DRUGS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in subsection (b), (c)(1),
(d), (e), or (f), no State or political subdivision of a State may estab-
lish or continue in effect any requirement—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
319
Sec. 751
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(1) that relates to the regulation of a drug that is not sub-
ject to the requirements of section 503(b)(1) or 503(f)(1)(A); and
(2) that is different from or in addition to, or that is other-
wise not identical with, a requirement under this Act, the Poi-
son Prevention Packaging Act of 1970 (15 U.S.C. 1471 et seq.),
or the Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (15 U.S.C. 1451 et
seq.).
(b) EXEMPTION.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Upon application of a State or political
subdivision thereof, the Secretary may by regulation, after no-
tice and opportunity for written and oral presentation of views,
exempt from subsection (a), under such conditions as may be
prescribed in such regulation, a State or political subdivision
requirement that—
(A) protects an important public interest that would
otherwise be unprotected, including the health and safety
of children;
(B) would not cause any drug to be in violation of any
applicable requirement or prohibition under Federal law;
and
(C) would not unduly burden interstate commerce.
(2) TIMELY ACTION.—The Secretary shall make a decision
on the exemption of a State or political subdivision require-
ment under paragraph (1) not later than 120 days after receiv-
ing the application of the State or political subdivision under
paragraph (1).
(c) SCOPE.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—This section shall not apply to—
(A) any State or political subdivision requirement that
relates to the practice of pharmacy; or
(B) any State or political subdivision requirement that
a drug be dispensed only upon the prescription of a practi-
tioner licensed by law to administer such drug.
(2) SAFETY OR EFFECTIVENESS.—For purposes of subsection
(a), a requirement that relates to the regulation of a drug shall
be deemed to include any requirement relating to public infor-
mation or any other form of public communication relating to
a warning of any kind for a drug.
(d) EXCEPTIONS.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—In the case of a drug described in sub-
section (a)(1) that is not the subject of an application approved
under section 505 or section 507 (as in effect on the day before
the date of enactment of the Food and Drug Administration
Modernization Act of 1997) or a final regulation promulgated
by the Secretary establishing conditions under which the drug
is generally recognized as safe and effective and not mis-
branded, subsection (a) shall apply only with respect to a re-
quirement of a State or political subdivision of a State that re-
lates to the same subject as, but is different from or in addition
to, or that is otherwise not identical with—
(A) a regulation in effect with respect to the drug pur-
suant to a statute described in subsection (a)(2); or
(B) any other requirement in effect with respect to the
drug pursuant to an amendment to such a statute made
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
320
Sec. 752
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
on or after the date of enactment of the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration Modernization Act of 1997.
(2) STATE INITIATIVES.—This section shall not apply to a
State requirement adopted by a State public initiative or ref-
erendum enacted prior to September 1, 1997.
(e) NO EFFECT ON PRODUCT LIABILITY LAW.—Nothing in this
section shall be construed to modify or otherwise affect any action
or the liability of any person under the product liability law of any
State.
(f) STATE ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.—Nothing in this section
shall prevent a State or political subdivision thereof from enforcing,
under any relevant civil or other enforcement authority, a require-
ment that is identical to a requirement of this Act.
SEC. 752. ø21 U.S.C. 379s¿ PREEMPTION FOR LABELING OR PACK-
AGING OF COSMETICS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Except as provided in subsection (b), (d), or
(e), no State or political subdivision of a State may establish or con-
tinue in effect any requirement for labeling or packaging of a cos-
metic that is different from or in addition to, or that is otherwise
not identical with, a requirement specifically applicable to a par-
ticular cosmetic or class of cosmetics under this Act, the Poison
Prevention Packaging Act of 1970 (15 U.S.C. 1471 et seq.), or the
Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (15 U.S.C. 1451 et seq.).
(b) EXEMPTION.—Upon application of a State or political sub-
division thereof, the Secretary may by regulation, after notice and
opportunity for written and oral presentation of views, exempt from
subsection (a), under such conditions as may be prescribed in such
regulation, a State or political subdivision requirement for labeling
or packaging that—
(1) protects an important public interest that would other-
wise be unprotected;
(2) would not cause a cosmetic to be in violation of any ap-
plicable requirement or prohibition under Federal law; and
(3) would not unduly burden interstate commerce.
(c) SCOPE.—For purposes of subsection (a), a reference to a
State requirement that relates to the packaging or labeling of a
cosmetic means any specific requirement relating to the same as-
pect of such cosmetic as a requirement specifically applicable to
that particular cosmetic or class of cosmetics under this Act for
packaging or labeling, including any State requirement relating to
public information or any other form of public communication.
(d) NO EFFECT ON PRODUCT LIABILITY LAW.—Nothing in this
section shall be construed to modify or otherwise affect any action
or the liability of any person under the product liability law of any
State.
(e) STATE INITIATIVE.—This section shall not apply to a State
requirement adopted by a State public initiative or referendum en-
acted prior to September 1, 1997.
SUBCHAPTER G—SAFETY REPORTS
SEC. 756. ø21 U.S.C. 379v¿ SAFETY REPORT DISCLAIMERS.
With respect to any entity that submits or is required to sub-
mit a safety report or other information in connection with the
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
321
Sec. 756
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
safety of a product (including a product that is a food, drug, device,
dietary supplement, or cosmetic) under this Act (and any release
by the Secretary of that report or information), such report or infor-
mation shall not be construed to reflect necessarily a conclusion by
the entity or the Secretary that the report or information con-
stitutes an admission that the product involved malfunctioned,
caused or contributed to an adverse experience, or otherwise
caused or contributed to a death, serious injury, or serious illness.
Such an entity need not admit, and may deny, that the report or
information submitted by the entity constitutes an admission that
the product involved malfunctioned, caused or contributed to an ad-
verse experience, or caused or contributed to a death, serious in-
jury, or serious illness.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.007
December 19, 2002 
322
1 Probably should be ‘‘subsection’’.
CHAPTER VIII—IMPORTS AND EXPORTS
IMPORTS AND EXPORTS
SEC. 801. ø21 U.S.C. 381¿ (a) The Secretary of the Treasury
shall deliver to the Secretary of Health and Human Services, upon
his request, samples of food, drugs, devices, and cosmetics which
are being imported or offered for import into the United States, giv-
ing notice thereof to the owner or consignee, who may appear be-
fore the Secretary of Health and Human Services and have the
right to introduce testimony. The Secretary of Health and Human
Services shall furnish to the Secretary of the Treasury a list of es-
tablishments registered pursuant to subsection (i) of section 510
and shall request that if any drugs or devices manufactured, pre-
pared, propagated, compounded, or processed in an establishment
not so registered are imported or offered for import into the United
States, samples of such drugs or devices be delivered to the Sec-
retary of Health and Human Services, with notice of such delivery
to the owner or consignee, who may appear before the Secretary of
Health and Human Services and have the right to introduce testi-
mony. If it appears from the examination of such samples or other-
wise that (1) such article has been manufactured, processed, or
packed under insanitary conditions or, in the case of a device, the
methods used in, or the facilities or controls used for, the manufac-
ture, packing, storage, or installation of the device do not conform
to the requirements of section 520(f), or (2) such article is forbidden
or restricted in sale in the country in which it was produced or
from which it was exported, or (3) such article is adulterated, mis-
branded, or in violation of section 505, then such article shall be
refused admission, except as provided in subsection (b) of this sec-
tion. The Secretary of the Treasury shall cause the destruction of
any such article refused admission unless such article is exported,
under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury,
within ninety days of the date of notice of such refusal or within
such additional time as may be permitted pursuant to such regula-
tions. Clause (2) of the third sentence of this paragraph 1 shall not
be construed to prohibit the admission of narcotic drugs the impor-
tation of which is permitted under the Controlled Substances Im-
port and Export Act.
(b) Pending decision as to the admission of an article being im-
ported or offered for import, the Secretary of the Treasury may au-
thorize delivery of such article to the owner or consignee upon the
execution by him of a good and sufficient bond providing for the
payment of such liquidated damages in the event of default as may
be required pursuant to regulations of the Secretary of the Treas-
ury. If it appears to the Secretary of Health and Human Services
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
323
Sec. 801
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
that an article included within the provisions of clause (3) of sub-
section (a) of this section can, by relabeling or other action, be
brought into compliance with the Act or rendered other than a
food, drug, device, or cosmetic, final determination as to admission
of such article may be deferred and, upon filing of timely written
application by the owner or consignee and the execution by him of
a bond as provided in the preceding provisions of this subsection,
the Secretary may, in accordance with regulations, authorize the
applicant to perform such relabeling or other action specified in
such authorization (including destruction or export of rejected arti-
cles or portions thereof, as may be specified in the Secretary’s au-
thorization). All such relabeling or other action pursuant to such
authorization shall in accordance with regulations be under the su-
pervision of an officer or employee of the Department of Health and
Human Services designated by the Secretary, or an officer or em-
ployee of the Department of the Treasury designated by the Sec-
retary of the Treasury.
(c) All expenses (including travel, per diem or subsistence, and
salaries of officers or employees of the United States) in connection
with the destruction provided for in subsection (a) of this section
and the supervision of the relabeling or other action authorized
under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, the amount
of such expenses to be determined in accordance with regulations,
and all expenses in connection with the storage, cartage, or labor
with respect to any article refused admission under subsection (a)
of this section, shall be paid by the owner or consignee and, in de-
fault of such payment, shall constitute a lien against any future
importations made by such owner or consignee.
(d)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2) and section 804, no
drug subject to section 503(b) or composed wholly or partly of insu-
lin which is manufactured in a State and exported may be im-
ported into the United States unless the drug is imported by the
manufacturer of the drug.
(2) The Secretary may authorize the importation of a drug the
importation of which is prohibited by paragraph (1) if the drug is
required for emergency medical care.
(3)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), no component of a drug, no
component part or accessory of a device, or other article of device
requiring further processing, which is ready or suitable for use for
health-related purposes, and no article of a food additive, color ad-
ditive, or dietary supplement, including a product in bulk form,
shall be excluded from importation into the United States under
subsection (a) if each of the following conditions is met:
(i) The importer of such article of a drug or device or im-
porter of such article of a food additive, color additive, or die-
tary supplement submits to the Secretary, at the time of initial
importation, a statement in accordance with the following:
(I) Such statement provides that such article is in-
tended to be further processed by the initial owner or con-
signee, or incorporated by the initial owner or consignee,
into a drug, biological product, device, food, food additive,
color additive, or dietary supplement that will be exported
by the initial owner or consignee from the United States
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
324
Sec. 801
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
in accordance with subsection (e) or section 802, or with
section 351(h) of the Public Health Service Act.
(II) The statement identifies the manufacturer of such
article and each processor, packer, distributor, or other en-
tity that had possession of the article in the chain of pos-
session of the article from the manufacturer to such im-
porter of the article.
(III) The statement is accompanied by such certificates
of analysis as are necessary to identify such article, unless
the article is a device or is an article described in para-
graph (4).
(ii) At the time of initial importation and before the deliv-
ery of such article to the importer or the initial owner or con-
signee, such owner or consignee executes a good and sufficient
bond providing for the payment of such liquidated damages in
the event of default as may be required pursuant to regula-
tions of the Secretary of the Treasury.
(iii) Such article is used and exported by the initial owner
or consignee in accordance with the intent described under
clause (i)(I), except for any portions of the article that are de-
stroyed.
(iv) The initial owner or consignee maintains records on
the use or destruction of such article or portions thereof, as the
case may be, and submits to the Secretary any such records re-
quested by the Secretary.
(v) Upon request of the Secretary, the initial owner or con-
signee submits a report that provides an accounting of the ex-
portation or destruction of such article or portions thereof, and
the manner in which such owner or consignee complied with
the requirements of this subparagraph.
(B) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the Secretary may
refuse admission to an article that otherwise would be imported
into the United States under such subparagraph if the Secretary
determines that there is credible evidence or information indicating
that such article is not intended to be further processed by the ini-
tial owner or consignee, or incorporated by the initial owner or con-
signee, into a drug, biological product, device, food, food additive,
color additive, or dietary supplement that will be exported by the
initial owner or consignee from the United States in accordance
with subsection (e) or section 802, or with section 351(h) of the
Public Health Service Act.
(C) This section may not be construed as affecting the responsi-
bility of the Secretary to ensure that articles imported into the
United States under authority of subparagraph (A) meet each of
the conditions established in such subparagraph for importation.
(4) The importation into the United States of blood, blood com-
ponents, source plasma, or source leukocytes or of a component, ac-
cessory, or part thereof is not permitted pursuant to paragraph (3)
unless the importation complies with section 351(a) of the Public
Health Service Act or the Secretary permits the importation under
appropriate circumstances and conditions, as determined by the
Secretary. The importation of tissue or a component or part of tis-
sue is not permitted pursuant to paragraph (3) unless the importa-
tion complies with section 361 of the Public Health Service Act.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
325
Sec. 801
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(e)(1) A food, drug, device, or cosmetic intended for export shall
not be deemed to be adulterated or misbranded under this Act if
it—
(A) accords to the specifications of the foreign purchaser,
(B) is not in conflict with the laws of the country to which
it is intended for export,
(C) is labeled on the outside of the shipping package that
it is intended for export, and
(D) is not sold or offered for sale in domestic commerce.
(2) Paragraph (1) does not apply to any device—
(A) which does not comply with an applicable requirement
of section 514 or 515,
(B) which under section 520(g) is exempt from either such
section, or
(C) which is a banned device under section 516,
unless, in addition to the requirements of paragraph (1), either (i)
the Secretary has determined that the exportation of the device is
not contrary to public health and safety and has the approval of
the country to which it is intended for export or (ii) the device is
eligible for export under section 802.
(3) A new animal drug that requires approval under section
512 shall not be exported pursuant to paragraph (1) if such drug
has been banned in the United States.
(4)(A) Any person who exports a drug, animal drug, or device
may request that the Secretary—
(i) certify in writing that the exported drug, animal drug,
or device meets the requirements of paragraph (1) or section
802; or
(ii) certify in writing that the drug, animal drug, or device
being exported meets the applicable requirements of this Act
upon a showing that the drug or device meets the applicable
requirements of this Act.
The Secretary shall issue such a certification within 20 days of the
receipt of a request for such certification.
(B) If the Secretary issues a written export certification within
the 20 days prescribed by subparagraph (A), a fee for such certifi-
cation may be charged but shall not exceed $175 for each certifi-
cation. Fees collected for a fiscal year pursuant to this subpara-
graph shall be credited to the appropriation account for salaries
and expenses of the Food and Drug Administration and shall be
available in accordance with appropriations Acts until expended
without fiscal year limitation. Such fees shall be collected in each
fiscal year in an amount equal to the amount specified in appro-
priations Acts for such fiscal year and shall only be collected and
available for the costs of the Food and Drug Administration.
(f)(1) If a drug (other than insulin, an antibiotic drug, an ani-
mal drug, or a drug exported under section 802) being exported in
accordance with subsection (e) is being exported to a country that
has different or additional labeling requirements or conditions for
use and such country requires the drug to be labeled in accordance
with those requirements or uses, such drug may be labeled in ac-
cordance with such requirements and conditions for use in the
country to which such drug is being exported if it also is labeled
in accordance with the requirements of this Act.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
326
Sec. 801
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(2) If, pursuant to paragraph (1), the labeling of an exported
drug includes conditions for use that have not been approved under
this Act, the labeling must state that such conditions for use have
not been approved under this Act. A drug exported under section
802 is exempt from this section.
(g)(1) With respect to a prescription drug being imported or of-
fered for import into the United States, the Secretary, in the case
of an individual who is not in the business of such importations,
may not send a warning notice to the individual unless the fol-
lowing conditions are met:
(A) The notice specifies, as applicable to the importation of
the drug, that the Secretary has made a determination that—
(i) importation is in violation of section 801(a) because
the drug is or appears to be adulterated, misbranded, or
in violation of section 505;
(ii) importation is in violation of section 801(a) because
the drug is or appears to be forbidden or restricted in sale
in the country in which it was produced or from which it
was exported;
(iii) importation is or appears to be in violation of sec-
tion 801(d)(1); or
(iv) importation otherwise is or appears to be in viola-
tion of Federal law.
(B) The notice does not specify any provision described in
subparagraph (A) that is not applicable to the importation of
the drug.
(C) The notice states the reasons underlying such deter-
mination by the Secretary, including a brief application to the
principal facts involved of the provision of law described in
subparagraph (A) that is the basis of the determination by the
Secretary.
(2) For purposes of this section, the term ‘‘warning notice’’,
with respect to the importation of a drug, means a communication
from the Secretary (written or otherwise) notifying a person, or
clearly suggesting to the person, that importing the drug for per-
sonal use is, or appears to be, a violation of this Act.
(h)(1) The Secretary shall give high priority to increasing the
number of inspections under this section for the purpose of ena-
bling the Secretary to inspect food offered for import at ports of
entry into the United States, with the greatest priority given to in-
spections to detect the intentional adulteration of food.
(2) The Secretary shall give high priority to making necessary
improvements to the information management systems of the Food
and Drug Administration that contain information related to foods
imported or offered for import into the United States for purposes
of improving the ability of the Secretary to allocate resources, de-
tect the intentional adulteration of food, and facilitate the importa-
tion of food that is in compliance with this Act.
(3) The Secretary shall improve linkages with other regulatory
agencies of the Federal Government that share responsibility for
food safety, and shall with respect to such safety improve linkages
with the States and Indian tribes (as defined in section 4(e) of the
Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C.
450b(e))).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
327
Sec. 801
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(i)(1) For use in inspections of food under this section, the Sec-
retary shall provide for research on the development of tests and
sampling methodologies—
(A) whose purpose is to test food in order to rapidly detect
the adulteration of the food, with the greatest priority given to
detect the intentional adulteration of food; and
(B) whose results offer significant improvements over the
available technology in terms of accuracy, timing, or costs.
(2) In providing for research under paragraph (1), the Sec-
retary shall give priority to conducting research on the develop-
ment of tests that are suitable for inspections of food at ports of
entry into the United States.
(3) In providing for research under paragraph (1), the Sec-
retary shall as appropriate coordinate with the Director of the Cen-
ters for Disease Control and Prevention, the Director of the Na-
tional Institutes of Health, the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency, and the Secretary of Agriculture.
(4) The Secretary shall annually submit to the Committee on
Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, and the
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Sen-
ate, a report describing the progress made in research under para-
graph (1), including progress regarding paragraph (2).
(j)(1) If an officer or qualified employee of the Food and Drug
Administration has credible evidence or information indicating that
an article of food presents a threat of serious adverse health con-
sequences or death to humans or animals, and such officer or quali-
fied employee is unable to inspect, examine, or investigate such ar-
ticle upon the article being offered for import at a port of entry into
the United States, the officer or qualified employee shall request
the Secretary of Treasury to hold the food at the port of entry for
a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 24 hours, for the purpose
of enabling the Secretary to inspect, examine, or investigate the ar-
ticle as appropriate.
(2) The Secretary shall request the Secretary of Treasury to re-
move an article held pursuant to paragraph (1) to a secure facility,
as appropriate. During the period of time that such article is so
held, the article shall not be transferred by any person from the
port of entry into the United States for the article, or from the se-
cure facility to which the article has been removed, as the case may
be. Subsection (b) does not authorize the delivery of the article pur-
suant to the execution of a bond while the article is so held.
(3) An officer or qualified employee of the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration may make a request under paragraph (1) only if the
Secretary or an official designated by the Secretary approves the
request. An official may not be so designated unless the official is
the director of the district under this Act in which the article in-
volved is located, or is an official senior to such director.
(4) With respect to an article of food for which a request under
paragraph (1) is made, the Secretary, promptly after the request is
made, shall notify the State in which the port of entry involved is
located that the request has been made, and as applicable, that
such article is being held under this subsection.
(k)(1) If an article of food is being imported or offered for im-
port into the United States, and the importer, owner, or consignee
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
328
Sec. 801
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 So in law. There is no paragraph (2).
of the article is a person who has been debarred under section
306(b)(3), such article shall be held at the port of entry for the arti-
cle, and may not be delivered to such person. Subsection (b) does
not authorize the delivery of the article pursuant to the execution
of a bond while the article is so held. The article shall be removed
to a secure facility, as appropriate. During the period of time that
such article is so held, the article shall not be transferred by any
person from the port of entry into the United States for the article,
or from the secure facility to which the article has been removed,
as the case may be.
(2) An article of food held under paragraph (1) may be deliv-
ered to a person who is not a debarred person under section
306(b)(3) if such person affirmatively establishes, at the expense of
the person, that the article complies with the requirements of this
Act, as determined by the Secretary.
(l)(1) 1 If an article of food is being imported or offered for im-
port into the United States, and such article is from a foreign facil-
ity for which a registration has not been submitted to the Secretary
under section 415, such article shall be held at the port of entry
for the article, and may not be delivered to the importer, owner,
or consignee of the article, until the foreign facility is so registered.
Subsection (b) does not authorize the delivery of the article pursu-
ant to the execution of a bond while the article is so held. The arti-
cle shall be removed to a secure facility, as appropriate. During the
period of time that such article is so held, the article shall not be
transferred by any person from the port of entry into the United
States for the article, or from the secure facility to which the article
has been removed, as the case may be.
(m)(1) In the case of an article of food that is being imported
or offered for import into the United States, the Secretary, after
consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall by regulation
require, for the purpose of enabling such article to be inspected at
ports of entry into the United States, the submission to the Sec-
retary of a notice providing the identity of each of the following:
The article; the manufacturer and shipper of the article; if known
within the specified period of time that notice is required to be pro-
vided, the grower of the article; the country from which the article
originates; the country from which the article is shipped; and the
anticipated port of entry for the article. An article of food imported
or offered for import without submission of such notice in accord-
ance with the requirements under this paragraph shall be refused
admission into the United States. Nothing in this section may be
construed as a limitation on the port of entry for an article of food.
(2)(A) Regulations under paragraph (1) shall require that a no-
tice under such paragraph be provided by a specified period of time
in advance of the time of the importation of the article of food in-
volved or the offering of the food for import, which period shall be
no less than the minimum amount of time necessary for the Sec-
retary to receive, review, and appropriately respond to such notifi-
cation, but may not exceed five days. In determining the specified
period of time required under this subparagraph, the Secretary
may consider, but is not limited to consideration of, the effect on
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
329
Sec. 801
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
commerce of such period of time, the locations of the various ports
of entry into the United States, the various modes of transpor-
tation, the types of food imported into the United States, and any
other such consideration. Nothing in the preceding sentence may be
construed as a limitation on the obligation of the Secretary to re-
ceive, review, and appropriately respond to any notice under para-
graph (1).
(B)(i) If an article of food is being imported or offered for im-
port into the United States and a notice under paragraph (1) is not
provided in advance in accordance with the requirements under
paragraph (1), such article shall be held at the port of entry for the
article, and may not be delivered to the importer, owner, or con-
signee of the article, until such notice is submitted to the Sec-
retary, and the Secretary examines the notice and determines that
the notice is in accordance with the requirements under paragraph
(1). Subsection (b) does not authorize the delivery of the article pur-
suant to the execution of a bond while the article is so held. The
article shall be removed to a secure facility, as appropriate. During
the period of time that such article is so held, the article shall not
be transferred by any person from the port of entry into the United
States for the article, or from the secure facility to which the article
has been removed, as the case may be.
(ii) In carrying out clause (i) with respect to an article of food,
the Secretary shall determine whether there is in the possession of
the Secretary any credible evidence or information indicating that
such article presents a threat of serious adverse health con-
sequences or death to humans or animals.
(3)(A) This subsection may not be construed as limiting the au-
thority of the Secretary to obtain information under any other pro-
vision of this Act.
(B) This subsection may not be construed as authorizing the
Secretary to impose any requirements with respect to a food to the
extent that it is within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Secretary
of Agriculture pursuant to the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21
U.S.C. 601 et seq.), the Poultry Products Inspection Act (21 U.S.C.
451 et seq.), or the Egg Products Inspection Act (21 U.S.C. 1031 et
seq.).
(n)(1) If a food has been refused admission under subsection
(a), other than such a food that is required to be destroyed, the Sec-
retary may require the owner or consignee of the food to affix to
the container of the food a label that clearly and conspicuously
bears the statement: ‘‘UNITED STATES: REFUSED ENTRY’’.
(2) All expenses in connection with affixing a label under para-
graph (1) shall be paid by the owner or consignee of the food in-
volved, and in default of such payment, shall constitute a lien
against future importations made by such owner or consignee.
(3) A requirement under paragraph (1) remains in effect until
the Secretary determines that the food involved has been brought
into compliance with this Act.
(o) If an article that is a drug or device is being imported or
offered for import into the United States, and the importer, owner,
or consignee of such article does not, at the time of offering the ar-
ticle for import, submit to the Secretary a statement that identifies
the registration under section 510(i) of each establishment that
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
330
Sec. 802
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
1 Moved to correct form.
with respect to such article is required under such section to reg-
ister with the Secretary, the article may be refused admission. If
the article is refused admission for failure to submit such a state-
ment, the article shall be held at the port of entry for the article,
and may not be delivered to the importer, owner, or consignee of
the article, until such a statement is submitted to the Secretary.
Subsection (b) does not authorize the delivery of the article pursu-
ant to the execution of a bond while the article is so held. The arti-
cle shall be removed to a secure facility, as appropriate. During the
period of time that such article is so held, the article shall not be
transferred by any person from the port of entry into the United
States for the article, or from the secure facility to which the article
has been removed, as the case may be.
EXPORTS OF CERTAIN UNAPPROVED PRODUCTS
SEC. 802. ø21 U.S.C. 382¿ (a) A drug or device—
(1) which, in the case of a drug—
(A)(i) requires approval by the Secretary under section
505 before such drug may be introduced or delivered for
introduction into interstate commerce; or
(ii) requires licensing by the Secretary under section
351 of the Public Health Service Act or by the Secretary
of Agriculture under the Act of March 4, 1913 (known as
the Virus-Serum Toxin Act) before it may be introduced or
delivered for introduction into interstate commerce;
(B) does not have such approval or license; and
(C) is not exempt from such sections or Act; and
(2) which, in the case of a device—
(A) does not comply with an applicable requirement
under section 514 or 515;
(B) under section 520(g) is exempt from either such
section; or
(C) is a banned device under section 516, is adulter-
ated, misbranded, and in violation of such sections or Act
unless the export of the drug or device is, except as pro-
vided in subsection (f), authorized under subsection (b), (c),
(d), or (e) or section 801(e)(2).
If 1 a drug or device described in paragraphs (1) and (2) may be ex-
ported under subsection (b) and if an application for such drug or
device under section 505 or 515 or section 351 of the Public Health
Service Act was disapproved, the Secretary shall notify the appro-
priate public health official of the country to which such drug will
be exported of such disapproval.
(b)(1)(A) A drug or device described in subsection (a) may be
exported to any country, if the drug or device complies with the
laws of that country and has valid marketing authorization by the
appropriate authority—
(i) in Australia, Canada, Israel, Japan, New Zealand, Swit-
zerland, or South Africa; or
(ii) in the European Union or a country in the European
Economic Area (the countries in the European Union and the
European Free Trade Association) if the drug or device is mar-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
331
Sec. 802
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
keted in that country or the drug or device is authorized for
general marketing in the European Economic Area.
(B) The Secretary may designate an additional country to be
included in the list of countries described in clauses (i) and (ii) of
subparagraph (A) if all of the following requirements are met in
such country:
(i) Statutory or regulatory requirements which require the
review of drugs and devices for safety and effectiveness by an
entity of the government of such country and which authorize
the approval of only those drugs and devices which have been
determined to be safe and effective by experts employed by or
acting on behalf of such entity and qualified by scientific train-
ing and experience to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of
drugs and devices on the basis of adequate and well-controlled
investigations, including clinical investigations, conducted by
experts qualified by scientific training and experience to evalu-
ate the safety and effectiveness of drugs and devices.
(ii) Statutory or regulatory requirements that the methods
used in, and the facilities and controls used for—
(I) the manufacture, processing, and packing of drugs
in the country are adequate to preserve their identity,
quality, purity, and strength; and
(II) the manufacture, preproduction design validation,
packing, storage, and installation of a device are adequate
to assure that the device will be safe and effective.
(iii) Statutory or regulatory requirements for the reporting
of adverse reactions to drugs and devices and procedures to
withdraw approval and remove drugs and devices found not to
be safe or effective.
(iv) Statutory or regulatory requirements that the labeling
and promotion of drugs and devices must be in accordance with
the approval of the drug or device.
(v) The valid marketing authorization system in such
country or countries is equivalent to the systems in the coun-
tries described in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A).
The Secretary shall not delegate the authority granted under this
subparagraph.
(C) An appropriate country official, manufacturer, or exporter
may request the Secretary to take action under subparagraph (B)
to designate an additional country or countries to be added to the
list of countries described in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A)
by submitting documentation to the Secretary in support of such
designation. Any person other than a country requesting such des-
ignation shall include, along with the request, a letter from the
country indicating the desire of such country to be designated.
(2) A drug described in subsection (a) may be directly exported
to a country which is not listed in clause (i) or (ii) of paragraph
(1)(A) if—
(A) the drug complies with the laws of that country and
has valid marketing authorization by the responsible authority
in that country; and
(B) the Secretary determines that all of the following re-
quirements are met in that country:
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
332
Sec. 802
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(i) Statutory or regulatory requirements which require
the review of drugs for safety and effectiveness by an enti-
ty of the government of such country and which authorize
the approval of only those drugs which have been deter-
mined to be safe and effective by experts employed by or
acting on behalf of such entity and qualified by scientific
training and experience to evaluate the safety and effec-
tiveness of drugs on the basis of adequate and well-con-
trolled investigations, including clinical investigations, con-
ducted by experts qualified by scientific training and expe-
rience to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of drugs.
(ii) Statutory or regulatory requirements that the
methods used in, and the facilities and controls used for
the manufacture, processing, and packing of drugs in the
country are adequate to preserve their identity, quality,
purity, and strength.
(iii) Statutory or regulatory requirements for the re-
porting of adverse reactions to drugs and procedures to
withdraw approval and remove drugs found not to be safe
or effective.
(iv) Statutory or regulatory requirements that the la-
beling and promotion of drugs must be in accordance with
the approval of the drug.
(3) The exporter of a drug described in subsection (a) which
would not meet the conditions for approval under this Act or condi-
tions for approval of a country described in clause (i) or (ii) of para-
graph (1)(A) may petition the Secretary for authorization to export
such drug to a country which is not described in clause (i) or (ii)
of paragraph (1)(A) or which is not described in paragraph (2). The
Secretary shall permit such export if—
(A) the person exporting the drug—
(i) certifies that the drug would not meet the condi-
tions for approval under this Act or the conditions for ap-
proval of a country described in clause (i) or (ii) of para-
graph (1)(A); and
(ii) provides the Secretary with credible scientific evi-
dence, acceptable to the Secretary, that the drug would be
safe and effective under the conditions of use in the coun-
try to which it is being exported; and
(B) the appropriate health authority in the country to
which the drug is being exported—
(i) requests approval of the export of the drug to such
country;
(ii) certifies that the health authority understands
that the drug is not approved under this Act or in a coun-
try described in clause (i) or (ii) of paragraph (1)(A); and
(iii) concurs that the scientific evidence provided pur-
suant to subparagraph (A) is credible scientific evidence
that the drug would be reasonably safe and effective in
such country.
The Secretary shall take action on a request for export of a drug
under this paragraph within 60 days of receiving such request.
(c) A drug or device intended for investigational use in any
country described in clause (i) or (ii) of subsection (b)(1)(A) may be
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
333
Sec. 802
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
exported in accordance with the laws of that country and shall be
exempt from regulation under section 505(i) or 520(g).
(d) A drug or device intended for formulation, filling, pack-
aging, labeling, or further processing in anticipation of market au-
thorization in any country described in clause (i) or (ii) of sub-
section (b)(1)(A) may be exported for use in accordance with the
laws of that country.
(e)(1) A drug or device which is used in the diagnosis, preven-
tion, or treatment of a tropical disease or another disease not of
significant prevalence in the United States and which does not oth-
erwise qualify for export under this section shall, upon approval of
an application, be permitted to be exported if the Secretary finds
that the drug or device will not expose patients in such country to
an unreasonable risk of illness or injury and the probable benefit
to health from the use of the drug or device (under conditions of
use prescribed, recommended, or suggested in the labeling or pro-
posed labeling of the drug or device) outweighs the risk of injury
or illness from its use, taking into account the probable risks and
benefits of currently available drug or device treatment.
(2) The holder of an approved application for the export of a
drug or device under this subsection shall report to the Secretary—
(A) the receipt of any credible information indicating that
the drug or device is being or may have been exported from a
country for which the Secretary made a finding under para-
graph (1)(A) to a country for which the Secretary cannot make
such a finding; and
(B) the receipt of any information indicating adverse reac-
tions to such drug.
(3)(A) If the Secretary determines that—
(i) a drug or device for which an application is approved
under paragraph (1) does not continue to meet the require-
ments of such paragraph; or
(ii) the holder of an approved application under paragraph
(1) has not made the report required by paragraph (2),
the Secretary may, after providing the holder of the application an
opportunity for an informal hearing, withdraw the approved appli-
cation.
(B) If the Secretary determines that the holder of an approved
application under paragraph (1) or an importer is exporting a drug
or device from the United States to an importer and such importer
is exporting the drug or device to a country for which the Secretary
cannot make a finding under paragraph (1) and such export pre-
sents an imminent hazard, the Secretary shall immediately pro-
hibit the export of the drug or device to such importer, provide the
person exporting the drug or device from the United States prompt
notice of the prohibition, and afford such person an opportunity for
an expedited hearing.
(f) A drug or device may not be exported under this section—
(1) if the drug or device is not manufactured, processed,
packaged, and held in substantial conformity with current good
manufacturing practice requirements or does not meet inter-
national standards as certified by an international standards
organization recognized by the Secretary;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
334
Sec. 802
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(2) if the drug or device is adulterated under clause (1),
(2)(A), or (3) of section 501(a) or subsection (c) or (d) of section
501;
(3) if the requirements of subparagraphs (A) through (D)
of section 801(e)(1) have not been met;
(4)(A) if the drug or device is the subject of a notice by the
Secretary or the Secretary of Agriculture of a determination
that the probability of reimportation of the exported drug or
device would present an imminent hazard to the public health
and safety of the United States and the only means of limiting
the hazard is to prohibit the export of the drug or device; or
(B) if the drug or device presents an imminent hazard to
the public health of the country to which the drug or device
would be exported;
(5) if the labeling of the drug or device is not—
(A) in accordance with the requirements and condi-
tions for use in—
(i) the country in which the drug or device re-
ceived valid marketing authorization under subsection
(b); and
(ii) the country to which the drug or device would
be exported; and
(B) in the language and units of measurement of the
country to which the drug or device would be exported or
in the language designated by such country; or
(6) if the drug or device is not promoted in accordance with
the labeling requirements set forth in paragraph (5).
In making a finding under paragraph (4)(B), (5), or (6) the Sec-
retary shall consult with the appropriate public health official in
the affected country.
(g) The exporter of a drug or device exported under subsection
(b)(1) shall provide a simple notification to the Secretary identi-
fying the drug or device when the exporter first begins to export
such drug or device to any country listed in clause (i) or (ii) of sub-
section (b)(1)(A). When an exporter of a drug or device first begins
to export a drug or device to a country which is not listed in clause
(i) or (ii) of subsection (b)(1)(A), the exporter shall provide a simple
notification to the Secretary identifying the drug or device and the
country to which such drug or device is being exported. Any ex-
porter of a drug or device shall maintain records of all drugs or de-
vices exported and the countries to which they were exported.
(h) For purposes of this section—
(1) a reference to the Secretary shall in the case of a bio-
logical product which is required to be licensed under the Act
of March 4, 1913 (37 Stat. 832–833) (commonly known as the
Virus-Serum Toxin Act) be considered to be a reference to the
Secretary of Agriculture, and
(2) the term ‘‘drug’’ includes drugs for human use as well
as biologicals under section 351 of the Public Health Service
Act or the Act of March 4, 1913 (37 Stat. 832–833) (commonly
known as the Virus-Serum Toxin Act).
(i) Insulin and antibiotic drugs may be exported without regard
to the requirements in this section if the insulin and antibiotic
drugs meet the requirements of section 801(e)(1).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
335
Sec. 804
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
OFFICE OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
SEC. 803. ø21 U.S.C. 383¿ (a) There is established in the De-
partment of Health and Human Services an Office of International
Relations.
(b) In carrying out the functions of the office under subsection
(a), the Secretary may enter into agreements with foreign countries
to facilitate commerce in devices between the United States and
such countries consistent with the requirements of this Act. In such
agreements, the Secretary shall encourage the mutual recognition
of—
(1) good manufacturing practice regulations promulgated
under section 520(f), and
(2) other regulations and testing protocols as the Secretary
determines to be appropriate.
(c)(1) The Secretary shall support the Office of the United
States Trade Representative, in consultation with the Secretary of
Commerce, in meetings with representatives of other countries to
discuss methods and approaches to reduce the burden of regulation
and harmonize regulatory requirements if the Secretary determines
that such harmonization continues consumer protections consistent
with the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Secretary shall support the Office of the United States
Trade Representative, in consultation with the Secretary of Com-
merce, in efforts to move toward the acceptance of mutual recogni-
tion agreements relating to the regulation of drugs, biological prod-
ucts, devices, foods, food additives, and color additives, and the reg-
ulation of good manufacturing practices, between the European
Union and the United States.
(3) The Secretary shall regularly participate in meetings with
representatives of other foreign governments to discuss and reach
agreement on methods and approaches to harmonize regulatory re-
quirements.
(4) The Secretary shall, not later than 180 days after the date
of enactment of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization
Act of 1997, make public a plan that establishes a framework for
achieving mutual recognition of good manufacturing practices in-
spections.
(5) Paragraphs (1) through (4) shall not apply with respect to
products defined in section 201(ff).
IMPORTATION OF COVERED PRODUCTS
SEC. 804. ø21 U.S.C. 384¿ (a) REGULATIONS.—The Secretary,
after consultation with the United States Trade Representative and
the Commissioner of Customs, shall promulgate regulations per-
mitting pharmacists and wholesalers to import into the United
States covered products.
(b) LIMITATION.—Regulations under subsection (a) shall—
(1) require that safeguards be in place to ensure that each
covered product imported pursuant to such subsection complies
with section 505 (including with respect to being safe and effec-
tive for its intended use), with sections 501 and 502, and with
other applicable requirements of this Act;
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
336
Sec. 804
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(2) require that an importer of a covered product pursuant
to subsection (a) comply with the applicable provisions of this
section, including subsection (d); and
(3) contain any additional provisions determined by the
Secretary to be appropriate as a safeguard to protect the public
health or as a means to facilitate the importation of such prod-
ucts.
(c) RECORDS.—Regulations under subsection (a) shall require
that records regarding the importation of covered products pursu-
ant to such subsection be provided to and maintained by the Sec-
retary for a period of time determined to be necessary by the Sec-
retary.
(d) IMPORTATION.—Regulations under subsection (a) shall re-
quire an importer of a covered product pursuant to such subsection
to provide to the Secretary the following information and records:
(1) The name and amount of the active ingredient of such
product and description of the dosage form.
(2) The date that the product is shipped and the quantity
of the product that is shipped, points of origin and destination
for the product, the price paid for the product by the importer,
and (once the product is distributed) the price for which such
product is sold by the importer.
(3) Documentation from the foreign seller specifying the
original source of the product and the amount of each lot of the
product originally received.
(4) The manufacturer’s lot or control number of the prod-
uct imported.
(5) The name, address, and telephone number of the im-
porter, including the professional license number of the im-
porter, if any.
(6) For a product that is coming directly from the first for-
eign recipient of the product from the manufacturer:
(A) Documentation demonstrating that such product
came from such recipient and was received by the recipient
from such manufacturer.
(B) Documentation of the amount of each lot of the
product received by such recipient to demonstrate that the
amount being imported into the United States is not more
than the amount that was received by the recipient.
(C) In the case of the initial imported shipment, docu-
mentation demonstrating that each batch of such shipment
was statistically sampled and tested for authenticity and
degradation.
(D) In the case of all subsequent shipments from such
recipient, documentation demonstrating that a statistically
valid sample of such shipments was tested for authenticity
and degradation.
(E) Certification from the importer or manufacturer of
such product that the product is approved for marketing in
the United States and meets all labeling requirements
under this Act.
(7) For a product that is not coming directly from the first
foreign recipient of the product from the manufacturer:
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
337
Sec. 804
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(A) Documentation demonstrating that each batch in
all shipments offered for importation into the United
States was statistically sampled and tested for authen-
ticity and degradation.
(B) Certification from the importer or manufacturer of
such product that the product is approved for marketing in
the United States and meets all labeling requirements
under this Act.
(8) Laboratory records, including complete data derived
from all tests necessary to assure that the product is in compli-
ance with established specifications and standards.
(9) Documentation demonstrating that the testing required
by paragraphs (6) through (8) was performed at a qualifying
laboratory (as defined in subsection (k)).
(10) Any other information that the Secretary determines
is necessary to ensure the protection of the public health.
(e) TESTING.—Regulations under subsection (a)—
(1) shall require that testing referred to in paragraphs (6)
through (8) of subsection (d) be conducted by the importer of
the covered product pursuant to subsection (a), or the manufac-
turer of the product;
(2) shall require that if such tests are conducted by the im-
porter, information needed to authenticate the product being
tested, and to confirm that the labeling of such product com-
plies with labeling requirements under this Act, be supplied by
the manufacturer of such product to the pharmacist or whole-
saler, and shall require that such information be kept in strict
confidence and used only for purposes of testing under this Act;
and
(3) may include such additional provisions as the Secretary
determines to be appropriate to provide for the protection of
trade secrets and commercial or financial information that is
privileged or confidential.
(f ) COUNTRY LIMITATION.—Regulations under subsection (a)
shall provide that covered products may be imported pursuant to
such subsection only from a country, union, or economic area that
is listed in subparagraph (A) of section 802(b)(1) or designated by
the Secretary, subject to such limitations as the Secretary deter-
mines to be appropriate to protect the public health.
(g) SUSPENSION OF IMPORTATIONS.—The Secretary shall require
that importations of specific covered products or importations by
specific importers pursuant to subsection (a) be immediately sus-
pended upon discovery of a pattern of importation of such products
or by such importers that is counterfeit or in violation of any re-
quirement pursuant to this section, until an investigation is com-
pleted and the Secretary determines that the public is adequately
protected from counterfeit and violative covered products being im-
ported pursuant to subsection (a).
(h) PROHIBITED AGREEMENTS.—No manufacturer of a covered
product may enter into a contract or agreement that includes a pro-
vision to prevent the sale or distribution of covered products im-
ported pursuant to subsection (a).
(i) STUDIES; REPORTS.—
(1) STUDY BY SECRETARY.—
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
338
Sec. 804
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(A) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary shall conduct, or con-
tract with an entity to conduct, a study on the imports per-
mitted pursuant to subsection (a), including consideration
of the information received under subsection (d). In con-
ducting such study, the Secretary or entity shall—
(i) evaluate the compliance of importers with regu-
lations under subsection (a), and the number of ship-
ments pursuant to such subsection, if any, that have
been determined to be counterfeit, misbranded, or
adulterated, and determine how such compliance con-
trasts with the number of shipments of prescription
drugs transported within the United States that have
been determined to be counterfeit, misbranded, or
adulterated; and
(ii) consult with the United States Trade Rep-
resentative and the Commissioner of Patents and
Trademarks to evaluate the effect of importations pur-
suant to subsection (a) on trade and patent rights
under Federal law.
(B) REPORT.—Not later than 2 years after the effective
date of final regulations under subsection (a), the Sec-
retary shall prepare and submit to the Congress a report
describing the findings of the study under subparagraph
(A).
(2) STUDY BY GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE.—The Comp-
troller General of the United States shall conduct a study to
determine the effect of this section on the price of covered
products sold to consumers at retail. Not later than 18 months
after the effective date of final regulations under subsection
(a), the Comptroller General shall prepare and submit to the
Congress a report describing the findings of such study.
( j) CONSTRUCTION.—Nothing in this section shall be construed
to limit the statutory, regulatory, or enforcement authority of the
Secretary relating to the importation of covered products, other
than with respect to section 801(d)(1) as provided in this section.
(k) DEFINITIONS.—
(1) COVERED PRODUCT.—
(A) IN
GENERAL.—For purposes of this section, the
term ‘‘covered product’’ means a prescription drug, except
that such term does not include a controlled substance in
schedule I, II, or III under section 202(c) of the Controlled
Substances Act or a biological product as defined in section
351 of the Public Health Service Act.
(B) CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS; PARENTERAL DRUGS.—
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, sec-
tion 801(d)(1)—
(i) continues to apply to a covered product donated
or otherwise supplied for free by the manufacturer of
the drug to a charitable or humanitarian organization,
including the United Nations and affiliates, or to a
government of a foreign country; and
(ii) continues to apply to a covered product that is
a parenteral drug the importation of which pursuant
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
339
Sec. 804
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
to subsection (a) is determined by the Secretary to
pose a threat to the public health.
(2) OTHER TERMS.—For purposes of this section:
(A) The term ‘‘importer’’ means a pharmacist or whole-
saler.
(B) The term ‘‘pharmacist’’ means a person licensed by
a State to practice pharmacy, including the dispensing and
selling of prescription drugs.
(C) The term ‘‘prescription drug’’ means a drug subject
to section 503(b).
(D) The term ‘‘qualifying laboratory’’ means a labora-
tory in the United States that has been approved by the
Secretary for purposes of this section.
(E) The term ‘‘wholesaler’’ means a person licensed as
a wholesaler or distributor of prescription drugs in the
United States pursuant to section 503(e)(2)(A). Such term
does not include a person authorized to import drugs
under section 801(d)(1).
(l) CONDITIONS.—This section shall become effective only if the
Secretary demonstrates to the Congress that the implementation of
this section will—
(1) pose no additional risk to the public’s health and safe-
ty; and
(2) result in a significant reduction in the cost of covered
products to the American consumer.
(m) SUNSET.—Effective upon the expiration of the 5-year period
beginning on the effective date of final regulations under sub-
section (a), this section ceases to have any legal effect.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.008
December 19, 2002 
340
CHAPTER IX—MISCELLANEOUS
SEPARABILITY CLAUSE
SEC. 901. ø21 U.S.C. 391¿ If any provision of this Act is de-
clared unconstitutional, or the applicability thereof to any person
or circumstances is held invalid, the constitutionality of the re-
mainder of the Act and the applicability thereof to other persons
and circumstances shall not be affected thereby.
EFFECTIVE DATE AND REPEALS
SEC. 902. ø21 U.S.C. 392¿ (a) This Act shall take effect twelve
months after the date of its enactment. The Federal Food and Drug
Act of June 30, 1906, as amended (U.S.C., 1934 ed., title 21, secs.
1–15), shall remain in force until such effective date, and except as
otherwise provided in this subsection, is hereby repealed effective
upon such date: Provided, That the provisions of section 701 shall
become effective on the enactment of this Act, and thereafter the
Secretary [of Agriculture] is authorized hereby to (1) conduct hear-
ings and to promulgate regulations which shall become effective on
or after the effective date of this Act as the Secretary [of Agri-
culture] shall direct, and (2) designate prior to the effective date of
this Act food having common or usual names and exempt such food
from the requirements of clause (2) of section 403(i) for a reason-
able time to permit the formulation, promulgation, and effective ap-
plication of definitions and standards of identity therefor as pro-
vided by section 401: Provided further, That sections 502(j), 505,
and 601(a), and all other provisions of this Act to the extent that
they may relate to the enforcement of such sections, shall take ef-
fect on the date of the enactment of this Act, except that in the
case of a cosmetic to which the proviso of section 601(a) relates,
such cosmetic shall not, prior to the ninetieth day after such date
of enactment, be deemed adulterated by reason of the failure of its
label to bear the legend prescribed in such proviso: Provided fur-
ther, That the Act of March 4, 1923 (U.S.C., 1945 ed., title 21, sec.
321a; 32 Stat. 1500, ch. 268), defining butter and providing a
standard therefor; the Act of July 24, 1919 (U.S.C., 1946 ed., title
21, sec. 321b; 41 Stat. 271, ch. 26), defining wrapped meats as in
package form; and the amendment to the Food and Drug Act, sec-
tion 10A, approved August 27, 1935 (U.S.C., 1946 ed., title 21, sec.
372a [49 Stat. 871, ch. 739]), shall remain in force and effect and
be applicable to the provisions of this Act.
(b) Meats and meat food products shall be exempt from the
provisions of this Act to the extent of the application or the exten-
sion thereto of the Meat Inspection Act, approved March 4, 1907,
as amended (U.S.C., 1946 ed., title 21, secs. 71–96; 34 Stat. 1260
et seq.).
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.009
December 19, 2002 
341
Sec. 903
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(c) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as in any
way affecting, modifying, repealing, or superseding the provisions
of section 351 of Public Health Service Act (relating to viruses, se-
rums, toxins, and analogous products applicable to man); the virus,
serum, toxin, and analogous products provisions, applicable to do-
mestic animals, of the Act of Congress approved March 4, 1913 (37
Stat. 832–833); the Filled Cheese Act of June 6, 1896 (U.S.C., 1946
ed., title 26, ch. 17, secs. 2350–2362); the Filled Milk Act of March
4, 1923 (U.S.C. 1946 ed., title 21, ch. 3, secs. 61–64); or the Import
Milk Act of February 15, 1927 (U.S.C., 1946 ed., title 21, ch. 4,
secs. 141–149).
SEC. 903. ø21 U.S.C. 393¿ FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION.
(a) IN GENERAL.—There is established in the Department of
Health and Human Services the Food and Drug Administration
(hereinafter in this section referred to as the ‘‘Administration’’).
(b) MISSION.—The Administration shall—
(1) promote the public health by promptly and efficiently
reviewing clinical research and taking appropriate action on
the marketing of regulated products in a timely manner;
(2) with respect to such products, protect the public health
by ensuring that—
(A) foods are safe, wholesome, sanitary, and properly
labeled;
(B) human and veterinary drugs are safe and effective;
(C) there is reasonable assurance of the safety and ef-
fectiveness of devices intended for human use;
(D) cosmetics are safe and properly labeled; and
(E) public health and safety are protected from elec-
tronic product radiation;
(3) participate through appropriate processes with rep-
resentatives of other countries to reduce the burden of regula-
tion, harmonize regulatory requirements, and achieve appro-
priate reciprocal arrangements; and
(4) as determined to be appropriate by the Secretary, carry
out paragraphs (1) through (3) in consultation with experts in
science, medicine, and public health, and in cooperation with
consumers, users, manufacturers, importers, packers, distribu-
tors, and retailers of regulated products.
(c) INTERAGENCY COLLABORATION.—The Secretary shall imple-
ment programs and policies that will foster collaboration between
the Administration, the National Institutes of Health, and other
science-based Federal agencies, to enhance the scientific and tech-
nical expertise available to the Secretary in the conduct of the du-
ties of the Secretary with respect to the development, clinical inves-
tigation, evaluation, and postmarket monitoring of emerging med-
ical therapies, including complementary therapies, and advances in
nutrition and food science.
(d) COMMISSIONER.—
(1) APPOINTMENT.—There shall be in the Administration a
Commissioner of Food and Drugs (hereinafter in this section
referred to as the ‘‘Commissioner’’) who shall be appointed by
the President by and with the advice and consent of the Sen-
ate.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.009
December 19, 2002 
342
Sec. 903
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(2) GENERAL POWERS.—The Secretary, through the Com-
missioner, shall be responsible for executing this Act and for—
(A) providing overall direction to the Food and Drug
Administration and establishing and implementing general
policies respecting the management and operation of pro-
grams and activities of the Food and Drug Administration;
(B) coordinating and overseeing the operation of all
administrative entities within the Administration;
(C) research relating to foods, drugs, cosmetics, and
devices in carrying out this Act;
(D) conducting educational and public information pro-
grams relating to the responsibilities of the Food and Drug
Administration; and
(E) performing such other functions as the Secretary
may prescribe.
(e) TECHNICAL
AND SCIENTIFIC REVIEW GROUPS.—The Sec-
retary through the Commissioner of Food and Drugs may, without
regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing
appointments in the competitive service and without regard to the
provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such
title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, es-
tablish such technical and scientific review groups as are needed
to carry out the functions of the Administration, including func-
tions under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and appoint
and pay the members of such groups, except that officers and em-
ployees of the United States shall not receive additional compensa-
tion for service as members of such groups.
(f) AGENCY PLAN FOR STATUTORY COMPLIANCE.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Not later than 1 year after the date of
enactment of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization
Act of 1997, the Secretary, after consultation with appropriate
scientific and academic experts, health care professionals, rep-
resentatives of patient and consumer advocacy groups, and the
regulated industry, shall develop and publish in the Federal
Register a plan bringing the Secretary into compliance with
each of the obligations of the Secretary under this Act. The
Secretary shall review the plan biannually and shall revise the
plan as necessary, in consultation with such persons.
(2) OBJECTIVES OF AGENCY PLAN.—The plan required by
paragraph (1) shall establish objectives and mechanisms to
achieve such objectives, including objectives related to—
(A) maximizing the availability and clarity of informa-
tion about the process for review of applications and sub-
missions (including petitions, notifications, and any other
similar forms of request) made under this Act;
(B) maximizing the availability and clarity of informa-
tion for consumers and patients concerning new products;
(C) implementing inspection and postmarket moni-
toring provisions of this Act;
(D) ensuring access to the scientific and technical ex-
pertise needed by the Secretary to meet obligations de-
scribed in paragraph (1);
(E) establishing mechanisms, by July 1, 1999, for
meeting the time periods specified in this Act for the re-
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.009
December 19, 2002 
343
Sec. 905
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
view of all applications and submissions described in sub-
paragraph (A) and submitted after the date of enactment
of the Food and Drug Administration Modernization Act of
1997; and
(F) eliminating backlogs in the review of applications
and submissions described in subparagraph (A), by Janu-
ary 1, 2000.
(g) ANNUAL REPORT.—The Secretary shall annually prepare
and publish in the Federal Register and solicit public comment on
a report that—
(1) provides detailed statistical information on the per-
formance of the Secretary under the plan described in sub-
section (f);
(2) compares such performance of the Secretary with the
objectives of the plan and with the statutory obligations of the
Secretary; and
(3) identifies any regulatory policy that has a significant
negative impact on compliance with any objective of the plan
or any statutory obligation and sets forth any proposed revi-
sion to any such regulatory policy.
SEC. 904. ø21 U.S.C. 394¿ SCIENTIFIC REVIEW GROUPS.
Without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code,
governing appointments in the competitive service and without re-
gard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter
53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay
rates, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs may—
(1) establish such technical and scientific review groups as
are needed to carry out the functions of the Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (including functions prescribed under this Act);
and
(2) appoint and pay the members of such groups, except
that officers and employees of the United States shall not re-
ceive additional compensation for service as members of such
groups.
SEC. 905. ø21 U.S.C. 395¿ LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM.
(a) IN GENERAL.—
(1) AUTHORITY FOR PROGRAM.—Subject to paragraph (2),
the Secretary shall carry out a program of entering into con-
tracts with appropriately qualified health professionals under
which such health professionals agree to conduct research, as
employees of the Food and Drug Administration, in consider-
ation of the Federal Government agreeing to repay, for each
year of such service, not more than $20,000 of the principal
and interest of the educational loans of such health profes-
sionals.
(2) LIMITATION.—The Secretary may not enter into an
agreement with a health professional pursuant to paragraph
(1) unless such professional—
(A) has a substantial amount of educational loans rel-
ative to income; and
(B) agrees to serve as an employee of the Food and
Drug Administration for purposes of paragraph (1) for a
period of not less than 3 years.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.009
December 19, 2002 
344
Sec. 906
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(b) APPLICABILITY OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS.—With respect to
the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program es-
tablished in subpart III of part D of title III of the Public Health
Service Act, the provisions of such subpart shall, except as incon-
sistent with subsection (a) of this section, apply to the program es-
tablished in such subsection in the same manner and to the same
extent as such provisions apply to the National Health Service
Corps Loan Repayment Program.
(c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—For the purpose of
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated
such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1994
through 1996.
SEC. 906. ø21 U.S.C. 396¿ PRACTICE OF MEDICINE.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit or interfere with
the authority of a health care practitioner to prescribe or admin-
ister any legally marketed device to a patient for any condition or
disease within a legitimate health care practitioner-patient rela-
tionship. This section shall not limit any existing authority of the
Secretary to establish and enforce restrictions on the sale or dis-
tribution, or in the labeling, of a device that are part of a deter-
mination of substantial equivalence, established as a condition of
approval, or promulgated through regulations. Further, this section
shall not change any existing prohibition on the promotion of unap-
proved uses of legally marketed devices.
SEC. 907. ø21 U.S.C. 397¿ CONTRACTS FOR EXPERT REVIEW.
(a) IN GENERAL.—
(1) AUTHORITY.—The Secretary may enter into a contract
with any organization or any individual (who is not an em-
ployee of the Department) with relevant expertise, to review
and evaluate, for the purpose of making recommendations to
the Secretary on, part or all of any application or submission
(including a petition, notification, and any other similar form
of request) made under this Act for the approval or classifica-
tion of an article or made under section 351(a) of the Public
Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 262(a)) with respect to a biologi-
cal product. Any such contract shall be subject to the require-
ments of section 708 relating to the confidentiality of informa-
tion.
(2) INCREASED EFFICIENCY AND EXPERTISE THROUGH CON-
TRACTS.—The Secretary may use the authority granted in
paragraph (1) whenever the Secretary determines that use of
a contract described in paragraph (1) will improve the timeli-
ness of the review of an application or submission described in
paragraph (1), unless using such authority would reduce the
quality, or unduly increase the cost, of such review. The Sec-
retary may use such authority whenever the Secretary deter-
mines that use of such a contract will improve the quality of
the review of an application or submission described in para-
graph (1), unless using such authority would unduly increase
the cost of such review. Such improvement in timeliness or
quality may include providing the Secretary increased sci-
entific or technical expertise that is necessary to review or
evaluate new therapies and technologies.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.009
December 19, 2002 
345
Sec. 909
FEDERAL FOOD, DRUG, AND COSMETIC ACT
(b) REVIEW OF EXPERT REVIEW.—
(1) IN GENERAL.—Subject to paragraph (2), the official of
the Food and Drug Administration responsible for any matter
for which expert review is used pursuant to subsection (a) shall
review the recommendations of the organization or individual
who conducted the expert review and shall make a final deci-
sion regarding the matter in a timely manner.
(2) LIMITATION.—A final decision by the Secretary on any
such application or submission shall be made within the appli-
cable prescribed time period for review of the matter as set
forth in this Act or in the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C.
201 et seq.).
SEC. 908. ø21 U.S.C. 398¿ NOTICES TO STATES REGARDING IMPORTED
FOOD.
(a) IN GENERAL.—If the Secretary has credible evidence or in-
formation indicating that a shipment of imported food or portion
thereof presents a threat of serious adverse health consequences or
death to humans or animals, the Secretary shall provide notice re-
garding such threat to the States in which the food is held or will
be held, and to the States in which the manufacturer, packer, or
distributor of the food is located, to the extent that the Secretary
has knowledge of which States are so involved. In providing notice
to a State, the Secretary shall request the State to take such action
as the State considers appropriate, if any, to protect the public
health regarding the food involved.
(b) RULE OF CONSTRUCTION.—Subsection (a) may not be con-
strued as limiting the authority of the Secretary with respect to
food under any other provision of this Act.
SEC. 909. ø21 U.S.C. 399¿ GRANTS TO STATES FOR INSPECTIONS.
(a) IN GENERAL.—The Secretary is authorized to make grants
to States, territories, and Indian tribes (as defined in section 4(e)
of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25
U.S.C. 450b(e))) that undertake examinations, inspections, and in-
vestigations, and related activities under section 702. The funds
provided under such grants shall only be available for the costs of
conducting such examinations, inspections, investigations, and re-
lated activities.
(b) NOTICES REGARDING ADULTERATED IMPORTED FOOD.—The
Secretary may make grants to the States for the purpose of assist-
ing the States with the costs of taking appropriate action to protect
the public health in response to notification under section 908, in-
cluding planning and otherwise preparing to take such action.
(c) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.—For the purpose of
carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated
$10,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be nec-
essary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2006.
Q:\COMP\FDA\FDA.009
December 19, 2002 
