VOL. 7, ISSUE 2 • MARCH/APRIL 2007National Center for Patient Safety
TOPICS IN PATIENT SAFETY
Contents
Look-Alike/Sound- 
Alike Medications
Pages 1 and 4
Adult Learning
Page 2
Problems With
Disposible Devices
Page 3
VA National 
Center for
Patient Safety
P.O. Box 486
Ann Arbor, MI 48106-0486
Phone:................(734) 930-5890
Fax:.....................(734) 930-5877
E-mail:................. NCPS@va.gov
Web sites:
Internet.....www.patientsafety.gov
Intranet...vaww.ncps.med.va.gov
VHA Chief Patient Safety Officer
James P. Bagian, MD, PE
Editor 
Joe Murphy, APR
Graphics 
Deb Royal 
Copy Editing  
Amy Carmack 
Diana Grayson
Deb Royal 
TIPS is published bimonthly 
by the VA National Center for 
Patient Safety. As the official 
patient safety newsletter of the 
Department of Veterans Affairs, 
it is meant to be a source of 
patient safety information for 
all VA employees. Opinions of 
contributors are not necessarily 
those of the VA. Suggestions 
and articles are always welcome.
Thanks to all contributors and 
those NCPS program managers 
and analysts who offered their 
time and effort to review and 
comment on these TIPS articles 
prior to publication. 
Look-Alike/Sound-Alike Medications —
What can be Done?
By Keith W. Trettin, R.Ph., MBA, NCPS program manager
 Look-alike/sound-alike (LA/SA) medications 
are a significant cause of adverse events and 
close calls. This article summarizes the problem 
and offers recommendations to help mitigate                           
it, based on stronger actions outlined in the Root 
Cause Analysis (RCA) Hierarchy of Actions, as 
noted on the sidebar on page 4 of this TIPS. This 
and other RCA tools are available on our web site: 
www.va.gov/ncps/CogAids/RCA/index.html
A Brief  History
 U.S. Pharmacopeia noted in its March 2001 issue 
of Quality Review that 15 percent of all entries into 
the organization’s Medication Errors Reporting 
System were associated with drugs having similar 
names. In May of that year, the Joint Commission 
on the Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations 
(JCAHO) also initially identified LA/SA drugs as 
a major safety issue in its Sentinel Event Alert article, 
“Look-alike, Sound-alike Drug Names.”
	 In 2004, JCAHO approved a National Patient 
Safety Goal (NPSG) that addresses this issue. 
NPSG 3 states: “Improve the safety of using 
medications.” Specifically, the goal notes: “Identify 
and at a minimum, annually review a list of look-
alike/sound-alike drugs used by the organization, 
and take action to prevent errors involving the 
interchange of these drugs.” The actions include 
a requirement for an organization to identify a 
minimum of 10 LA/SA drug pairs. As of 2005, 
JCAHO reported that three percent of all general 
hospitals receiving a full survey were not compliant 
with NPSG 3. Changes to the goal have been made 
since 2004, but it has not been retired and continues 
as a current NPSG. 
	 NCPS has received a significant number of RCAs 
and safety reports that implicate either similarities 
in drug names or problems with a drug delivery 
system as a contributing cause to a medication 
event. 
	 Along with what is available on the JCAHO 
web site (www.jcaho.org), a number of other lists of 
LA/SA medications and possible interventions to 
minimize incidences have been developed and are 
available online:
•	 Institute for Safe Med. Practices – www.ismp.org
•	 Federal Drug Administration – www.fda.gov
•	 U.S. Pharmacopeia – www.usp.org 
Examples of  the VA’s Approach
 The VA has developed a number of unique 
solutions to the LA/SA problem. For example, 
when the VA Pharmacy Benefits Management 
Strategic Healthcare Group (PBM) and VA Medical 
Advisory Panel review a drug for addition to the 
VA formulary, a list of drugs with LA/SA risk 
potential is reviewed. The list is generated by a 
pilot program developed by PBM and the Center 
for Medication Safety, VA MedSafe. The program 
queries a multi-attribute drug product search engine 
for medications with similar sound and appearance. 
	 In a second example, the VA Office of 
Information and NCPS worked collaboratively to 
identify and correct human factors that cause LA/
SA problems. In 2004, data from NCPS’ Patient 
Safety Information System, commonly known 
by its nickname, “SPOT,” was used to support 
modifications to the medication order program in 
the VA’s Computerized Patient Record System. This 
was done to help eradicate wrong drug selection 
during the order entry process. 
	 Previously, when the first several letters of 
a drug were used to generate a list of available 
formulary medications, the first drug on the list was 
highlighted and could easily be selected by pushing 
the enter key. This caused a significant number of 
drugs to be selected incorrectly. A modification 
to the program eliminated the automatic selection 
of the first drug, requiring a prescriber to actively 
select a drug. This has significantly reduced 
incorrect drug selection. 
What Next Steps can be Taken? 
 What should be done next to minimize LA/SA-
associated medication events? When a LA/SA 
issue has been identified, we recommend that RCA 
teams take stronger actions to mitigate the problem  
whenever possible. This may not seem “new” to 
those familiar with our recommendations, but it is 
important to state and restate. 
Continued on back page
Page 2 
Adult 
learning...  
Teaching 
and learning
are part of our 
daily routine in 
patient safety. 
In fact, they 
occur so 
frequently we 
may not even 
notice.  
Adult Learning ­— It’s Important to Patient Safety
By Beth King, RN, BSN, MA, NCPS program manager
	 Teaching and learning are part of our daily rou­
tine in patient safety. In fact, they occur so frequent­
ly we may not even notice. It would come as no 
surprise to say adults learn differently than children. 
Interestingly, though, much of our teaching experi­
ence concerns children. 
	 I would like to present some concepts about 
how adults learn differently than children. These 
concepts may be useful when bringing new caregiv­
ers into root cause analysis teams or at other times 
when teaching adults about patient safety.  
 In an article by Stephen Lieb,1 adults are de­
scribed as self-directed and goal-oriented learners. 
Adults spend time learning what they feel is useful 
to them; adults will learn if they believe it will help 
them achieve their goals. 
	 If an adult does not feel the need to learn 
something, he or she may not become engaged in 
the learning. For instance, observe the difference 
in motivation when you try teaching a medical pro­
cedure to someone you feel needs to know how to 
complete it, but believes he or she will never have to 
perform that task because it is the specific responsi­
bility of another staff member, versus one who will 
use it.  
	 Lieb also indicates that adults come with a 
foundation of life experience and knowledge, and 
that they look for an issue’s relevancy to them. For 
example, learning how to complete retirement pa­
perwork would be much more relevant for someone 
planning to retire soon than for someone in his or 
her mid-twenties who is just beginning a career.
	 As adults, when we are exposed to something 
new, we typically think about past experiences and 
identify how this information agrees with or dif­
fers from our current knowledge base. This helps 
us to assimilate the new information. With this in 
mind when teaching adults, we must try and bring 
a common, related experience to a learning session 
so that the information can be better assimilated. It 
is also valuable to determine what an adult is most 
interested in and what past experiences he or she 
might have had with the topic. Approaching a topic 
using these techniques helps adults to better define 
the relevance of learning something new.
	 Supplying adults with facts without connecting 
them to things important to their own goals and/or 
experience can result in lower levels of learning. Any 
one of us could likely recall an educational session 
where our minds wandered to another topic we felt 
was more important than the one being discussed.
	 Androgogy, the art and science of adult learn­
ing, has different characteristics from child learning. 
These differing characteristics are defined in the 
table below.2 Characteristics from both adult and 
child learning may sometimes be used during a sin­
gle session, depending on the goals of the program.
	 To help adults learn, it is useful to understand 
the four critical areas that can enhance learning, as 
described by Lieb:1 
1. Motivation. Adults must see the benefit of 
learning before they motivate themselves to 
learn the content. If the adult does not view 
the information as needed, the instructor may 
be working in vain. Barriers to motivation may 
include a lack of time, money, confidence, 
scheduling problems, etc. The instructor can 
help adults best by increasing the personal ben­
efits to learning and by decreasing the barriers.
2. Reinforcement. Reinforcement can help achieve 
consistent, desired behavior. Positive reinforce­
ment is normally used when teaching new 
skills.
table of child
 versus adult 
learning
Page 3
3.	 Retention. Adults must understand, interpret, 
and apply the information. Practicing the 
application during the learning process is 
encouraged to help an adult maintain the 
desired performance. Successful practice 
episodes are helpful to increase retention 
for adults.
4. Transference. Learning can be enhanced when 
adults can associate the information to some­
thing they already know. Transference can oc­
cur when information is similar, there is a lot 
of new learning, or it is extremely beneficial or 
critical for their job.
	 It is also very important to recognize that adults 
bring their self-esteem and ego into the learning 
environment with them. When an adult perceives a 
high threat to self-esteem, learning may be slowed 
or even stopped. For example, if an adult partici­
pant in an audience is spontaneously asked if he or 
she will present at the end the session, a person’s fear 
of giving a poor presentation may be a barrier to 
further learning during the remainder of that 
session.  
	 Learning is enhanced when adults feel their self-
esteem will not be harmed. An instructor must be 
able to support a learning environment where the 
participants feel they will not be vulnerable. 
	 Much of the work on adult learning was pioneered 
by Malcolm Knowles (Learn more about his work: 
www.infed.org/thinkers/et-knowl.htm) and growth in 
this area of study can be anticipated in the future 
— reading up on it is well worth it! 
  1 Lieb, S. (1991). Principles of Adult Learning: http://honolulu.
hawaii.edu/intranet/committees/FacDevCom/guidebk/teachtip/adults-2.htm
	  2 Jackson, W. H. (1998). Adult vs Child Learning: http://
cybermesa.com/~bjackson/Papers/Androgogy.htm	
	 Want further info? Zemke, R., Zemke, S. (1984). 30 Things 
We Know For Sure About Adult Learning: http://honolulu.hawaii.
edu/intranet/committees/FacDevCom/guidebk/teachtip/adults-3.htm
Out of box
failures? 
An item may 
have been 
broken or 
damaged 
during 
production, 
packaging, 
shipping, 
unpacking, 
or storage. 
“Out-of-the-Box Failures” 
Problems With Disposable, Invasive Devices 
 Ever wonder why certain invasive medical devices 
are found “broken” after they have been inserted 
into a patient and have to be retrieved? This 
includes items such as cardiac catheterization cath­
eters and other types of catheters, wound drainage 
tubes, and sump tubes.
	 During a recent review of a number of RCAs, 
we noted that RCA teams encountered difficulties 
finding a specific reason, such as nicking or suturing 
during placement, as to why an item broke inside a 
patient. This could be the case because the device 
might have been damaged sometime in the process 
of production, packaging, shipping, unpacking, or  
storage. Therefore, to mitigate vulnerabilities from 
damaged products, it is a good practice to inspect 
all medical devices prior to use.  
	 In some situations it might be difficult to do 
this, but consider a pilot project that focuses on a 
specific department, to include documentation of 
likely cost savings. 
	 If one department pilots a protocol to inspect 
invasive medical devices prior to use, an “out-of-
the-box failure” will likely be found before it occurs 
and other departments will follow suit — not to 
mention that the patients involved will be safer!
 	 Some of these devices are expensive and the 
supplier/manufacturer might not give your facility 
full credit to replace them once used, so inspecting 
them before use makes sense. Of course, remember 
to follow your facility’s procedures, and involve your 
materiels management, logistics, and purchasing 
departments. 
	 In the private sector, this was implemented at 
By Bryanne Patail, NCPS biomedical engineer
a rather large, very busy, teaching medical center. 
The savings were published on a monthly, quarterly, 
and annual basis. The employees were also given 
incentives to sustain the program and it turned out to 
be a “win, win, win” situation: 
•	 Win for the patient — safer, less inconvenience. 
•	 Win for the medical center — full credit for defec­
tive/broken devices, substantial cost savings.
•	 Win for the employees — pride in making the fa­
cility safer through an effective incentive program.photo of various drainage tubes
Wound drainage tubes can be inspected prior to use by pulling 
the ends taut and looking for flaws in the holes or other 
irregularities that can cause breakage.
Page 4
RCA Hierarchy
Actions
Actions can be thought 
of as stronger or 
weaker, based upon 
the likelihood of reduc­
ing vulnerability. 
Stronger 
The action is more 
likely to eliminate or 
greatly reduce the 
likelihood of an event; 
uses physical or plant 
or systemic fixes; 
applies human factors 
principles.
Intermediate 
The action is likely 
to control the root 
cause or vulnerability; 
applies human factors 
principles, but also 
relies upon individual 
action (e.g., a checklist 
or cognitive aid). 
Weaker 
The action relies on 
policies, procedures, 
and additional 
training.
Look-Alike/Sound-Alike Medications
Continued from page 1
 Stronger actions, as defined by NCPS, are ones 
more likely to eliminate or greatly reduce the 
likelihood of an adverse event, such as physical 
plant or systemic fixes that apply human factors 
principles (see sidebar to the left).  
	 Promoting weaker solutions is not only a 
significant waste of an RCA team’s valuable time, 
but can cause harm to patients — the exact opposite 
of the team’s goal. One of the most common 
corrective actions suggested in RCAs submitted to 
us is to implement “independent” double-checks, 
which have been found to create major problems.1
	 We consider these weak actions because they are 
often prone to be influenced by “confirmation bias.” 
This concept is generally defined as when you see 
what you think or expect you should see, rather than 
what is actually present. For example, please count 
and confirm there are only three F’s in the following 
sentence:
FINISHED FILES ARE THE RESULT 
OF YEARS OF SCIENTIFIC STUDY 
COMBINED WITH THE EXPERIENCE 
OF YEARS.
	 Did you find three? Please see the end of the 
article for the correct answer.**
	 Here is a clinical-based example of confirmation 
bias: In response to a medication event in which 
a wrong concentration of Heparin was given, 
a proposed action might be “double check all 
Heparins prior to administration.” In this scenario, 
a caregiver double-checking Heparins could assume 
that the previous co-worker, likely known by the 
caregiver, is competent and selected the correct 
concentration. This confirmation bias might 
lead to an incorrectly selected concentration of 
Heparin because the first caregiver might not have 
recognized a problem for a number of reasons that 
have nothing to do with skill level — such as fatigue, 
workload, or distraction. 
	 As an example of a stronger action in this case, 
an RCA team could recommend reviewing how 
well the number of concentrations of Heparin 
have been minimized within the facility. Though 
this is required by NPSG 3b, “Standardize and limit 
the number of drug concentrations used by the 
Organization,” a team might find a new and better 
systems-based way to do this, perhaps a stronger 
action that might have been previously overlooked. 
	 Another example of a stronger intervention 
might be to implement a closed drug delivery system 
that uses “Cubie Drawers™” (lidded bins). In such a 
system, only active drugs on the patient profile may 
be accessed from that system’s dispensing machine. 
An action of this type is more likely to eliminate or 
greatly reduce the likelihood of an adverse event. 
Correct refilling of the drug can be assured by bar 
coding the replacement prior to replenishing the 
dispensing unit. 
	 Mixing drug delivery product lines is another 
example of a stronger action. Using a combination 
of amps, vials, and syringe delivery systems helps to 
differentiate products, thus applying human factors 
principles. Implementing a mixture of delivery 
systems can also help to minimize drug mix-ups.  
 Most VA medical centers use the Carpuject™ 
syringe system for delivery of injectable drugs. 
Medication events have been reported because of 
the similarity of drugs stocked within this system. 
Using a mixture of delivery systems can help to 
minimize or eliminate drug mix-ups.  
	 As a final example of a stronger, systemic action, 
RCA teams could consider the feasibility of using 
different companies or package sizes to differentiate 
products. Manufacturers often design a similar 
look and size for packaging to enhance brand 
recognition, not to promote patient safety. By mixing 
manufacturers’ products, packaging is easier to 
distinguish. Further, using different sized packages 
for different forms of creams, ointments, and gels 
can also help to differentiate products.
	 As we can only provide a limited number of 
examples due to space limitations, we encourage 
RCA teams to contact NCPS and review their 
options with the appropriate program manager. We 
are always ready to help!  
  1 Tamuz M, Harrison MI. (2006). Improving patient safety in 
hospitals: contributions of high-reliability theory and normal 
accident theory. Health Services Research; 41(S.1):1654-1676.
  Toft B, Mascie-Taylor H. (2005). Involuntary automaticity: 
a work-system induced risk to safe health care. Health Services 
Management Research; 18:211-216. 
   **The sentence contains six “Fs.” If you agreed that there were 
only three, you were a victim of confirmation bias.
   ™Cardinal Health photo of capuject system
Over seventy different medications are available in the 
Carpuject™ system. Problems have occurred because of  the 
similarity in shape and size of  the system.
