45822
Federal Register / Vol. 69, No. 146 / Friday, July 30, 2004 / Notices 
we also incorporated a number of 
elements into the SNF PPS, such as 
case-mix classification methodology, the 
MDS assessment schedule, a market 
basket index, a wage index, and the 
urban and rural distinction used in the 
development or adjustment of the 
Federal rates. Further, section 
1888(e)(4)(H) of the Act specifically 
requires us to disseminate the payment 
rates for each new fiscal year through 
the Federal Register, and to do so before 
the August 1 that precedes the start of 
the new fiscal year. Accordingly, we are 
not pursuing alternatives with respect to 
the payment methodology. Further, as 
discussed previously in section II.B of 
this notice, we are not implementing 
case-mix refinements at the present 
time, but instead are proceeding with 
our ongoing research in this area. 
D. Conclusion 
This notice does not initiate any 
policy changes with regard to the SNF 
PPS; rather, it simply provides an 
update to the rates for FY 2005. 
Therefore, for the reasons set forth in 
the preceding discussion, we are not 
preparing analyses for either the RFA or 
section 1102(b) of the Act, because we 
have determined that this notice will 
not have a significant economic impact 
on a substantial number of small entities 
or a significant impact on the operations 
of a substantial number of small rural 
hospitals. 
Finally, in accordance with the 
provisions of Executive Order 12866, 
this regulation was reviewed by the 
Office of Management and Budget. 
VIII. Waiver of Proposed Rulemaking 
We ordinarily publish a notice of 
proposed rulemaking in the Federal 
Register to provide a period for public 
comment before the provisions of a 
notice such as this take effect. We can 
waive this procedure, however, if we 
find good cause that notice and 
comment procedure is impracticable, 
unnecessary, or contrary to the public 
interest and incorporate a statement of 
the finding and the reasons for it into 
the notice issued. 
We believe it is unnecessary to 
undertake notice-and-comment 
rulemaking in this instance, as the 
statute requires annual updates to the 
SNF PPS rates, the methodologies used 
to update the rates have been previously 
subject to public comment, and this 
notice initiates no policy changes with 
regard to the SNF PPS but simply 
reflects the application of previously 
established methodologies. Therefore, 
we find good cause to waive notice and 
comment procedures.
(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 
Program No. 93.773, Medicare-Hospital 
Insurance Program; and No. 93.774, 
Medicare-Supplementary Medical Insurance 
Program)
Dated: June 24, 2004. 
Mark B. McClellan, 
Administrator, Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services.
Dated: July 27, 2004. 
Tommy G. Thompson, 
Secretary.
[FR Doc. 04–17443 Filed 7–29–04; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4120–01–P
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
HUMAN SERVICES 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid 
Services 
[CMS–4068–N] 
Medicare Program; Open Public 
Meeting Regarding the Development of 
the Model Guidelines for Categories 
and Classes of Drugs
AGENCY: Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services (CMS), HHS.
ACTION: Notice of meeting.
SUMMARY: This notice announces a 
public meeting to provide 
pharmaceutical benefit managers and 
other interested parties, an opportunity 
to provide individual comments on the 
Model Guidelines for Classes and 
Categories of Drugs (Model Guidelines) 
developed by the United States 
Pharmacopeia (USP). Interested parties 
include beneficiaries, advocacy groups, 
managed care organizations, trade and 
professional associations, prescription 
drug plans, healthcare practitioners, 
providers, pharmaceutical 
manufacturers, and others. USP is a 
nongovernmental organization, as set 
forth under the Medicare Prescription 
Drug, Improvement, and Modernization 
Act of 2003 (MMA). The MMA provides 
for the development of Model 
Guidelines by USP in consultation with 
pharmaceutical benefit managers and 
other interested parties.
DATES: The meeting is scheduled for 
August 27, 2004, from 9 a.m. until 4 
p.m. e.d.t. This meeting is open to the 
public.
ADDRESSES: The meeting will be held in 
Baltimore, MD at the Wyndham 
Baltimore-Inner Harbor, 101 West 
Fayette Street. Phone: 410–752–1100. 
The meeting will be organized by the 
United States Pharmacopeia with 
support from its meeting coordinator, 
Conferon Inc.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
Kelly Coates, United States 
Pharmacopeia at 12601 Twinbrook 
Parkway, Rockville, MD 20852, 
conferences@usp.org, (301) 816–8130.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: 
I. Background 
The Medicare Prescription Drug, 
Improvement, and Modernization Act of 
2003 (MMA) (Pub. L. 108–173, enacted 
on December 8, 2003) establishes a new 
prescription drug benefit under Part D 
of the Medicare Program through 
competing prescription drug plans. The 
Secretary will approve or disapprove 
prescription drug plans based on 
various requirements in the statute, 
including the requirements specified in 
section 1860D–11(e)(2)(D)(i) and (ii) of 
the MMA. One of the requirements is 
that the Secretary does not find that the 
design of the plan and its benefits are 
likely to discourage enrollment by 
certain Part D eligible individuals. The 
Secretary may not find that the design 
of categories and classes within a 
formulary discourages enrollment if the 
categories and classes are consistent 
with Model Guidelines established by 
United States Pharmacopeia (USP). 
In an effort to establish these 
guidelines, MMA requires the Secretary 
to request USP to develop, in 
consultation with pharmaceutical 
benefit managers and other interested 
parties, a list of categories and classes 
(Model Guidelines) that may be used by 
prescription drug plans and to revise the 
classification from time to time to reflect 
changes in therapeutic uses of covered 
Part D drugs and additions of new 
covered Part D drugs. At the request of 
the Secretary and as specified in section 
1860D–4(b)(3)(C)(ii) of the MMA, USP is 
in the process of developing the Model 
Guidelines that may be used by 
prescription drug plans and is seeking 
comments on the draft Model 
Guidelines. 
II. Provisions of the Notice 
The purpose of this meeting is to 
provide information on the draft of the 
Model Guidelines for Classes and 
Categories of Drugs to be used in Part D 
plan formularies and to allow for public 
comment. 
Meeting Format: USP Staff and the 
USP Medicare Model Guideline Expert 
Committee (Expert Committee) will 
present a draft of the Model Guidelines 
and the approach and methodology of 
establishing the Model Guidelines. 
Interested persons may present data, 
information, or views orally or in 
writing, on issues directly related to the 
Model Guidelines. 
VerDate jul<14>2003 
20:28 Jul 29, 2004
Jkt 203001
PO 00000
Frm 00154
Fmt 4703
Sfmt 4703
E:\FR\FM\30JYN1.SGM
30JYN1
45823
Federal Register / Vol. 69, No. 146 / Friday, July 30, 2004 / Notices 
Public Presentations: USP and the 
Expert Committee Members will hear 
oral presentations from the public. The 
Expert Committee may limit the number 
and duration of oral presentations to the 
time available. If you wish to make a 
formal oral presentation, you must 
contact the individual named in the FOR 
FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT section of 
this notice and submit the following by 
August 20, 2004: a brief statement of the 
general nature of the comment, the 
name and address of proposed 
individual to present, and approximate 
time needed for the presentation. All 
presenters must submit written 
documentation of their oral 
presentation. USP will determine the 
time allotments for oral presentations 
based upon the number of presenters. If 
additional time is available, USP and 
the Expert Committee will open the 
floor to additional comments by 
attendees. An agenda for the meeting 
will be posted on USP’s website 
approximately two weeks prior to the 
meeting. 
Public Written Comment: Comments 
on the draft Model Guidelines and 
associated documents must be mailed to 
Lynn Lang, United States Pharmacopeia, 
12601 Twinbrook Parkway, Rockville, 
Maryland 20852–1790, lfl@usp.org, by 
September 10, 2004. Comments must 
clearly identify the individual or 
organization submitting the comment 
and must be clearly marked as 
‘‘Comments to the Draft Model 
Guidelines.’’ Comments may be 
submitted either in paper or in 
electronic format. USP will post all 
comments on its Web page for public 
viewing. 
Registration: Registration for this 
public meeting is required and will be 
on a first-come, first-served basis up to 
the 500 person capacity of the meeting 
room. There is no charge for 
registration. The registration deadline 
will be August 20, 2004. Registration 
may be accomplished by visiting 
www.usp.org/conferences or you may 
call United States Pharmacopeia’s 
meeting coordinator, Conferon Inc. at 
(330) 425–9330. A confirmation notice 
will be sent to attendees upon 
finalization of registration. Individuals 
who are not registered in advance will 
not be guaranteed attendance due to 
space limitations. 
Written Requests Concerning the 
Public Meeting: USP will accept written 
questions about meeting logistics or 
requests for the Draft Model Guidelines 
before the meeting. Written submissions 
must be sent to: Kelly Coates, United 
States Pharmacopeia, at e-mail 
ktc@usp.org.
(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance 
Program No. 93.778, Medical Assistance 
Program; No. 93.773 Medicare—Hospital 
Insurance Program; and No. 93.774, 
Medicare—Supplementary Medical 
Insurance Program)
Dated: July 21, 2004. 
Mark B. McClellan, 
Administrator, Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services.
[FR Doc. 04–17237 Filed 7–29–04; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4120–01–P
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND 
HUMAN SERVICES 
Administration for Children and 
Families 
Office of Planning, Research and 
Evaluation; Funding Opportunity Title: 
Child Development Research 
Fellowship Program 
Announcement Type: Initial.
Funding Opportunity Number: HHS–
2004–ACF–OPRE–PH–0005. 
CFDA Number: 93–595. 
Due Date for Applications: August 30, 
2004. 
Due Date for Letters of Intent: N/A. 
I. Funding Opportunity Description 
A. Purpose 
The purpose of this priority area is to 
announce the availability of funds for a 
cooperative agreement to sponsor a 
Child Development Research 
Fellowship that will allow child 
development professionals from the 
academic community the opportunity to 
actively participate in policy-relevant 
research activities associated with ACF 
programs. The goal of the fellowship 
program is to expose researchers to a 
policy environment and thereby to 
expand and enrich the field’s capacity 
for policy-relevant research. Fellows 
will be able to work on-site in OPRE or 
an ACF-related office on research 
related to ACF programs on a full-time 
basis for a period of up to two years 
(renewable for a third year at the 
discretion of the sponsoring 
organization and ACF). The program is 
intended to stimulate the active 
exchange of child development research 
and evaluation information directly 
relevant to ACF programs and to inform 
the process of developing long-term 
research and evaluation agendas across 
the various ACF programs and in the 
research community at large. The 
cooperative agreement will require 
active partnership between the 
sponsoring organization and the Office 
of Planning, Research and Evaluation 
(OPRE). 
B. Background 
Section 1110 (42 U.S.C. 1310) (a) (1) 
of the Social Security Act authorizes 
funding for conducting research related 
to programs carried on or assisted 
through the Social Security Act, or 
related programs. The Office of 
Planning, Research and Evaluation 
engages in a number of research and 
evaluation efforts related to low income 
children and families, including 
research with Head Start, Child Care, 
Child Welfare, and at-risk youth 
populations as well as research on the 
impact of welfare policies on families 
and children. Such research efforts 
typically are large in scale, and are 
interdisciplinary in their design, 
implementation, and analysis. As such, 
they benefit from expertise provided by 
multidisciplinary teams. 
For more than a decade, Child 
Development Fellowships have been 
offered through ACF under the 
sponsorship of the Society for Research 
in Child Development. For the past five 
years, these fellowships have been 
supported through a cooperative 
agreement between ACF and SRCD. 
Child Development Fellows have 
contributed substantially to research 
efforts related to child development and 
programmatic outcomes for children 
and families in Head Start, Child Care, 
and Child Welfare programs. 
C. Priorities 
The Fellowships have resulted in a 
range of activities that have been of 
considerable benefit to the Fellows, 
ACF, and to the field of early childhood 
development and education. The 
successful applicant will work with 
ACF to ensure that the kinds of 
activities and opportunities that have 
proven beneficial in the past continue to 
be available. These activities have 
included active participation in the 
technical conceptualization, planning, 
implementing and coordinating of major 
research and evaluation activities across 
ACF programs; identifying 
opportunities for increased program 
effectiveness through coordination of 
research and evaluation activities with 
other Departments and agencies; 
maintaining strong ties with both 
academic and practitioner communities; 
and actively contributing to the 
theoretical and empirical knowledge 
base within the areas of child 
development and social services 
programs, among other activities. The 
Fellows have benefited not only from 
the direct experience of working in a 
policy environment, but also through 
planned activities with the sponsoring 
organization for Fellows from other 
VerDate jul<14>2003 
20:28 Jul 29, 2004
Jkt 203001
PO 00000
Frm 00155
Fmt 4703
Sfmt 4703
E:\FR\FM\30JYN1.SGM
30JYN1
