 
 
                                       Monthly Newsletter November 2003 
NASA OH Newsletter is published by the NASA OH Support Office  
  Send information, comments or questions to: 
 u  E-mail − Bart.Geyer-1@ksc.nasa.gov     u Telephone − 321-867-3473 
Find OH Monthly on the Internet at   http://ohp.nasa.gov/  
         
u EHR Task Force Holds First Meeting:  On November 
20-21, NASA Occupational Health conducted the inaugural 
meeting of the Agency Task Force for Electronic Health 
Records (EHR).  The members of the task force, selected from 
each of NASA’s fourteen centers and facilities, met near 
Kennedy Space Center to discuss the needs for health 
information management improvement, transforming the current 
culture into a One NASA environment, and the issues and 
potential solutions to implementing an EHR as the cornerstone 
for taking NASA’s healthcare system into the 21st  Century.  The 
two-day meeting focused on three areas of discussion; 
commonalities among current work processes, obstacles to 
Agency-wide standardization, and requirements for commercial 
EHR application software.  At the close, draft recommendations 
to address specific issues with standardization and clinic needs 
were proposed and several EHR requirements were identified.  
The task force concluded the meeting with a behind the scenes 
tour of the Kennedy Space Center.  A formal synopsis of the 
meeting highlights will be distributed to the Occupational 
Health community in the coming weeks.     
 
u Occupational Health Support Office at KSC 
transitions from Bionetics to Dynamac:  On October 6, 
2003, the Support Office transitioned from the Bionetics 
Corporation to the Dynamac Corporation.  Bionetics and 
Dynamac are partners on the Life Sciences Services Contract at 
KSC that contains the Support Office.  The change is anticipated 
to be transparent to all personnel at the NASA centers that the 
office supports; however, note the change of our mail code from 
BIO-5 to DYN-4.      
 
u Dr. Richard Williams Recognized: On November 6th, 
Dr. Williams was honored with NASA’s Exceptional 
Performance Award for his leadership during the recent events 
that have affected the Nation and Agency’s health and well-
being.  The award was in recognition for the many ways which 
he has positively impacted the lives of HQ employees by 
championing their physical and mental well-being above all 
else.  
 
u Updates on Health Promotion Activities: 
*On a monthly basis , a greater number of copies of the Mayo 
Clinic HealthQuest (HQ) newsletter are sent to Wallop’s 
Health Unit compared to the other center health facilities.  A 
readership survey, attached to the newsletter, has been 
designed to obtain data on the effectiveness of HQ as an 
employee outreach/education tool when distributed to a larger 
number of readers.  Duration of the pilot study is from 
November ’03- June ’04.  
*Mayo Clinic’s telephone based tobacco cessation program, 
Quitline, will be piloted at Stennis Space Center and Michoud 
Assembly Facility. The project was introduced to employees on 
the Great American Smoke-Out Day with an implementation date 
of Jan 1, 2004.  
   *Women’s Heart Advantage (WHA) is a community                           
outreach program from the VHA, which is made up of the 
affiliation of 2200 not-for-profit healthcare systems.  WHA 
focuses on educating the Health Care Provider as well as the lay 
people, especially women, regarding cardiovascular disease risk 
factors.  To date, Headquarters and Kennedy Space Center 
clinics have begun to work with their local VHA affiliates to 
bring the message to their employees and clinic staff.  
*Influenza High Risk Surveys - Infectious disease experts say 
approximately 65 percent of U.S. adults who should get the flu 
vaccine actually do.  To date, we have received about 7000 
surveys. Once tallied, we hope the information will provide you 
with a picture of the health of the population you vaccinated. 
More so, the report will help you extrapolate knowledge about 
the health of your Center.  Please continue to forward the 
completed risk surveys to our office at DYN-4, KSC, FL 32899.  
If you have completed your Influenza Immunization Campaign, 
please send us your final Immunization Count at: 
hafizh@kscems.ksc.nasa.gov 
 
u Occupational Health Support Office adds two new 
staff: Dr. Alec Navinkov has joined the Occupational Health 
Support Office staff as International Space Medicine Physician 
Liaison. He has 25 years of experience in aviation and space 
medicine operations.  Dr. Navinkov received his M.D. from the 
State Medical Institute in Moscow, Russia and his Ph.D. in 
Aviation, Aerospace and Naval Medicine from the Institute for 
Biomedical Problems in Saratov, Russia.  He will provide medical 
consultation on international space medicine issues.  The 
second addition is Kurt Geber, MS, CHP.  Kurt is a graduate of 
the University of Florida and most recently worked for DOE’s 
Argonne National Laboratory as the Radiation Safety Officer for 
NASA’s Plum Brook Reactor Decommissioning Project.  Kurt 
will serve as the Team's Health Physicist. 
 
u Worker’s Compensation ViTS for 2004: 4/26/04 2-
3:30PM, 8/26/04 2-3:30 PM, 12/13/04 2-3:30 PM.  Kevin Finn 
(OWCP) will present on 4/26/03.   
u Health Promotion and Wellness ViTS for 2004: 3/1/01 
1:30-3 PM, 6/7/04 12-1:30 PM, 9/13/04 12-1:30 PM, 12/13/04 12-
1:30 PM 
uUpcoming Occupational Health ViTS: 
-Health Physics ViTS – Dec. 3rd, 12:00-1:00 PM EST 
-Health Promotion ViTS – Dec. 15th, 3:30-4:30 PM EST 
-EH ViTS – Dec. 19th, 2:00-3:00 PM EST 
