>>>>> 
 
 VIP2VIP   
<<<<< 
Season 6, Volume 6        Big Bend National Park’s Volunteer Newsletter    April 1, 2007 
Spring 2007 Volunteers 
Persimmon Gap 
Mark Kirtley– Visitor Center 
Sally & Bob Jones– Visitor Center 
Castolon 
Tillman Cavert– SCA- Camp Host & Backcountry 
Joan & Raymond Kane– Camp Host & Backcountry 
Kim & Al Peabody– Camp Host & Backcountry 
Maryann & Ted Rowan- Visitor Center 
Bob Wirt- Visitor Center 
Rio Grande Village 
Reta & Dick Averill– Camp Hosts 
Barbara & Bill Baldwin- Camp Hosts 
Alice & Bob Ramsey– Visitor Center 
Samantha Schroeder– Backcountry 
Patsy & Shad Shadoin– Visitor Center 
Phil Souza- Backcountry 
Chisos Basin 
Ruthine & Bob Hennessy- Camp Host 
Charlotte & Bob Whitesides- Visitor Center 
Roger Lane-new– Camp Host 
Panther Junction 
Susan Buchel-new– Resource Management 
Diane & Gary Frable– River 
Richard Grayson- River 
Jodi Lau-SCA– Interpretation 
Brittany Palmer-SCA– Interpretation 
Jennette Timmer-SCA– Interpretation 
Jessica Wooldridge-new-SCA– Resource Management 
Part-time 
Judy Brinkerhoff– Resource Management 
Angie Dean– Interpretation 
Leah Glenn– Library 
Steve Harper– Resource Management 
Jason Morris– Emergency Services 
Christiann Tillman– Library 
Steve Wick– Resource Management 
Reine Wonite– Emergency Services 
 
The Pizza Party and Award Ceremony was a huge success.  We had a wonderful 
turnout, and everyone had the opportunity to enjoy more than they needed of the 
pizza, salad, and scrumptious deserts!  Without BBNHA, this dinner could not 
happen, so we want to express a huge “Thank You” to Mike Boren and BBNHA!  
They have been extremely generous in hosting this event to honor the volunteers 
each season.  In addition we owe Claudia a giant “Thanks” for staffing the bar.  
Casa Grande donates the drinks for the volunteers each season, and that is 
greatly appreciated.  The staff at Big Bend are very generous in making each 
volunteer feel welcomed and appreciated.  All of these things combine to make 
this the best park to donate volunteer time! 
 
Bob & Ruthine Hennessy 
Don Sharlow presents awards and 
thanks the trail crew volunteers. 
Each VIP was 
introduced by 
her/his supervisor.  
Right, Vidal Davila 
makes his 
presentation to 
Sue Buchel, a new 
resource 
management 
volunteer. 
Superintendent Wellman 
presents Jason Morris 
with his certificate.  
Jason works for 
emergency services. 
Angelina 
presents a 
clock, a 
special gift 
for numerous 
year VIPs, to 
Bob Wirt and 
Steve 
Harper. 
 
Patsy and Shad Shadoin volunteered in Big Bend 14 years ago, and have been excited about 
returning to volunteer this spring.  This season they are working in the Rio Grande Village Visitor Center.   They 
have been coming here for over 30 years.  They spent their 32nd wedding anniversary backpacking during an ice 
storm on the South Rim.  The cold conditions of that year didn’t deter them, because 
they returned to spend their 50th anniversary wandering around in the Park.      
 
Patsy and Shad are from DeSoto Parish in western Louisiana.  Shad started 
his educational career teaching the 5th grade when he was only 19 years old!  He 
eventually earned his Doctorate in Education at the University of Arkansas, and went 
on to become Dean at the University of Louisiana in Monroe.  After having their 3 
children, Patsy went to work as the secretary to the superintendent of schools.  
When Shad finished his doctorate degree, she started college as a freshman.  She 
eventually earned her masters degree in education, and became the principal of an 
elementary school until Shad retired.   
 
They named their farm and home Briar Hurst Farms.  The original house was 
built before the 1900s.  For 20 years they restored the home, but eventually sold it, 
and built a new home on their property. They farmed, and after Shad’s retirement, 
they started raising Paint horses.  Patsy said they started this business when Shad 
found a black and white stallion that he fell in love with.  They bought mares and enjoyed raising horses for many 
years.  Eventually they decided they were too old to be cowboys.  Taking care of the horses 
was a 24 hour a day, 7 day a week responsibility, which became very confining.  After selling 
the horses they converted the business to a hay farm and pine tree plantation.  They still 
operate the hay farm, and will have to get back to work after their volunteer duties end 
here. 
 
They have enjoyed volunteering over the years.  Shad worked as a campground 
host, while Patsy gave interpretive programs in the campground at Custer State Park in 
South Dakota.   They have been Red Cross Volunteers for years, involved mostly with 
fundraising.  Patsy is the president of the Mansfield Garden Club and very active in their 
church. 
 
Visitors to Rio Grande Village will benefit from their experience and perspective, 
having seen this park grow through the years.  Patsy and Shad’s delight to be here is 
evident in their welcoming smiles.    
Volunteering for the Second Time 
Brittany, Jennette, & Jodi spent one of their Resource 
Management work days at RGV pulling cattails out of the 
recently constructed Spring 4 Pond.  This is the newest of 
the ponds the park has constructed to help preserve the 
endangered mosquitofish (Gambusia Gaigei).  The cattails 
have proved to be a rapid invader of recently disturbed 
aquatic habitat and wetlands.  For the benefit of the 
mosquitofish and general aquatic life, it is desirable to have 
more diversity of vegetation in and on the margins of the 
pond.  The SCA’s also participated in planting a variety of 
other aquatic and bank species.  Ultimately the habitat will 
include cattails, but by holding them off long enough for 
other species to become established, it is hoped they will 
not completely dominate the pond. 
Swimsuits needed for work on the Gambusia Gaigei Pond 
 
Big Bend symbolizes different things to many people.  To 
newlyweds, Bob and Alice Ramsey, it can be considered the 
site of their honeymoon.  Our Rio Grande Village Visitor Center 
Volunteers were married January 11, 2007 at 4:15 pm.   
 
Bob has lived in the Dallas area all of his life.  He retired 
from the United States Postal Service after 33 years.  He has 3 sons, 
one grandchild, and 1 great-grandchild.  Alice grew up in Bern, KS, a 
very small town of 200 people.  Alice earned a degree in education 
from the University of Nebraska.  She taught 1st, 2nd. and 3rd grades 
in Nebraska, Indiana, and in 1985 moved to Dallas.  She has 2 children, 3 grandchildren, and 3 great-grandchildren 
(almost 4 – she has another one due in April)! 
 
Before meeting one another, they each had some interesting short-term work experiences.  For example, 
Bob worked as a Dance Host on a cruise ship in 2002.  He said it wasn’t quite like the Walter Matthau and Jack 
Lemon movie “Out to Sea”.  Alice volunteered at a park in Hawaii.  Her job was trying to remove ginger plants, which 
are exotic to the area.  She spent an uncomfortable 2 weeks staying in an old CCC camp during that time. 
 
Alice and Bob met in 2003 at country and western dance 
lessons, in Dallas, TX.  They have continued to travel and have found 
interesting jobs together.  They spent, what they described as a 
“wild” time, working at the NASCAR Races in Talladega, FL.  They 
worked in Moab, UT, at Arches View Campground.  Without their RV, 
they have been to Greece, Niagara Falls, Playa del Carmen in Mexico, 
Washington DC, and Las Vegas.  This summer they have planned a trip 
to Switzerland. 
 
Between travels, they return home to Wills Point, TX.  They 
own land in this small community just east of Dallas, and are planning 
to build their home there.  They enjoy most outdoor activities, 
including hiking, bicycling, and riding their motorcycle.  Alice and Bob 
feel very fortunate to be living the way they do, and we are fortunate 
they choose to spend their “honeymoon” time with us!  
Big Bend Honeymoon 
SCA’s are extremely valuable to Big Bend.  Their work includes staffing the visitor center, giving guided 
walks, and many different projects for Science and Resource Management. 
Bob and Charlotte 
Whitesides are excellent 
examples of how 
volunteers make an impact 
on the visitors.  The idea 
of volunteering at Big Bend 
this year came from the 
encounters they have had 
with VIPs in various 
national parks.  They 
decided they wanted to 
see what this 
“volunteering” was all 
about.  Charlotte saw a job 
opening for the Chisos 
Basin Visitor Center on the 
internet, mentioned it to 
Bob, and they decided to 
make it happen for them!   
 
Charlotte grew up in Peoria, IL, and after high school, moved to Houston 
with her parents.   About the same time, Bob’s parents moved to Houston from their 
home in Dallas, TX.  Their mothers became friends at the newcomer’s bridge club.  
When Bob came to Houston on leave from the Army, his mother conspired with 
Charlotte’s mother to set them up on a date.    They married before he left for 
Vietnam.  During his tour, Charlotte gave birth to twin daughters.  The girls were six 
months old before Bob first saw them!  Both families gave Charlotte the support she 
needed with the babies.   
 
When Bob returned, they moved to Dallas.  Bob finished his degree in 
marketing at the University of North Texas, and started his career in sales.  
Charlotte stayed home raising the twins and their third daughter.  She was very 
active in the girls’ school and extra curricular activities. One of the things she 
enjoyed was becoming active with the Girl Scouts.  When the youngest was a senior 
in high school, Charlotte accepted a paid job as an assistant librarian.   
 
Bob’s hobby, since childhood, has been guns.  He loves to shoot, and has 
bought and sold guns for years.  He always told Charlotte that he could support the 
family with his hobby, if it ever became necessary.  In October of 1990, he was laid 
off, and buying and selling guns did become the family’s means of support.  For 2 
years they traveled the circuit to gun shows.  Charlotte said that during those years 
they met some wonderful people, who have remained their life-long friends.   
Eventually the travel became more than they wanted, so in 1992, they opened their 
gun store in Giddings, TX. 
 
Their family has always been very close, and they have remained that way.  
Their daughters live in Tyler and Florence, Texas, and one daughter lives near them 
in Giddings.  Between the three girls they now have 5 grandchildren.   
 
Charlotte and Bob have always enjoyed traveling and visiting national parks.  
It was only natural for them to decide to try their hands at volunteering when 
Charlotte decided they needed an extended vacation.  They were fortunate that 
their daughter in Giddings agreed to run their gun store so they could come to Big 
Bend and work.  They both have always loved talking to people, so sharing information 
and helping visitors comes natural to them.  In order to have first hand information, 
they spend as much time as possible challenging themselves by hiking various trails in 
the park.  They are both thoroughly enjoying themselves, and Big Bend visitors are 
benefiting from their efforts in the Visitor Center.        
A Volunteering Vacation 
 Activities & Events 
 
 Potluck Picnic– Thurs. Apr. 12, 6:30 pm.  
PJ Community Remuda (the 
covered area next to San 
Vicente School).  Everyone 
please come!  
Big Bend Paisanos Relay for Life– 
Fri. Apr.20th through Sat. 
Apr. 21st.  American Cancer 
Society fund raiser.  Contact 
Melissa Forsythe for details: 
477-2317 
 
Ongoing: 
Adult Bible Study– Sun. 9-10 am or 
Tues. 7-8 pm.   
 
San Vicente School meeting 
room. 
Big Bend Community Choir– 
 
Wednesdays, 5:30 pm, Music 
 
room at Terlingua School.  For 
 
information call Patricia, 
 
424-3208.  
 
Check the bulletin board at PJ for 
details and updates! 
Please submit your paperwork for 
reimbursement to Angelina at 
least a week before you plan to 
leave the park.  Once your 
paperwork has been submitted, 
please wait a week, then call 
Terry Boren at 477-1118 or 
Susan Simmons at 477-1119 to 
see if your check is ready.  You 
will need to see Terry or Susan in 
person, in the Administration 
Office, Mon-Fri, 8-5 to sign for 
your check.  
