NDA 21-928 
Page 5 
 
CHANTIX™ 
(varenicline) Tablets 
 
DESCRIPTION 
CHANTIX™ tablets contain the active ingredient, varenicline (as the tartrate salt), which is a partial 
agonist selective for α4β2 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes. 
Varenicline, as the tartrate salt, is a powder which is a white to off-white to slightly yellow solid 
with the following chemical name: 7,8,9,10-tetrahydro-6,10-methano-6H-pyrazino[2,3-
h][3]benzazepine, (2R,3R)-2,3-dihydroxybutanedioate (1:1).  It is highly soluble in water.  
Varenicline tartrate has a molecular weight of 361.35 Daltons, and a molecular formula of C13H13N3 
• C4H6O6.  The chemical structure is: 
HOOC
COO
OH
OH
H2
N
N
N
R
R
 
CHANTIX is supplied for oral administration in two strengths: a 0.5 mg capsular biconvex, white to 
off-white, film-coated tablet debossed with "Pfizer" on one side and "CHX 0.5" on the other side 
and a 1 mg capsular biconvex, light blue film-coated tablets debossed with "Pfizer" on one side and 
"CHX 1.0" on the other side.  Each 0.5 mg CHANTIX tablet contains 0.85 mg of varenicline 
tartrate equivalent to 0.5 mg of varenicline free base; each 1mg CHANTIX tablet contains 1.71 mg 
of varenicline tartrate equivalent to 1 mg of varenicline free base.  The following inactive 
ingredients are included in the tablets: microcrystalline cellulose, anhydrous dibasic calcium 
phosphate, croscarmellose sodium, colloidal silicon dioxide, magnesium stearate, Opadry® White 
(for 0.5 mg), Opadry® Blue (for 1 mg), and Opadry® Clear. 
CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 
 
Mechanism of Action 
Varenicline binds with high affinity and selectivity at α4β2 neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptors.  The efficacy of CHANTIX in smoking cessation is believed to be the result of 
varenicline’s activity at a sub-type of the nicotinic receptor where its binding produces agonist 
activity, while simultaneously preventing nicotine binding to α4β2 receptors. 
NDA 21-928 
Page 6 
 
Electrophysiology studies in vitro and neurochemical studies in vivo have shown that varenicline 
binds to α4β2 neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptors and stimulates receptor-mediated activity, 
but at a significantly lower level than nicotine.  Varenicline blocks the ability of nicotine to activate 
α4β2 receptors and thus to stimulate the central nervous mesolimbic dopamine system, believed to 
be the neuronal mechanism underlying reinforcement and reward experienced upon smoking.  
Varenicline is highly selective and binds more potently to α4β2 receptors than to other common 
nicotinic receptors (>500-fold α3β4, >3500-fold α7, >20,000-fold α1βγδ), or to non-nicotinic 
receptors and transporters (>2000-fold). Varenicline also binds with moderate affinity (Ki = 350 
nM) to the 5-HT3 receptor. 
 
Pharmacokinetics 
 
Absorption/Distribution 
 
Maximum plasma concentrations of varenicline occur typically within 3-4 hours after oral 
administration.  Following administration of multiple oral doses of varenicline, steady-state 
conditions were reached within 4 days.  Over the recommended dosing range, varenicline exhibits 
linear pharmacokinetics after single or repeated doses.  In a mass balance study, absorption of 
varenicline was virtually complete after oral administration and systemic availability was high.  
Oral bioavailability of varenicline is unaffected by food or time-of-day dosing.  Plasma protein 
binding of varenicline is low (<20%) and independent of both age and renal function. 
Metabolism/Elimination 
 
The elimination half-life of varenicline is approximately 24 hours.  Varenicline undergoes minimal 
metabolism with 92% excreted unchanged in the urine.  Renal elimination of varenicline is 
primarily through glomerular filtration along with active tubular secretion possibly via the organic 
cation transporter, OCT2.   
Pharmacokinetics in Special Patient Populations 
 
There are no clinically meaningful differences in varenicline pharmacokinetics due to age, race, 
gender, smoking status, or use of concomitant medications, as demonstrated in specific 
pharmacokinetic studies and in population pharmacokinetic analyses.   
Renal impairment 
 
Varenicline pharmacokinetics were unchanged in subjects with mild renal impairment (estimated 
creatinine clearance >50 mL/min and ≤80 mL/min).  In patients with moderate renal impairment 
(estimated creatinine clearance ≥30 mL/min and ≤50 mL/min), varenicline exposure increased 1.5-
fold compared with subjects with normal renal function (estimated creatinine clearance >80 
mL/min).  In subjects with severe renal impairment (estimated creatinine clearance <30 mL/min), 
varenicline exposure was increased 2.1-fold.  In subjects with end-stage-renal disease (ESRD) 
undergoing a three hour session of hemodialysis for three days a week, varenicline exposure was 
NDA 21-928 
Page 7 
 
increased 2.7-fold following 0.5 mg once daily administration for 12 days.  The plasma Cmax and 
AUC of varenicline noted in this setting were similar to healthy subjects receiving about 1 mg twice 
daily.  Caution is warranted with the use of CHANTIX in subjects with renal impairment (See 
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION).  Additionally, in subjects with ESRD, varenicline was 
efficiently removed by hemodialysis (See OVERDOSAGE).     
Geriatric 
 
A combined single and multiple-dose pharmacokinetic study demonstrated that the 
pharmacokinetics of 1 mg varenicline given QD or BID to 16 healthy elderly male and female 
smokers (aged 65-75 yrs) for 7 consecutive days was similar to that of younger subjects. 
Pediatric 
 
Because the safety and effectiveness of CHANTIX in pediatric patients have not been established, 
CHANTIX is not recommended for use in patients under 18 years of age. 
When 22 pediatric patients aged 12 to 17 years (inclusive) received a single 0.5 mg and 1 mg-dose of 
varenicline, the pharmacokinetics of varenicline was approximately dose proportional between the 
0.5 mg and 1 mg doses.  Systemic exposure, as assessed by AUC(0-∞), and renal clearance of 
varenicline  were comparable to those of an adult population. 
 
Hepatic impairment 
 
Due to the absence of significant hepatic metabolism, varenicline pharmacokinetics should be 
unaffected in patients with hepatic insufficiency. 
Drug-Drug Interactions 
 
Drug interaction studies were performed with varenicline and digoxin, warfarin, transdermal 
nicotine, bupropion, cimetidine and metformin.  No clinically meaningful pharmacokinetic drug-
drug interactions have been identified.   
In vitro studies demonstrated that varenicline does not inhibit the following cytochrome P450 
enzymes (IC50 >6400 ng/mL): 1A2, 2A6, 2B6, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, 2E1, and 3A4/5.  Also, in 
human hepatocytes in vitro, varenicline does not induce the cytochrome P450 enzymes 1A2 and 
3A4. 
In vitro studies demonstrated that varenicline does not inhibit human renal transport proteins at 
therapeutic concentrations.  Therefore, drugs that are cleared by renal secretion (e.g. metformin - 
see below) are unlikely to be affected by varenicline.    
In vitro studies demonstrated the active renal secretion of varenicline is mediated by the human 
organic cation transporter, OCT2.  Co-administration with inhibitors of OCT2 may not require a 
dose adjustment of CHANTIX as the increase in systemic exposure to CHANTIX is not expected to 
be clinically meaningful (see Cimetidine interaction below).  Furthermore, since metabolism of 
NDA 21-928 
Page 8 
 
varenicline represents less than 10% of its clearance, drugs known to affect the cytochrome P450 
system are unlikely to alter the pharmacokinetics of CHANTIX (see Phamacokinetics) and 
therefore a dose adjustment of CHANTIX would not be required.   
Metformin:  When co-administered to 30 smokers varenicline (1 mg BID) did not alter the steady-
state pharmacokinetics of metformin (500 mg BID), which is a substrate of OCT2.  Metformin had 
no effect on varenicline steady-state pharmacokinetics.   
Cimetidine:  Co-administration of an OCT2 inhibitor, cimetidine (300 mg QID), with varenicline (2 
mg single dose) to 12 smokers increased the systemic exposure of varenicline by 29% (90% CI: 
21.5%, 36.9%) due to a reduction in varenicline renal clearance.   
Digoxin:  Varenicline (1 mg BID) did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of digoxin 
administered as a 0.25 mg daily dose in 18 smokers. 
Warfarin:  Varenicline (1 mg BID) did not alter the pharmacokinetics of a single 25 mg dose of (R, 
S)-warfarin in 24 smokers.  Prothrombin time (INR) was not affected by varenicline.  Smoking 
cessation itself may result in changes to warfarin pharmacokinetics (see PRECAUTIONS). 
 
 
 
Use with other therapies for smoking cessation:   
Bupropion:  Varenicline (1 mg BID) did not alter the steady-state pharmacokinetics of bupropion 
(150 mg BID) in 46 smokers. The safety of the combination of bupropion and varenicline has not 
been established. 
 
Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT):  Although co-administration of varenicline (1 mg BID) and 
transdermal nicotine (21 mg/day) for up to 12 days did not affect nicotine pharmacokinetics, the 
incidence of nausea, headache, vomiting, dizziness, dyspepsia and fatigue was greater for the 
combination than for NRT alone.   In this study, eight of twenty-two (36%) subjects treated with the 
combination of varenicline and NRT prematurely discontinued treatment due to adverse events, 
compared to 1 of 17 (6%) of subjects treated with NRT and placebo .   
Safety and efficacy of CHANTIX in combination with other smoking cessation therapies have not 
been studied.   
 
CLINICAL STUDIES 
 
The efficacy of CHANTIX in smoking cessation was demonstrated in six clinical trials in which a 
total of 3659 chronic cigarette smokers (≥10 cigarettes per day) were treated with CHANTIX.  In all 
clinical studies, abstinence from smoking was determined by patient self-report and verified by 
measurement of exhaled carbon monoxide (CO<10 ppm) at weekly visits. Among the CHANTIX-
treated patients enrolled in these studies, the completion rate was 65%.  Except for the initial Phase 
2 study (Study 1) and the maintenance of abstinence study (Study 6), patients were treated for 12 
weeks and then were followed for 40 weeks post-treatment.  Most subjects enrolled in these trials 
were white (79% - 96%).  All studies enrolled almost equal numbers of men and women. The 
average age of subjects in these studies was 43 years.  Subjects on average had smoked about 21 
cigarettes per day for an average of approximately 25 years. 
NDA 21-928 
Page 9 
 
In all studies, patients were provided with an educational booklet on smoking cessation and 
received up to 10 minutes of smoking cessation counseling at each weekly treatment visit according 
to Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality guidelines. Patients set a date to stop smoking 
(target quit date, TQD) with dosing starting 1 week before this date. 
Initiation of Abstinence 
Study 1: This was a six-week dose-ranging study comparing CHANTIX to placebo.  This study 
provided initial evidence that CHANTIX at a total dose of 1 mg per day or 2 mg per day was 
effective as an aid to smoking cessation. 
 
Study 2: This study of 627 subjects compared CHANTIX 1 mg per day and 2 mg per day with 
placebo.  Patients were treated for 12 weeks (including one week titration) and then were followed 
for 40 weeks post-treatment.  CHANTIX was given in two divided doses. Each dose of CHANTIX 
was given in two different regimens, with and without initial dose titration, to explore the effect of 
different dosing regimens on tolerability. For the titrated groups, dosage was titrated up over the 
course of one week, with full dosage achieved starting with the second week of dosing. The titrated 
and nontitrated groups were pooled for efficacy analysis. 
 
Forty five percent of subjects receiving CHANTIX 1 mg per day (0.5 mg BID) and 51% subjects 
receiving 2 mg per day (1 mg BID) had CO-confirmed continuous abstinence during weeks 9 
through 12 compared to 12% subjects in the placebo group, (Figure 1). In addition, 31% of the 1 mg 
per day group and 31% of the 2 mg per day group were continuously abstinent from one week after 
TQD through the end of treatment as compared to 8% of the placebo group.  
 
Study 3: This flexible-dosing study of 312 subjects examined the effect of a patient-directed dosing 
strategy of CHANTIX or placebo. After an initial one-week titration to a dose of 0.5 mg BID, 
subjects could adjust their dosage as often as they wished between 0.5 mg QD to 1 mg BID per day.  
Sixty nine percent of patients titrated to the maximum allowable dose at any time during the study.  
For 44% of patients, the modal dose selected was 1 mg BID; for slightly over half of the study 
participants, the modal dose selected was 1 mg/day or less. 
  
Of the subjects treated with CHANTIX, 40% had CO-confirmed continuous abstinence during 
weeks 9 through 12 compared to 15% in the placebo group. In addition, 29% of the CHANTIX 
group were continuously abstinent from one week after TQD through the end of treatment as 
compared to 9% of the placebo group.  
Study 4 and Study 5: These identical double-blind studies compared CHANTIX 2 mg per day, 
bupropion sustained release (SR) 150 mg BID, and placebo. Patients were treated for 12 weeks and 
then were followed for 40 weeks post-treatment.  The CHANTIX dosage of 1 mg BID was achieved 
using a titration of 0.5 mg QD for the initial 3 days followed by 0.5 mg BID for the next 4 days.  
The bupropion SR dosage of 150 mg BID was achieved using a 3-day titration of 150 mg QD. 
Study 4 enrolled 1022 subjects and Study 5 enrolled 1023 subjects. Patients inappropriate for 
bupropion treatment or patients who had previously used bupropion were excluded.   
In Study 4, subjects treated with CHANTIX had a superior rate of CO-confirmed abstinence during 
weeks 9 through 12 (44%) compared to patients treated with bupropion SR (30%) or placebo 
(17%).  The bupropion SR quit rate was also superior to placebo. In addition, 29% of the 
NDA 21-928 
Page 10 
 
CHANTIX group were continuously abstinent from one week after TQD through the end of 
treatment as compared to 12% of the placebo group and 23% of the bupropion SR group. 
Similarly in Study 5, subjects treated with CHANTIX had a superior rate of CO-confirmed 
abstinence during weeks 9 through 12 (44%) compared to patients treated with bupropion SR (30%) 
or placebo (18%).  The bupropion SR quit rate was also superior to placebo. In addition, 29% of the 
CHANTIX group were continuously abstinent from one week after TQD through the end of 
treatment as compared to 11% of the placebo group and 21% of the bupropion SR group. 
Figure 1: Continuous Abstinence, Weeks 9 through 12 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
CHANTIX 0.5 mg
BID
CHANTIX 1.0 mg
BID
Placebo
CHANTIX Flexible
Placebo
CHANTIX 1.0 mg
BID
    Bupropion SR 
150 mg BID
Placebo
CHANTIX 1.0 mg
BID
    Bupropion SR 
150 mg BID
Placebo
STUDY 2
STUDY 3
STUDY 4
STUDY 5
 
NDA 21-928 
Page 11 
 
 
Table 1: Continuous Abstinence, Week 9 through 12 (95% confidence interval) across different studies 
 
 
CHANTIX 
0.5 mg BID 
CHANTIX 
1 mg BID 
CHANTIX 
Flexible 
Bupropion 
SR 
Placebo 
Study 2  
 
45% 
(39%, 51%) 
51% 
(44%, 57%) 
 
 
12% 
(6%, 18%) 
Study 3 
 
 
 
40% 
(32%, 48%) 
 
12% 
(7%, 17%) 
Study 4 
   
 
44% 
(38%, 49%) 
 
30% 
(25%, 35%) 
17% 
(13%, 22%) 
Study 5 
 
 
44% 
(38%, 49%) 
 
30% 
(25%, 35%) 
18% 
(14%, 22%) 
 
 
 
Urge To Smoke 
 
Based on responses to the Brief Questionnaire of Smoking Urges and the Minnesota Nicotine 
Withdrawal scale “Urge to Smoke” item, CHANTIX reduced urge to smoke compared to placebo in 
all studies.   
 
Long-Term Abstinence 
 
Studies 1 through 5 included 40 weeks of post-treatment follow-up.  In each study, CHANTIX-
treated patients were more likely to maintain abstinence throughout the follow-up period than were 
patients treated with placebo (Table 2). 
 
NDA 21-928 
Page 12 
 
Figure 2: Continuous Abstinence, Weeks 9 through 52 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
CHANTIX 0.5 mg
BID
CHANTIX 1.0 mg
BID
Placebo
CHANTIX Flexible
Placebo
CHANTIX 1.0 mg
BID
    Bupropion SR 
150 mg BID
Placebo
CHANTIX 1.0 mg
BID
    Bupropion SR 
150 mg BID
Placebo
STUDY 2
STUDY 3
STUDY 4
STUDY 5
 
 
Table 2: Continuous Abstinence, Weeks 9 through 52 (95% confidence interval) across different 
studies 
 
 
CHANTIX 
0.5 mg BID 
CHANTIX 
1 mg BID 
CHANTIX 
Flexible 
Bupropion 
SR 
Placebo 
Study 2 
 
19% 
(14%, 24%) 
23% 
(18%, 28%) 
 
 
4% 
(1%, 8%) 
Study 3 
 
 
 
22% 
(16%, 29%) 
 
8% 
(3%, 12%) 
Study 4 
   
 
21% 
(17%, 26%) 
 
16% 
(12%, 20%) 
8% 
(5%, 11%) 
Study 5 
 
 
22% 
(17%, 26%) 
 
14% 
(11%, 18%) 
10% 
(7%, 13%) 
 
 
Study 6: This study assessed the effect of an additional 12 weeks of CHANTIX therapy on the 
likelihood of long-term abstinence.  Patients in this study (n=1927) were treated with open-label 
CHANTIX 1 mg BID for 12 weeks.  Patients who had stopped smoking by Week 12 were then 
randomized to double-blind treatment with CHANTIX (1 mg BID) or placebo for an additional 12 
weeks and then followed for 28 weeks post-treatment.  
 
NDA 21-928 
Page 13 
 
The continuous abstinence rate from Week 13 through Week 24 was higher for subjects continuing 
treatment with CHANTIX (70%) than for subjects switching to placebo (50%). Superiority to 
placebo was also maintained during 28 weeks post-treatment follow-up (CHANTIX 54% versus 
placebo 39% (Figure 3)). 
 
In the figure below, the x-axis represents the study week for each observation allowing a 
comparison of groups at similar times after discontinuation of CHANTIX. Post-CHANTIX follow-
up begins at Week 13 for the placebo group and Week 25 for the CHANTIX group.  The y-axis 
represents the percent of subjects who had been abstinent for the last week of CHANTIX treatment 
and remained abstinent at the given timepoint.  
 
Figure 3: Continuous Abstinence Rate during nontreatment follow-up  
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
25/13
26/14
28/16
32/20
36/24
40/28
44/32
48/36
52/40
Nontreatment follow-up (in weeks)
% continuous abstinent 
CHANTIX 1.0 mg BID
Placebo
 
 
INDICATIONS AND USAGE 
 
CHANTIX is indicated as an aid to smoking cessation treatment.   
 
PRECAUTIONS 
 
General 
 
Nausea was the most common adverse event associated with CHANTIX treatment.  Nausea was 
generally described as mild or moderate and often transient; however, for some subjects, it was 
NDA 21-928 
Page 14 
 
persistent over several months.  The incidence of nausea was dose-dependent.  Initial dose-titration 
was beneficial in reducing the occurrence of nausea.  Nausea was reported by approximately 30% 
of patients treated with CHANTIX 1 mg BID after an initial week of dose titration.  In patients 
taking CHANTIX  0.5 mg BID, the incidence of nausea was 16% following initial titration.  
Approximately 3% of subjects treated with CHANTIX 1 mg BID in studies involving 12 weeks of 
treatment discontinued treatment prematurely because of nausea. For patients with intolerable 
nausea, dose reduction should be considered. 
 
 
Effect of smoking cessation:  Physiological changes resulting from smoking cessation, with or 
without treatment with CHANTIX, may alter the pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of some 
drugs, for which dosage adjustment may be necessary (examples include theophylline, warfarin and 
insulin).  
Drug Interactions  
 
Based on varenicline characteristics and clinical experience to date, CHANTIX has no clinically 
meaningful pharmacokinetic drug interactions (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, Drug-
Drug Interactions). 
Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility 
 
Carcinogenesis.  Lifetime carcinogenicity studies were performed in CD-1 mice and Sprague-
Dawley rats.  There was no evidence of a carcinogenic effect in mice administered varenicline by 
oral gavage for 2 years at doses up to 20 mg/kg/day (47 times the maximum recommended human 
daily exposure based on AUC).  Rats were administered varenicline (1, 5, and 15 mg/kg/day) by 
oral gavage for 2 years. In male rats (n = 65 per sex per dose group), incidences of hibernoma 
(tumor of the brown fat) were increased at the mid dose (1 tumor, 5 mg/kg/day, 23 times the 
maximum recommended human daily exposure based on AUC) and maximum dose (2 tumors, 15 
mg/kg/day, 67 times the maximum recommended human daily exposure based on AUC).  The 
clinical relevance of this finding to humans has not been established.  There was no evidence of 
carcinogenicity in female rats. 
Mutagenesis.  Varenicline was not genotoxic, with or without metabolic activation, in the following 
assays: Ames bacterial mutation assay; mammalian CHO/HGPRT assay; and tests for cytogenetic 
aberrations in vivo in rat bone marrow and in vitro in human lymphocytes. 
Impairment of fertility.  There was no evidence of impairment of fertility in either male or female 
Sprague-Dawley rats administered varenicline succinate up to 15 mg/kg/day (67 and 36 times, 
respectively, the maximum recommended human daily exposure based on AUC at 1 mg BID).  
However, a decrease in fertility was noted in the offspring of pregnant rats who were administered 
varenicline succinate at an oral dose of 15 mg/kg/day (36 times the maximum recommended human 
daily exposure based on AUC at 1 mg BID).  This decrease in fertility in the offspring of treated 
female rats was not evident at an oral dose of 3 mg/kg/day (9 times the maximum recommended 
human daily exposure based on AUC at 1 mg BID). 
NDA 21-928 
Page 15 
 
Pregnancy 
 
Pregnancy Category C. 
Varenicline succinate was not teratogenic in rats and rabbits at oral doses up to 15 and 30 
mg/kg/day, respectively (36 and 50-times the maximum recommended human daily exposure based 
on AUC at 1 mg BID, respectively).   
 
Nonteratogenic effects 
   
Varenicline succinate has been shown to have an adverse effect on the fetus in animal reproduction 
studies.  Administration of varenicline succinate to pregnant rabbits resulted in reduced fetal 
weights at an oral dose of 30 mg/kg/day (50 times the human AUC at 1 mg BID); this reduction was 
not evident following treatment with 10 mg/kg/day (23 times the maximum recommended daily 
human exposure based on AUC). In addition, in the offspring of pregnant rats treated with 
varenicline succinate there were decreases in fertility and increases in auditory startle response at an 
oral dose of 15 mg/kg/day (36 times the maximum recommended human daily exposure based on 
AUC at 1 mg BID).  
 
There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women.  CHANTIX should be used 
during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus.  
Nursing mothers 
 
Although it is not known whether this drug is excreted in human milk, animal studies have 
demonstrated that varenicline can be transferred to nursing pups. Because many drugs are excreted 
in human milk and because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants from 
CHANTIX, a decision should be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue the drug, 
taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother. 
Labor and delivery 
 
The potential effects of CHANTIX on labor and delivery are not known.   
 
Pediatric Use 
 
Safety and effectiveness of CHANTIX in pediatric patients have not been established; therefore, 
CHANTIX is not recommended for use in patients under 18 years of age. 
Geriatric Use  
 
A combined single and multiple-dose pharmacokinetic study demonstrated that the 
pharmacokinetics of 1 mg varenicline given QD or BID to 16 healthy elderly male and female 
smokers (aged 65-75 yrs) for 7 consecutive days was similar to that of younger subjects.  No overall 
differences in safety or effectiveness were observed between these subjects and younger subjects, 
and other reported clinical experience has not identified differences in responses between the 
elderly and younger patients, but greater sensitivity of some older individuals cannot be ruled out. 
NDA 21-928 
Page 16 
 
Varenicline is known to be substantially excreted by the kidney, and the risk of toxic reactions to 
this drug may be greater in patients with impaired renal function.  Because elderly patients are more 
likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may be useful 
to monitor renal function (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION, Special Populations, 
Patients with impaired renal function). 
No dosage adjustment is recommended for elderly patients (see DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION, Special Populations). 
 
Information for Patients: 
• Patients should be instructed to set a date to quit smoking and to initiate CHANTIX 
treatment one week before the quit date. 
• Patients should be advised that CHANTIX should be taken after eating, and with a full glass 
of water. 
• Patients should be instructed how to titrate CHANTIX, beginning at a dose of 0.5 mg/day. 
Prescribers should explain that one 0.5 mg tablet should be taken daily for the first three 
days, and that for the next four days, one 0.5 mg tablet should be taken in the morning and 
one 0.5 mg tablet should be taken in the evening. 
• Patients should be advised that, after the first seven days, the dose should be increased to 
one 1 mg tablet in the morning and one 1 mg tablet in the evening. 
• Patients should be encouraged to continue to attempt to quit if they have early lapses after 
quit day. 
• Patients should be informed that nausea and insomnia are side effects of CHANTIX and are 
usually transient; however, patients should be advised that if they are persistently troubled 
by these symptoms, they should notify the prescribing physician so that a dose reduction can 
be considered. 
• Patients should also be provided with educational materials and necessary counseling to 
support an attempt at quitting smoking. 
• Patients should be informed that some medications may require  dose adjustment after 
quitting smoking,  
• Patients intending to become pregnant or planning to breast-feed an infant should be advised 
of the risks of smoking and risks and benefits of smoking cessation with CHANTIX.  
 
 
ADVERSE REACTIONS 
 
During the premarketing development of CHANTIX, over 4500 individuals were exposed to 
CHANTIX, with over 450 treated for at least 24 weeks and approximately 100 for a year.  Most 
study participants were treated for 12 weeks or less. 
In Phase 2 and 3 placebo-controlled studies, the treatment discontinuation rate due to adverse events 
in patients dosed with 1 mg BID was 12% for CHANTIX compared to 10% for placebo in studies 
of three months’ treatment.  In this group, the discontinuation rates for the most common adverse 
events in CHANTIX treated patients were as follows: nausea (3% vs. 0.5% for placebo), headache 
(0.6% vs. 0.9% for placebo), insomnia (1.2% vs. 1.1% for placebo), and abnormal dreams (0.3% vs. 
0.2% for placebo).   
NDA 21-928 
Page 17 
 
Adverse Events were categorized using the Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities 
(MedDRA, Version 7.1). 
The most common adverse events associated with CHANTIX (>5% and twice the rate seen in 
placebo-treated patients) were nausea, sleep disturbance, constipation, flatulence, and vomiting. 
Smoking cessation, with or without treatment, is associated with nicotine withdrawal symptoms.   
The most common adverse event associated with CHANTIX treatment is nausea.  For patients 
treated to the maximum recommended dose of 1 mg BID following initial dosage titration, the 
incidence of nausea was 30% compared with 10% in patients taking a comparable placebo regimen.  
In patients taking CHANTIX 0.5 mg BID following initial titration, the incidence was 16% 
compared with 11% for placebo.  Nausea was generally described as mild or moderate and often 
transient; however, for some subjects, it was persistent throughout the treatment period.   
 
Table 3 shows the adverse events for CHANTIX and placebo in the 12 week fixed dose studies with 
titration in the first week (Studies 2 (titrated arm only), 4, and 5).   MedDRA High Level Group 
Terms (HLGT) reported in ≥ 5% of patients in the CHANTIX 1 mg BID dose group, and more 
commonly than in the placebo group, are listed, along with subordinate Preferred Terms (PT) 
reported in ≥ 1% of CHANTIX patients (and at least 0.5% more frequent than placebo).  Closely 
related Preferred Terms such as ‘Insomnia’, ‘Initial insomnia’, ‘Middle insomnia’, ‘Early morning 
awakening’ were grouped, but individual patients reporting two or more grouped events are only 
counted once.   
 
Table 4: Common Treatment Emergent AEs (%) in the Fixed-Dose, Placebo-Controlled Studies (≥ 1% in the 1 
mg BID CHANTIX Group, and 1 mg BID CHANTIX at least 0.5% more than Placebo) 
SYSTEM ORGAN CLASS 
CHANTIX 
CHANTIX 
Placebo 
  High Level Group Term 
0.5 mg BID 
1mg BID  
 
       Preferred Term 
N=129 
N=821 
N=805 
GASTROINTESTINAL 
 
 
 
 GI Signs and Symptoms 
 
 
 
     Nausea 
16 
30 
10 
     Abdominal Pain* 
5 
7 
5 
     Flatulence 
9 
6 
3 
     Dyspepsia 
5 
5 
3 
     Vomiting 
1 
5 
2 
 GI Motility/Defecation Conditions 
 
 
 
     Constipation 
5 
8 
3 
     Gastroesophageal reflux disease 
1 
1 
0 
 Salivary Gland Conditions 
 
 
 
     Dry mouth 
4 
6 
4 
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS 
 
 
 
 Sleep Disorders/Disturbances 
 
 
 
     Insomnia** 
19 
18 
13 
     Abnormal dreams 
9 
13 
5 
     Sleep disorder 
2 
5 
3 
NDA 21-928 
Page 18 
 
SYSTEM ORGAN CLASS 
CHANTIX 
CHANTIX 
Placebo 
  High Level Group Term 
0.5 mg BID 
1mg BID  
 
       Preferred Term 
N=129 
N=821 
N=805 
     Nightmare 
2 
1 
0 
NERVOUS SYSTEM  
 
 
 
 Headaches  
 
 
 
     Headache  
19 
15 
13 
 Neurological Disorders NEC 
 
 
 
     Dysgeusia  
8 
5 
4 
     Somnolence 
3 
3 
2 
     Lethargy 
2 
1 
0 
GENERAL DISORDERS 
 
 
 
 General Disorders NEC 
 
 
 
     Fatigue/Malaise/Asthenia 
4 
7 
6 
RESPIR/THORACIC/MEDIAST 
 
 
 
 Respiratory Disorders NEC 
 
 
 
     Rhinorrhea 
0 
1 
0 
     Dyspnoea  
2 
1 
1 
Upper Respiratory Tract Disorder  
7 
5 
4 
SKIN/SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE 
 
 
 
 Epidermal and Dermal Conditions 
 
 
 
     Rash 
1 
3 
2 
     Pruritis 
0 
1 
1 
METABOLISM & NUTRITION 
 
 
 
 Appetite/General Nutrit. Disorders 
 
 
 
     Increased appetite  
4 
3 
2 
     Decreased appetite /Anorexia 
1 
2 
1 
* Includes PTs Abdominal (pain, pain upper, pain lower, discomfort, tenderness, distension) 
and Stomach discomfort 
** Includes PTs Insomnia/Initial insomnia/Middle insomnia/Early morning awakening 
 
The overall pattern, and the frequency of adverse events during the longer-term trials was very 
similar to that described in Table 4, though several of the most common events were reported by a 
greater proportion of patients.  Nausea, for instance, was reported in 40% of patients treated with 
CHANTIX 1 mg BID in a one-year study, compared to 8% of placebo-treated patients.  
Following is a list of treatment-emergent adverse events reported by patients treated with 
CHANTIX during all clinical trials.  The listing does not include those events already listed in the 
previous tables or elsewhere in labeling, those events for which a drug cause was remote, those 
events which were so general as to be uninformative, and those events reported only once which did 
not have a substantial probability of being acutely life-threatening. 
 
BLOOD AND LYMPHATIC SYSTEM DISORDERS. Infrequent: Anemia, Lymphadenopathy.  
Rare: Leukocytosis, Thrombocytopenia, Splenomegaly. 
NDA 21-928 
Page 19 
 
CARDIAC DISORDERS. Infrequent: Angina pectoris, Arrhythmia, Bradycardia, Ventricular 
extrasystoles, Myocardial infarction, Palpitations, Tachycardia.  Rare: Atrial fibrillation, Cardiac 
flutter, Coronary artery disease, Cor pulmonale, Acute coronary syndrome. 
EAR AND LABYRINTH DISORDERS.  Infrequent:  Tinnitus, Vertigo.  Rare: Deafness, 
Meniere’s disease. 
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS.  Infrequent: Thyroid gland disorders. 
EYE DISORDERS.  Infrequent: Conjunctivitis, Dry eye, Eye irritation, Vision blurred, Visual 
disturbance, Eye pain.  Rare: Acquired night blindness, Blindness transient, Cataract subcapsular, 
Ocular vascular disorder, Photophobia, Vitreous floaters. 
GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS  Frequent: Diarrhea, Gingivitis.  Infrequent: Dysphagia, 
Enterocolitis, Eructation, Gastritis, Gastrointestinal hemorrhage, Mouth ulceration, Esophagitis.  
Rare: Gastric ulcer, Intestinal obstruction, Pancreatitis acute. 
GENERAL DISORDERS AND ADMINISTRATION SITE CONDITIONS.  Frequent: Chest 
pain, Influenza like illness, Edema, Thirst.  Infrequent: Chest discomfort, Chills, Pyrexia. 
HEPATOBILIARY DISORDERS.  Infrequent: Gall bladder disorder. 
IMMUNE SYSTEM DISORDERS.  Infrequent: Hypersensitivity. Rare: Drug hypersensitivity. 
INVESTIGATIONS.  Frequent:  Liver function test abnormal, Weight increased.  Infrequent: 
Electrocardiogram abnormal, Muscle enzyme increased, Urine analysis abnormal. 
METABOLISM AND NUTRITION DISORDERS.  Infrequent: Diabetes mellitus, 
Hyperlipidemia, Hypokalemia.  Rare: Hyperkalemia, Hypoglycemia. 
MUSCULOSKELETAL AND CONNECTIVE TISSUE DISORDERS.  Frequent: Arthralgia, 
Back pain, Muscle cramp, Musculoskeletal pain, Myalgia.  Infrequent: Arthritis, Osteoporosis.  
Rare:  Myositis. 
NERVOUS SYSTEM DISORDERS.  Frequent: Disturbance in attention, Dizziness, Sensory 
disturbance.  Infrequent: Amnesia, Migraine, Parosmia, Psychomotor hyperactivity, Restless legs 
syndrome, Syncope, Tremor.  Rare: Balance disorder, Cerebrovascular accident, Convulsion, 
Dysarthria, Facial palsy, Mental impairment, Multiple sclerosis, Nystagmus, Psychomotor skills 
impaired, Transient ischemic attack, Visual field defect.   
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS.  Frequent: Anxiety, Depression, Emotional disorder, Irritability, 
Restlessness.  Infrequent: Aggression, Agitation, Disorientation, Dissociation, Libido decreased, 
Mood swings, Thinking abnormal.  Rare: Bradyphrenia, Euphoric mood, Hallucination, Psychotic 
disorder, Suicidal ideation. 
RENAL AND URINARY DISORDERS.  Frequent: Polyuria.  Infrequent: Nephrolithiasis, 
Nocturia, Urine abnormality, Urethral syndrome.  Rare: Renal failure acute, Urinary retention. 
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM AND BREAST DISORDERS.  Frequent: Menstrual disorder.  
Infrequent: Erectile dysfunction.  Rare: Sexual dysfunction. 
RESPIRATORY, THORACIC AND MEDIASTINAL DISORDERS.  Frequent: Epistaxis, 
Respiratory disorders.  Infrequent: Asthma.  Rare: Pleurisy, Pulmonary embolism. 
SKIN AND SUBCUTANEOUS TISSUE DISORDERS.  Frequent: Hyperhidrosis.  Infrequent: 
Acne, Dermatitis, Dry skin, Eczema, Erythema, Psoriasis, Urticaria.  Rare: Photosensitivity 
reaction. 
VASCULAR DISORDERS.  Frequent: Hot flush, Hypertension.  Infrequent: Hypotension, 
Peripheral ischemia, Thrombosis. 
 
NDA 21-928 
Page 20 
 
DRUG ABUSE AND DEPENDENCE 
 
Controlled Substance Class 
 
Varenicline is not a controlled substance. 
Humans: Fewer than 1 out of 1000 patients reported euphoria in clinical trials with CHANTIX.  At 
higher doses (greater than 2 mg), CHANTIX produced more frequent reports of gastrointestinal 
disturbances such as nausea and vomiting.  There is no evidence of dose-escalation to maintain 
therapeutic effects in clinical studies, which suggests that tolerance does not develop.  Abrupt 
discontinuation of CHANTIX was associated with an increase in irritability and sleep disturbances 
in up to 3% of patients.  This suggests that, in some patients, varenicline may produce mild physical 
dependence which is not associated with addiction. 
 
In a human laboratory abuse liability study, a single oral dose of 1 mg varenicline did not produce 
any significant positive or negative subjective responses in smokers.  In non-smokers, 1 mg 
varenicline produced an increase in some positive subjective effects, but this was accompanied by 
an increase in negative adverse effects, especially nausea.  A single oral dose of 3 mg varenicline 
uniformly produced unpleasant subjective responses in both smokers and non-smokers. 
Animals: Studies in rodents have shown that varenicline produces behavioral responses similar to 
those produced by nicotine.  In rats trained to discriminate nicotine from saline, varenicline 
produced full generalization to the nicotine cue.  In self-administration studies, the degree to which 
varenicline substitutes for nicotine is dependent upon the requirement of the task.  Rats trained to 
self-administer nicotine under easy conditions continued to self-administer varenicline to a degree 
comparable to that of nicotine, however in a more demanding task, rats self-administered 
varenicline to a lesser extent than nicotine. Varenicline pretreatment also reduced nicotine self-
administration. 
OVERDOSAGE 
 
In case of overdose, standard supportive measures should be instituted as required.   
Varenicline has been shown to be dialyzed in patients with end stage renal disease (see CLINICAL 
PHARMACOLOGY, Pharmacokinetics, Pharmacokinetics in Special Patient Populations), 
however, there is no experience in dialysis following overdose. 
DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION 
 
Usual Dosage for Adults  
 
Smoking cessation therapies are more likely to succeed for patients who are motivated to stop 
smoking and who are provided additional advice and support.  Patients should be provided with 
appropriate educational materials and counseling to support the quit attempt. 
NDA 21-928 
Page 21 
 
The patient should set a date to stop smoking.  CHANTIX dosing should start one week before this 
date.  
 
CHANTIX should be taken after eating and with a full glass of water. 
   
The recommended dose of CHANTIX is 1 mg twice daily following a 1-week titration as follows:  
Days 1 – 3: 
0.5 mg once daily 
Days 4 – 7: 
0.5 mg twice daily 
Day 8 – End of treatment: 
1 mg twice daily 
 
Patients who cannot tolerate adverse effects of CHANTIX may have the dose lowered temporarily 
or permanently. 
 
Patients should be treated with CHANTIX for 12 weeks.  For patients who have successfully 
stopped smoking at the end of 12 weeks, an additional course of 12 weeks treatment with 
CHANTIX is recommended to further increase the likelihood of long-term abstinence.  
Patients who do not succeed in stopping smoking during 12 weeks of initial therapy, or who relapse 
after treatment, should be encouraged to make another attempt once factors contributing to the 
failed attempt have been identified and addressed. 
Special Populations 
 
Patients with impaired renal function 
 
No dosage adjustment is necessary for patients with mild to moderate renal impairment.   
For patients with severe renal impairment, the recommended starting dose of CHANTIX is 0.5 mg 
once daily.  Patients may then titrate as needed to a maximum dose of 0.5 mg twice a day.  For 
patients with End-stage renal disease undergoing hemodialysis, a maximum dose of 0.5 mg once 
daily may be administered if tolerated well (See CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY, 
Pharmacokinetics, Pharmacokinetics in Special Populations, Renal impairment). 
 
Dosing in elderly patients and patients with impaired hepatic function 
 
No dosage adjustment is necessary for patients with hepatic impairment.  Because elderly patients 
are more likely to have decreased renal function, care should be taken in dose selection, and it may 
be useful to monitor renal function (See PRECAUTIONS, Geriatric Use). 
 
Use in children 
 
Safety and effectiveness of CHANTIX in pediatric patients have not been established; therefore, 
CHANTIX is not recommended for use in patients under 18 years of age. 
NDA 21-928 
Page 22 
 
HOW SUPPLIED 
 
CHANTIX is supplied for oral administration in two strengths: a 0.5 mg capsular biconvex, white to 
off-white, film-coated tablet debossed with "Pfizer" on one side and "CHX 0.5" on the other side 
and a 1 mg capsular biconvex, light blue film-coated tablets debossed with "Pfizer" on one side and 
"CHX 1.0" on the other side.  CHANTIX is supplied in the following package configurations: 
 
 
Description 
NDC 
Packs 
 
 
 
First month of therapy: 
Pack (Includes 1 card - 0.5 mg x 11 tablets and 3 cards - 
1 mg x 14 tablets) 
NDC 0069-0471-97 
 
Continuing months of therapy: 
Pack (Includes 4 cards - 1 mg x 14 tablets ) 
NDC 0069-0469-97 
Bottles 
 
 
 
0.5 mg - bottle of 56 
NDC 0069-0468-56 
 
1 mg - bottle of 56 
NDC 0069-0469-56 
 
 
STORAGE AND HANDLING   
 
Store at 25ºC (77ºF); excursions permitted to 15–30ºC (59–86ºF) (see USP Controlled Room 
Temperature). 
 
Rx only 
[PLACEHOLDER FOR INTERNAL TRACKING NUMBER AND DATE] 
 
 
 
 
NDA 21-928 
Page 23 
 
PATIENT INFORMATION 
CHANTIX™ 
(varenicline) Tablets 
Read the patient information that comes with CHANTIX before you start taking it and each 
time you get a refill.   There may be new information. This information does not take the 
place of talking with your doctor about your condition or treatment. 
 
WHAT IS CHANTIX?   
CHANTIX is a prescription medicine to help adults stop smoking. 
 
WHO SHOULD NOT TAKE CHANTIX? 
CHANTIX has not been studied in children under 18 years of age.  CHANTIX is not 
recommended for children under 18 years of age.  
Do not take CHANTIX if you are allergic to anything in it.  See a complete list of ingredients 
at the end of this leaflet. 
 
WHAT SHOULD I TELL MY DOCTOR BEFORE STARTING CHANTIX? 
Tell your doctor about all of your medical conditions including if you: 
• 
have kidney problems or get kidney dialysis. Your doctor may prescribe a lower 
dose of CHANTIX for you.  
• 
are pregnant or plan to become pregnant. CHANTIX has not been studied in 
pregnant women. It is not known if CHANTIX will harm your unborn baby. It is best 
to stop smoking before you get pregnant.  
• 
are breastfeeding. Although it was not studied, CHANTIX may pass into breast 
milk.  You and your doctor should discuss alternative ways to feed your baby if 
you take CHANTIX. 
NDA 21-928 
Page 24 
 
Tell your doctor about all your other medicines including prescription and nonprescription 
medicines, vitamins and herbal supplements.  Especially, tell your doctor if you take: 
• insulin 
• asthma medicines 
• blood thinners. 
When you stop smoking, there may be a change in how these and other medicines work 
for you.  
Know the medicines you take.  Keep a list of them with you to show your doctor and 
pharmacist. 
 
HOW DO I TAKE CHANTIX? 
1. Choose a quit date when you will stop smoking.  
2. Start taking CHANTIX 1 week (7 days) before your quit date. This lets CHANTIX 
build up in your body. You can keep smoking during this time. Make sure that you 
try and stop smoking on your quit date.  If you slip, try again.  Some people need 
a few weeks for CHANTIX to work best.   
3. Take CHANTIX after eating and with a full glass (8 ounces) of water. 
4. Most people will keep taking CHANTIX for up to 12 weeks.  If you have completely 
quit smoking by 12 weeks, ask your doctor if another 12 weeks of CHANTIX may 
help you stay cigarette-free.  
• CHANTIX comes as a white tablet (0.5 mg) and a blue tablet (1 mg). You start with the 
white tablet and then usually go to the blue tablet.  See the chart below for dosing 
instructions.   
 
NDA 21-928 
Page 25 
 
 
Day 1 to Day 3 
•  White tablet (0.5 mg), 1 tablet each day 
Day 4 to Day 7 
•  White tablet (0.5 mg), twice a day 
•  1 in the morning and 1 in the evening 
Day 8 to end of  treatment 
•  Blue tablet (1 mg) twice a day 
•  1 in the morning and 1 in the evening 
• 
This dosing schedule may not be right for everyone.  Talk to your doctor if you are 
having side effects such as nausea or sleep problems.  Your doctor may want to 
reduce your dose. 
• 
If you miss a dose, take it as soon as you remember. If it is close to the time for your 
next dose, wait. Just take your next regular dose.  
WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE SIDE EFFECTS OF CHANTIX? 
.The most common side effects of CHANTIX include:  
• 
nausea  
• 
changes in dreaming 
• 
constipation 
• 
gas 
• 
vomiting 
  
Tell your doctor about side effects that bother you or that do not go away. 
These are not all the side effects of CHANTIX.  Ask your doctor or pharmacist for more 
information. 
 
NDA 21-928 
Page 26 
 
HOW SHOULD I STORE CHANTIX? 
• Store CHANTIX at room temperature, 59 to 86°F (15 to 30°C). 
• Safely dispose of CHANTIX that is out of date or no longer needed. 
• Keep CHANTIX and all medicines out of the reach of children. 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT CHANTIX 
Medicines are sometimes prescribed for conditions other than those described in patient 
information leaflets.  Do not use CHANTIX for a condition for which it was not prescribed.  
Do not give your CHANTIX to other people, even if they have the same symptoms that you 
have.  It may harm them.  
This leaflet summarizes the most important information about CHANTIX. If you would like 
more information, talk with your doctor.  You can ask your doctor or pharmacist for 
information about CHANTIX that is written for healthcare professionals.   
To find out more about CHANTIX and tips on how to quit smoking:  
o Go to the CHANTIX website at www.CHANTIX.com.  
o Call 1-800-CHANTIX (800-242-6749).  
WHAT IS IN CHANTIX? 
Active ingredient: varenicline tartrate 
Inactive ingredients: microcrystalline cellulose (NF), anhydrous dibasic calcium phosphate 
(USP), croscarmellose sodium (NF), colloidal silicon dioxide (NF), magnesium stearate 
(NF), Opadry ®, White (for 0.5 mg), Opadry ® Blue (for 1 mg), and Opadry® Clear (for 
both 0.5 mg and 1 mg) 
Rx only  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 2006 
NDA 21-928 
Page 27 
 
 
 
