2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Introduction 
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION
– 1 – 
Chapter 1 – Introduction 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
– 2 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Introduction 
Introduction 
Colin C. Hardy 
Bill Leenhouts 
Why Do We Need A National Smoke Management Guide? 
As an ecological process, wildland fire is essen­
tial in creating and maintaining functional 
ecosystems and achieving other land use objec­
tives. As a decomposition process, wildland fire 
produces combustion byproducts that are harm­
ful to human health and welfare. Both the land 
management benefits from using wildland fire 
and the public health and welfare effects from 
wildland fire smoke are well documented. The 
challenge in using wildland fire is balancing the 
public interest objectives of protecting human 
health and welfare and sustaining ecological 
integrity. 
Minimizing the adverse effects of smoke on 
human health and welfare while maximizing the 
effectiveness of using wildland fire is an inte­
grated and collaborative activity. Everyone 
interested in natural resource management is 
responsible and has a role. Land managers need 
to assure that using wildland fire is the most 
effective alternative of achieving the land 
management objectives. State, regional, tribal 
and national air resource managers must ensure 
that air quality rules and regulations equitably 
accommodate all legal emission sources. 
The varied smoke management issues from 
across the nation involve many diverse cultures 
and interests, include a multitude of strategies 
and tactics, and cover a heterogeneous land­
scape. No national answer or cookbook ap­
proach will adequately address them. But 
people with a desire for responsible smoke 
management working in partnership with the 
latest science-based smoke management infor­
mation can fashion effective regional smoke 
management plans and programs to address 
their individual and collective objectives. The 
intent of the Guide is to provide the latest 
science-based smoke management information 
from across the nation to facilitate these col­
laborative efforts. 
Awareness of smoke production, transport, and 
effects on receptors from prescribed and wild­
land fires will enable us to refine existing smoke 
management strategies and to develop better 
smoke management plans and programs in the 
future. This Guide addresses the basic control 
strategies for minimizing the adverse effects of 
smoke on human health and welfare—thus 
maximizing the effectiveness of using wildland 
fire. These control strategies are: 
• Avoidance – using meteorological condi­
tions when scheduling burning in order to 
avoid incursions of wildland fire smoke 
into smoke sensitive areas. 
• Dilution – controlling the rate of emissions 
or scheduling for dispersion to assure 
tolerable concentrations of smoke in 
designated areas. 
– 3 – 
Chapter 1 – Introduction 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
• Emissions-reduction – using techniques to 
minimize the smoke output per unit area 
treated and decrease the contribution to 
regional haze as well as intrusions into 
designated areas. 
Guide Goals and 
Considerations 
The Smoke Management Guide steering com­
mittee and the NWCG Fire Use Working Team 
developed this Guide with the following goals: 
• Provide fire use practitioners with a 
fundamental understanding of fire-emis-
sions processes and impacts, regulatory 
objectives, and tools for the management 
of smoke from wildland fires. 
• Provide local, state, tribal, and federal air 
quality managers with background infor­
mation related to the wildland fire and 
emissions processes and air, land and 
wildland fire management. 
The following considerations provide the con­
text within which these goals can be met: 
• This document is about smoke manage­
ment, not about the decision to use wild­
land fire or its alternatives. Its purpose is 
not to advocate for or against the use of 
fire to meet land management objectives. 
• While the Guide contains relevant back­
ground material and resources generally 
useful to development of smoke manage­
ment programs, it is not a tutorial on how 
to develop a state smoke management 
program. 
• Although the Guide is replete with infor­
mation and examples for potential applica­
tion at the local and regional level, the 
Guide generally focuses on national smoke 
management principles. For maximum 
benefit to local or regional applications, 
appropriate supplements should be devel­
oped for the scale or geographical location 
of the respective application. 
• The Guide is more appropriate for knowl­
edgeable air, land, and wildland fire 
managers, and is not intended for novice 
readers. 
Overview and 
Organization of the Guide 
The Smoke Management Guide for Prescribed 
and Wildland Fire–2001 Edition follows a 
textbook model so that it can be used as a 
supplemental reference in smoke management 
training sessions and courses such as the 
NWCG Smoke Management course, RX-410 
(formerly RX-450). Following an Introduc­
tion, a background chapter presents a primer on 
wildland fire and a discussion of the imperatives 
for smoke management. In the Wildland Fire 
Imperative, the Guide addresses both the 
ecological and societal aspects of wildland fire 
(not agricultural, construction debris, or other 
biomass burning), and provides the details 
necessary for fire use practitioners and air 
quality managers to understand the fundamen­
tals of fire in wildlands. The Smoke Manage­
ment Imperative discusses the needs for smoke 
management as well as its benefits and costs. 
The background sections are followed by chap­
ters presenting details on Wildland Fire Smoke 
Impacts—public health, visibility, problem and 
nuisance smoke, and smoke exposure among 
fireline personnel—and on Regulations for 
Smoke Management. The chapter on Smoke 
Source Characteristics follows a sequence 
similar to the basic pathway that smoke produc­
– 4 – 
___________________________________ 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Introduction 
tion does—from the pre-fire fuel characteristics 
and the fire phenomenon as an emissions 
source, through the processes of combustion, 
biomass consumption and emissions production. 
The chapter on Fire Use Planning addresses 
important considerations for developing a 
comprehensive fire use plan (a “burn plan”). 
The general planning process is reviewed, from 
developing a general land use plan, through a 
fire management plan and, ultimately, to a unit-
specific burn plan. 
The Smoke Management Meteorology chapter 
presents a primer on the use of weather observa­
tions and forecasts, and then provides informa­
tion regarding the transport and dispersion of 
smoke from wildland fires. 
Techniques to Reduce or Redistribute Emis­
sions are presented in an exhaustive list and 
synthesis of emissions reduction and impact 
reduction practices and techniques. These 
practices and techniques were initially compiled 
as the outcomes of three regional workshops 
held specifically for the purpose of synthesizing 
current and potential smoke management tools. 
Presented here in a nationally applicable format, 
they are the fundamental tools available to fire 
planners and fire use practitioners for the man­
agement and mitigation of smoke from wildland 
fires. 
The Smoke Dispersion Prediction Systems 
chapter reviews current prediction tools within 
the context of three “families” of model applica-
tions—screening, planning, or regulating. 
Air Quality Monitoring for Smoke discusses 
various objectives for monitoring, and empha­
sizes the need to carefully match the monitoring 
objective with the appropriate equipment. In 
addition, the chapter presents information on 
some common monitoring equipment, methods, 
and their associated costs. 
Emission Inventories help managers and 
regulators understand how to better include fire 
in an emissions inventory.  This chapter dis­
cusses the use of the three basic elements 
needed to perform an emission inventory—area 
burned, fuel consumed, and appropriate emis­
sion factor(s). 
No smoke management effort can succeed 
without continued assessment and feedback. 
The chapter on Program Administration and 
Assessment discusses the need to maintain a 
balance between the level of effort in a program 
and the level of prescribed or fire use activity as 
well as their associated local or regional effects. 
Each section in this Guide is now supported by 
an extensive list of relevant references. Also, 
authorship for a specific section is given in the 
table of contents, where appropriate. In such 
cases, the section can be cited with its respective 
author(s) as an independent “chapter” in the 
Guide. 
A glossary of frequently used fire and smoke 
1
management terms is provided as an appendix 
to the Guide. 
History of Smoke 
Management Guidance 
The first guidance document specifically ad­
dressing the management of smoke from pre­
scribed fires was the Southern Smoke 
Management Guidebook, produced in 1976 by 
the Southern Forest Fire Laboratory staff 
For a comprehensive presentation of fire terminology, the reader should refer to the NWCG Glossary of Wildland 
Fire Terminology (NWCG 1996—PMS #205, Boise, ID). 
– 5 – 
1 
___________________________________ 
Chapter 1 – Introduction 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
(1976). It was a comprehensive treatment of the 
various aspects fire behavior, emissions, trans­
port and dispersion, and the management of 
smoke in the southern United States. 
In 1985, NWCG’s Prescribed Fire and Fire 
Effects Working Team developed the widely 
accepted Prescribed Fire Smoke Management 
Guide that forms the basis for this 2001 revised 
Guide (NWCG 1985). The 1985 edition fo­
cused on national smoke management principles 
and, as a result, was far less comprehensive than 
the Southern guidebook. 
One of six state-of-knowledge reports prepared 
for the 1978 National Fire Effects Workshop is a 
review called Effects of Fire on Air (USDA 
Forest Service 1978). The six volumes, called 
the “Rainbow Series” on fire effects, were in 
response to the changes in policies, laws, regula­
tions, and initiatives. Objectives specific to the 
volume on air were to: “…summarize the 
current state-of-knowledge of the effects of 
forest burning on the air resource, and to define 
research questions of high priority for the 
management of smoke from prescribed and wild 
fires” (USDA Forest Service 1978, p.5).2 
Conflicts between prescribed fire and air quality 
began to be seriously addressed in the mid­
1980s. Prior to this, only a few states had 
developed or implemented smoke management 
programs, and national-level policies addressing 
smoke from wildland burns were only beginning 
to be drafted. Much has changed since then, 
with numerous policies and initiatives raising 
the potential for conflicting resource manage­
ment objectives—principally air quality and 
ecosystem integrity.  The Clean Air Act amend­
ments adopted in 1990 specifically addressed 
regional haze. Smoke Management Plans have 
been developed by many states as administrative 
rules enforceable under state law.  These rules 
are often incorporated into State and Tribal 
Implementation Plans (SIPs and TIPs) for 
submission to the U.S. Environmental Protec­
tion Agency (EPA) and, once promulgated by 
EPA, are then enforceable under federal law as 
well. And now, the role of fire and the need for 
its accelerated use has become widely recog­
nized with respect to maintenance and restora­
tion of fire-adapted ecosystems. These issues 
all point to the imperative for better knowledge 
and more informed collaboration between 
managers of both the air and terrestrial re­
sources. 
The 2001 Edition of the Smoke 
Management Guide 
Recognizing the increasing likelihood of im­
pacting the public, the proliferation of federal, 
state, and local statutes, rules and ordinances 
pertaining to smoke, as well as major improve­
ments to our knowledge of smoke and its man­
agement, the NWCG Fire Use Working Team 
(formerly named the Prescribed Fire and Fire 
Effects Working Team) sponsored revision of 
the Guide. Conceptually, the Fire Use Working 
Team identified the need for a revised guide­
book that targeted not just prescribed fire practi­
tioners, but state and local air quality and public 
health agency personnel as well. A consequence 
of this expansion of the target audience was the 
need to substantially augment the background 
information with respect to fire in wildlands. 
A suite of potential smoke management prac­
tices and techniques are not only suggested in 
The Joint Fire Sciences Program is sponsoring extensive revisions to the Rainbow Series fire effects volumes, 
including a new volume on fire effects on air. 
– 6 – 
2 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Introduction 
this Guide, but their relative effectiveness and 
regionally-specific applicability are also pro­
vided. This information was acquired through 
three regional workshops held in collaboration 
with the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency’s Office of Air Quality Planning and 
Standards. 
This revised Guide now emphasizes both emis­
sion and impact reduction methods that have 
been found to be practical, useful, and benefi­
cial. This new emphasis on reducing emissions 
is in response to regional haze and fine particle 
(PM2.5) control programs that will require 
emission reductions from a wide variety of 
pollution sources (including prescribed and 
wildland fire). This is especially important in 
view of the major increases in the use of fire 
projected by federal land managers. Readers 
will also find a greatly expanded discussion of 
air quality regulatory requirements, reflecting 
the growing complexities and demands on 
today’s fire practitioners. 
Literature Citations 
NWCG. 1985. Prescribed fire smoke management 
guide. NWCG publication PMS-420-2. Boise, 
ID. National Wildfire Coordinating Group. 
28 p. 
Southern Forest Fire Laboratory Staff. 1976. South­
ern forestry smoke management guidebook. 
USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. SE-10. 
Asheville, N.C. USDA Forest Service, South­
east Forest Experiment Station. 140 p. 
USDA Forest Service. 1978.  Effects of fire on air. 
USDA For. Serv. Gen. Tech. Rep. WO-9. 
Washington, D.C. USDA Forest Service. 40 p. 
– 7 – 
Chapter 2 – Overview 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
– 8 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
2.1 – The Wildland Fire Imperative 
Chapter 2
OVERVIEW
– 9 – 
Chapter 2 – Overview 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
– 10 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
2.1 – The Wildland Fire Imperative 
The Wildland Fire Imperative 
Colin C. Hardy 
Sharon M. Hermann 
Robert E. Mutch 
Perpetuating America’s Natural Heritage: Balancing 
Wildland Management Needs and the Public Interest 
Strategies for responsible and effective smoke 
management cannot be developed without 
careful consideration of the ecological and the 
societal impacts of fire management in the 
wildlands of modern America.  The need to 
consider both perspectives is acknowledged by 
most land management agencies, as well as by 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) —the primary Federal agency responsible 
for protecting air quality.  An awareness of this 
challenge is reflected in NWCG’s education 
message, Managing Wildland Fire: Balancing 
America’s Natural Heritage and the Public 
Interest (NWCG 1998). The preamble to this 
document not only states that “fire is an impor­
tant and inevitable part of America’s wildlands,” 
but also recognizes that “wildland fires can 
produce both benefits and damages—to the 
environment and to people’s interests.” 
The EPA’s Interim Air Quality Policy on Wild­
land and Prescribed Fires (U.S. EPA 1998) 
employs similar language to describe related 
public policy goals: (1) To allow fire to function, 
as nearly as possible, in its natural role in 
maintaining healthy wildland ecosystems; and, 
(2) To protect public health and welfare by 
mitigating the impacts of air pollutant emissions 
on air quality and visibility.  The document 
comments on the responsibilities of wildland 
owners/managers and State/tribal air quality 
managers to coordinate fire activities, minimize 
air pollutant emissions, manage smoke from 
prescribed fires as well as wildland fires used 
for resource benefits, and establish emergency 
action programs to mitigate the unavoidable 
impacts on the public. In addition, EPA asserts 
that “this policy is not intended to limit opportu­
nities by private wildland owners/managers to 
use fire so that burning can be increased on 
publicly owned wildlands.” 
In this and the following section (2.2–The 
Smoke Management Imperative), we outline 
both ecological and societal aspects of wildland 
and prescribed fire. We review the historical 
role and extent of fire and the effects of settle­
ment and land use changes. The influence of 
fire exclusion policies on historical disturbance 
processes is considered in light of modern 
landscape conditions. This provides the basis 
for discussion of significant, recent changes in 
Federal wildland fire policy and new initiatives 
for accelerating use of prescribed and wildland 
fire to achieve resource management objectives. 
Finally, we present examples of the impacts of 
– 11 – 
Chapter 2 – Overview
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
wildland smoke on air quality, human health, 
and safety. 
Fire in Wildlands 
Recurring fires are often an essential component 
of the natural environment—as natural as rain, 
snow, or wind.  Evidence for the recurrence of 
past fires is found in charcoal layers of lakes and 
bogs, in fire-scars of trees, and in the morpho­
logical and life history adaptations of numerous 
native plants and animals. Many ecosystems in 
North America and throughout the world are 
fire-dependent (Heinselman 1978) and periodic 
burning is essential for healthy ecosystem 
functioning in these wildlands. Fire acts at the 
individual, population, and community levels 
and can influence: 
•	
Plant succession. 
•	
Fuel accumulation and decay. 
•	
Recruitment pattern and age distribu­
tion of individuals. 
•	
Species composition of vegetation. 
•	
Disease and insect pathogens. 
•	
Nutrient cycles and energy flows. 
•	
Biotic productivity, diversity, and 
stability. 
•	
Habitat structure for wildlife. 
For millennia, lightning, volcanoes, and people 
have ignited fires in wildland ecosystems. The 
current emphasis on ecosystem management 
calls for the maintenance of interactions be­
tween such disturbance processes and ecosys­
tem functions. Therefore, it is incumbent on 
both fire and natural resource managers to 
understand the range of historical frequency, 
severity, and aerial extent of past burns.  This 
knowledge provides a frame of reference for 
applying appropriate management practices on a 
landscape scale, including the use and exclusion 
of fire. 
Many studies have described the historical 
occurrence of fires throughout the world. For 
example, Swetnam (1993) used fire scars to 
describe a 2000-year period of fire history in 
giant sequoia groves in California. He found 
that frequent small fires occurred during a warm 
period from about A.D. 1000 to 1300, and less 
frequent but more widespread fires occurred 
during cooler periods from about A.D. 500-1000 
and after 1300. Swain (1973) determined from 
lake sediment analyses in the Boundary Waters 
Canoe Area in Minnesota that tree species and 
fire had interacted in complex ways over a 
10,000-year period. Other studies ranging from 
Maine (e.g. Copenheaver and others 2000) to 
Florida (e.g. Watts and others 1992) have em­
ployed pollen and charcoal deposits to demon­
strate shifts in fire frequency correlated with the 
onset of European settlement. 
There is an even larger body of science that 
details the numerous effects of wildland fires on 
components of ecosystems. Some of the most 
compelling examples of fire dependency come 
from studies on plant reproduction and estab­
lishment. For instance, there are at least ten 
species of pines scattered over the United States 
that have serotinous cones; that is to say the 
cones are sealed by resin; the cone scales do not 
open and seeds do not disperse until the resin is 
exposed to high heat (reviewed in Whelan 
1995). Examples of fire dependency in herba­
ceous plants include flowering of wiregrass in 
Southeastern longleaf pine forests that is greatly 
enhanced by growing season burns (Myers 
1990) and seed germination of California 
chaparral forbs that is triggered by exposure to 
smoke (Keeley and Fotheringham 1997).  Ani­
mals as diverse as rare Karner blue butterflies in 
Indiana (Kwilosz and Knutson 1999) to whoop­
ing cranes in Texas (Chavez Ramirez and others 
1996) benefit when fire is re-introduced into 
their habitats. There are numerous other types 
of fire dependency in North American ecosys­
– 12 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
2.1 – The Wildland Fire Imperative 
tems and many studies on this topic are summa­
rized in books and government publications 
(e.g. Agee 1993, Bond and van Wilgen 1996, 
Brown and Kapler Smith 2000, Johnson 1992, 
Kapler Smith 2000, Wade and others 1980, 
Whelan 1995). In addition, there is a small but 
growing volume of literature that evaluates the 
influence of fire on multiple trophic levels (e.g. 
Hermann and others 1998). 
Knowledge of fire history, fire regimes, and fire 
effects allows land stewards to develop informed 
management strategies. Application of fire may 
be one of the tools used to meet resource man­
agement objectives. The role of fire as an 
important disturbance process has been high­
lighted in a classification of continental fire 
regimes (Kilgore and Heinselman 1990). These 
authors describe a natural fire regime as the total 
pattern of fires over time that is characteristic of 
a region or ecosystem. Fire regimes are defined 
in terms of fire type and severity, typical fire 
sizes and patterns, and fire frequency, or length 
of return intervals in years. Kilgore and 
(b) 
(a) 
Heinselman (1990) placed natural fire regimes 
of North America into seven classes, ranging 
from Class 0, in which fires are rare or absent, 
to Class 6, in which crown fires and severe 
surface fires occur at return intervals longer than 
300 years. Intermediate fire regimes, Classes 1­
5, are characterized by increasingly longer fire 
return intervals and increasingly higher fire 
intensities. Class 2, for example, describes the 
situation for long-needled pines, like longleaf 
pine, ponderosa pine, and Jeffrey pine; in this 
class low severity, surface fires occur rather 
frequently (return intervals of less than 25 
years). Lodgepole pine, jackpine, and the boreal 
forest of Canada and Alaska generally fall into 
Class 4, a class in which high severity crown 
fires occur every 25 to 100 years; or into Class 
5, a class in which crown fires occur every 100 
to 300 years. White bark pine forests at high 
elevations typically fall into Class 6. For com­
parison, three general classes of fire are shown 
in figure 2.1, including a low-intensity surface 
fire, a mixed-severity fire, and a stand-replacing 
crown fire. 
(c) 
Figure 2.1. The relative difference in general classes of fire are shown. This 
series illustrates a low-intensity surface fire (a), a mixed-severity fire (b), and a 
stand-replacing crown fire (c). 
– 13 – 
Chapter 2 – Overview 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
A noteworthy aspect of continental fire regimes 
is that very few North American ecosystems fall 
into Class 0. In other words, most ecosystems 
in the United States have evolved under the 
consistent influence of wildland fire, establish­
ing fire as a process that affects numerous 
ecosystem functions described earlier.  Those 
who apply prescribed burns or use wildland fire 
often attempt to mimic the natural role of fire in 
creating or maintaining ecosystems. Sustaining 
the productivity of fire-adapted ecosystems 
generally requires application of prescribed fire 
on a sufficiently large scale to ensure that 
various ecosystem processes remain intact. 
Ecological Effects of 
Altered Fire Regimes 
As humans alter fire frequency and severity, 
many plant and animal communities experience 
a loss of species diversity, site degradation, and 
increases in the sizes and severity of wildfires. 
Ferry and others (1995) concluded that altered 
fire regimes was the principal agent of change 
affecting vegetative structure, composition, and 
biological diversity of five major plant commu­
nities totaling over 350 million acres in the U.S. 
As a way to evaluate the current amount of fire 
in wildland habitat, Leenhouts (1998) compared 
estimated land area burned 200-400 years ago 
(“pre-industrial”) to data from the contemporary 
conterminous United States. The result suggests 
that ten times more acreage burned annually in 
the pre-industrial era than does in modern times. 
After accounting for loss of wildland area due to 
land use changes such as urbanization and 
agriculture, Leenhouts concluded that the 
remaining wildland is burned approximately 
fifty percent less compared to fire frequency 
under historical fire regimes (figure 2.2). 
Numerous ecosystem indicators serve as alarm­
ing examples of the effects of altered fire re­
gimes. Land use changes, attempted fire 
exclusion practices, prolonged drought, and 
epidemic levels of insects and diseases have 
coincided to produce extensive forest mortality, 
or major changes in forest density and species 
composition. Gray (1992) called attention to a 
forest health emergency in parts of the western 
Figure 2.2.  Estimates of the range of annual area burned in the conterminous United States pre-European 
settlement (Historic), applying presettlement fire frequencies to present land cover types (Expected), and 
burning (wildland and agriculture) that has occurred during the recent past (Current). Source: Leenhouts 
(1998). 
– 14 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
2.1 – The Wildland Fire Imperative 
United States where trees have been killed 
across millions of acres in eastern Oregon and 
Washington.  He indicated that similar problems 
extend south into Utah, Nevada, and California, 
and east into Idaho. Denser stands and heavy 
fuel accumulations are also setting the stage for 
high severity crown fires in Montana, Colorado, 
Arizona, New Mexico, and Nebraska, where the 
historical norm in long-needled pine forests was 
(a) 
for more frequent low severity surface fires (fire 
regime Class 2; Kilgore and Heinselman 1990). 
The paired photos in figure 2.3 illustrate 85 
years of change resulting from fire exclusion on 
a fire-dependent site in western Montana. In 
North Carolina, Gilliam and Platt (1999) quanti­
fied the dramatic effects of over 80-years of fire 
exclusion on tree species composition and stand 
structure in a longleaf pine forest. 
(b) 
Figure 2.3. These two photos, taken of the same homestead near Sula, Montana, show 85 years of change on 
a fire-dependent site where fire has been excluded. The top photo (a) was taken in 1895.  By 1980 (b), 
encroaching trees and shrubs occupy nearly all of the site.  Stand-replacing crown fire visited this site in 2000. 
– 15 – 
Chapter 2 – Overview 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Since the 1960s, records show an alarming 
trend towards more acres consumed by wild 
fires, despite all of our advances in fire suppres­
sion technology (figure 2.4). The larger, more 
severe wildfires have accelerated the rate of tree 
mortality, threatening people, property, and 
natural resources (Mutch 1994). These wild­
fires also have emitted large amounts of particu­
late matter into the atmosphere. One study 
estimated that more than 53 million pounds of 
respirable particulate matter were produced 
over a 58-day period by the 1987 Silver Fire in 
southwestern Oregon (Hardy and others 1992). 
The ecological consequences of past policies of 
fire exclusion have been foreseen for some 
time. More than 50 years ago, Weaver (1943) 
reported that the “complete prevention of forest 
fires in the ponderosa pine region of California, 
Oregon, Washington, northern Idaho, and 
western Montana has certain undesirable eco­
logical and silvicultural effects [and that]... 
conditions are already deplorable and are be­
coming increasingly serious over large areas.” 
Also, Cooper (1961) stated, “…fire has played a 
major role in shaping the world’s grassland and 
forests. Attempts to eliminate it have introduced 
problems fully as serious as those created by 
accidental conflagrations.” Only more recently 
have concerns been expressed about potential 
loss of biodiversity as a result of fire suppres­
sion. This issue may be especially pressing in 
the Eastern United States. For example, in 
southern longleaf pine ecosystems, at least 66 
rare plant species are maintained by frequent 
fire (Walker 1993).  The ecological need for 
high fire frequency in large areas of Southeast­
ern native ecosystems coupled with the region’s 
long growing season contribute to the rapid 
buildup of fuel and subsequent change in habitat 
structure. 
Figure 2.4. The average annual burned area for the western States, shown here for the period 
1916-2000, has generally been increasing since the mid-1960s 
– 16 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
2.1 – The Wildland Fire Imperative 
Wildland and Prescribed Fire Ter­
minology Update 
The federal Implementation Procedures Refer­
ence Guide for Wildland and Prescribed Fire 
Management Policy (USDI and USDA Forest 
Service 1998) contains significant changes in 
fire terminology.  Several traditional terms have 
either been omitted or have been made obsolete 
by the new policy.  These include: confine/ 
contain/control; escaped fire situation analysis; 
management ignited prescribed fire; pre-sup-
pression; and prescribed natural fire, or “PNF.” 
Additionally, there was adoption of several new 
terms and interpretations that supercedes earlier, 
traditional terminology: 
• Fire Use - the combination of wildland 
fire use and prescribed fire application to 
meet resource objectives. 
• Prescribed Fire - Any fire ignited by 
management actions to meet specific 
objectives. A written, approved prescribed 
fire plan must exist, and NEPA require­
ments must be met, prior to ignition. This 
term replaces management ignited pre­
scribed fire. 
• Wildfire - An unwanted wildland fire. 
This term was only included to give con­
tinuing credence to the historic fire pre­
vention products.  This is NOT a separate 
type of fire under the new terminology. 
• Wildland Fire - Any non-structure fire, 
other than prescribed fire, that occurs in 
the wildland. This term encompasses fires 
previously called both wildfires and 
prescribed natural fires. 
• Wildland Fire Use - the management of 
naturally-ignited wildland fires to accom­
plish specific pre-stated resource manage­
ment objectives in predefined geographic 
areas outlined in Fire Management Plans. 
Wildland fire use is not to be confused 
with “fire use,” which is a broader term 
encompassing more than just wildland 
fires. 
Taking Action: The Federal Wild­
land and Prescribed Fire Policy 
The decline in resiliency and ecological “health” 
of ecosystems has reached alarming proportions 
in recent decades, as evidenced by the trend 
since the mid-1960’s towards more acres burned 
in wildfires (figure 2.4). While national aware­
ness of this trend has existed for some time, the 
1994 fire season created a renewed awareness 
and concern among Federal land management 
agencies and their constituents regarding the 
serious impacts of wildfires. The Federal 
Wildland Fire Management Policy and Program 
Review is chartered by the Secretaries of Agri­
culture and Interior to “ensure that uniform 
federal policies and cohesive interagency and 
intergovernmental fire management programs 
exist” (USDI and USDA Forest Service 1995). 
The review process is directed by an interagency 
Steering Group whose members represented the 
Departments of Agriculture and Interior, the 
U.S. Fire Administration, the National Weather 
Service, the Federal Emergency Management 
Agency, and the Environmental Protection 
Agency.  In their cover letter accepting the Final 
Report of the Review (December 18, 1995), the 
Secretaries of Agriculture and Interior pro­
claimed: 
“The philosophy, as well as the specific 
policies and recommendations, of the 
Report continues to move our approach to 
wildland fire management beyond the 
traditional realms of fire suppression by 
further integrating fire into the manage­
ment of our lands and resources in an 
ongoing and systematic manner, consistent 
with public health and environmental 
– 17 – 
Chapter 2 – Overview 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
quality considerations. We strongly sup­
port the integration of wildland fire into 
our land management planning and imple­
mentation activities. Managers must learn 
to use fire as one of the basic tools for 
accomplishing their resource management 
objectives.” 
USDI and USDA Forest 
Service 1995—cover 
memorandum 
The Report asserts that “the planning, imple­
mentation, and monitoring of wildland fire 
management actions will be done on an inter­
agency basis with the involvement of all part­
ners.” The term “partners” is all-encompassing, 
including Federal land management and regula­
tory agencies; tribal governments; Department 
of Defense; State, county, and local govern­
ments; the private sector; and the public. Part­
nerships are essential for establishing collective 
priorities to facilitate use of fire at the landscape 
level. Smoke does not respond to artificial 
boundaries or delineations. Interaction among 
partners is necessary to meet the dual challenge 
of using fire for natural resource management 
coupled with the need to minimize negative 
effects related to smoke.  Both concerns must be 
met to fulfill the public need. 
Literature Citations 
Agee, J.K. 1993. Fire Ecology of Pacific Northwest 
Forests. Island Press, Washington, DC. 
Bond, W.J. and B.W. van Wilgen.  1996. Fire and 
Plants. Chapman Hall, London. 
Brown, J.K. and J. Kapler Smith (eds.). 2000. 
Wildland Fire in Ecosystems: Effects of Fire on 
Flora. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-42-vol.2. 
Ogden, UT. 
Chavez Ramirez, F., H.E. Hunt, R.D. Slack and T.V. 
Stehn. 1996. Ecological correlates of Whoop­
ing Crane use of fire-treated upland habitats. 
Conservation Biology 10:217-223. 
Cooper, C.F. 1961. The ecology of fire. Sci. Am. 
204(4):150-160. 
Copenheaver, C.A., A.S. White and W.A. Patterson. 
2000. Vegetation development in a southern 
Maine pitch pine-scrub oak barren. Journal 
Torrey Botanical Soc.127:19-32. 
Ferry, G.W. R.G. Clark, R.E. Montomery, R.W. 
Mutch, W.P. Leenhouts, and G. T. Zimmerman. 
1995. Altered fire regimes within fire-adapted 
ecosystems. Pages 222-224. In: Our Living 
Resources. W.T. LaRoe, G. S. Farris, C.E. 
Puckett, P.D. Doran, and M.J. Mac eds.  U.S. 
Department of the Interior, National Biological 
Service, Washington, D.C. 530p. 
Gilliam, F.S. and W.J. Platt.  1999. Effects of long-
term fire exclusion on tree species composition 
and stand structure in an old-growth Pinus 
palustris (Longleaf pine) forest. Plant Ecology 
140:15-26. 
Gray, G.L. 1992. Health emergency imperils western 
forests. Resource Hotline. 8(9). Published by 
American Forests. 
Hardy, C. C., D. E. Ward, and W. Einfeld. 1992. 
PM2.5 emissions from a major wildfire using a 
GIS: rectification of airborne measurements. In: 
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the 
Pacific Northwest International Section, Air and 
Waste Management Association, November 11­
13, 1992, Bellevue, WA. Pittsburgh, PA: Air and 
Waste Management Association. 
Heinselman, M. L. 1978. Fire in wilderness ecosys­
tems. In: Wilderness Management. J. C. 
Hendee, G. H. Stankey, and R. C. Lucas, eds. 
USDA Forest Service, Misc. Pub. 1365 
Hermann, S.M., T. Van Hook, R.W. Flowers, L.A. 
Brennan, J.S. Glitzenstein, D.R. Streng, J.L. 
Walker and R.L. Myers.  1998. Fire and 
biodiversity: studies of vegetation and 
arthropods. Trans. North American Wildlife and 
Natural Resources Conf. 63:384-401 
Johnson, E.A. 1992. Fire and Vegetation Dynamics: 
Studies from the North American Boreal Forest. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Keeley, J.E., and C.J. Fotheringham.  1997. Trace 
gas emissions and smoke induced seed germi­
nation. Science 276:1248-1250. 
– 18 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide
2.1 – The Wildland Fire Imperative 
Kilgore, B. M., and M. L. Heinselman. 1990. Fire in 
wilderness ecosystems. In: Wilderness Man­
agement, 2nd ed. J. C. Hendee, G. H. Stankey, 
and R. C. Lucas, eds. North American Press, 
Golden, CO. Pp. 297-335. 
Kwilosz, J.R. and R.L. Knutson. 1999. Prescribed 
fire management of Karner blue butterfly 
habitat at Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore. 
Natural Areas Journal 19:98-108 
Leenhouts, Bill. 1998. Assessment of biomass 
burning in the conterminous United States. 
Conservation Ecology [online] 2(1): 1. Avail­
able from the Internet. URL: 
Mutch, R. W. 1994. Fighting fire with prescribed 
fire—a return to ecosystem health. J. For. 
92(11):31-33. 
Mutch, R. W. 1997. Need for more prescribed fire: 
but a double standard slows progress. In Pro­
ceedings of the Environmental Regulation and 
Prescribed Fire Conference, Tampa, Florida. 
March 1995. Pp. 8-14. 
Myers, R.L. 1990. Scrub and high pine. pages 150­
193 in (R.L. Myers and J.J. Ewel, eds.) Ecosys­
tems of Florida. University of Central Florida 
Press, Orlando. 
National Wildfire Coordinating Group (NWCG). 
1998. Managing Wildland Fire: Balancing 
America’s Natural Heritage and the Public 
Interest. National Wildfire Coordinating Group; 
Fire Use Working Team [online]. Available 
from the Internet. URL: http://www.fs.fed.us/ 
fire/fire_new/fireuse/wildland_fire_use/role/ 
role_pg8.html 
Smith, J. Kapler (ed.). 2000. Wildland fire in 
ecosystems: effects of fire on fauna.  Gen. Tech. 
Rep. RMRS-GTR-42-vol. 1. Ogden, UT. 
Swain, A. 1973. A history of fire and vegetation in 
northeastern Minnesota as recorded in lake 
sediment. Quat. Res. 3: 383-396. 
Swetnam, T. W. 1993. Fire history and climate 
change in giant sequoia groves. Science. 
262:885-889. 
USDI and USDA Forest Service.  1995. Federal 
wildland fire management policy and program 
review. Final report. National Interagency Fire 
Center, Boise, ID. 45 pp. 
USDI and USDA Forest Service.  1998. Wildland 
and prescribed fire management policy— 
implementation procedures reference guide. 
National Interagency Fire Center, Boise, ID. 81 
pp. and appendices. 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 1998. 
Interim air quality policy on wildland and 
prescribed fires. Final report. U.S. Environ­
mental Protection Agency. 
Wade, D.D., J.J. Ewel, and R. Hofsetter.  1980. Fire 
in South Florida Ecosystems. USDA Forest 
Service General Technical Report SE-17. 
Walker, J.  1993. Rare vascular plant taxa associated 
with the longleaf pine ecosystems: patterns in 
taxonomy and ecology.  pages 105-125 in (S.M. 
Hermann, ed.), The Longleaf Pine Ecosystem: 
ecology, restoration, and management.  Pro­
ceedings of the Tall Timbers Fire Ecology 
Conference, No. 18. 
Watts, W.A., B.C.S. Hansen and E.C. Grimm.  1992. 
Camel Lake – A 4000-year record of vegeta­
tional and forest history from northwest Florida. 
Ecology 73:1056-1066. 
Weaver, H. 1943. Fire as an ecological and silvicul­
tural factor in the ponderosa pine region of the 
Pacific Slope. J. For. 41:7-14. 
Whelan, R.J. 	 1995. The Ecology of Fire. Cam­
bridge University Press, Cambridge. 
– 19 – 
Chapter 2 – Overview 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
– 20 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
2.2 – Smoke Management Imperative 
The Smoke Management Imperative 
Colin C. Hardy 
Sharon M. Hermann 
John E. Core 
Introduction 
In the past, smoke from prescribed burning was 
managed primarily to avoid nuisance conditions 
objectionable to the public or to avoid traffic 
hazards caused by smoke drift across roadways. 
While these objectives are still valid, today’s 
smoke management programs are also likely to 
be driven, in part, by local, regional and federal 
air quality regulations. These new demands on 
smoke management programs have emerged as 
a result of Federal Clean Air Act requirements 
that include standards for regulation of regional 
haze and the recent revisions to the National 
nation. Smoke from wildland burning can 
obscure these natural wonders. 
• Although smoke may be an inconvience 
under the best conditions and a public 
health and safety risk under the worst 
conditions, without periodic fires, the 
natural habitat that society holds in such 
high esteem will decline and ultimately 
dissapear.  In addition, as ecosystem 
health declines, fuel increases to levels 
that also pose significant risks for wildfire 
Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) on 
and consequently additional safety risks. 
particulate matter.1 
• Wildland and prescribed fire managers are 
entrusted with balancing these and other, 
Development of the additional requirements 
often potentially conflicting responsibili­
coincides with renewed efforts to increase use of 
ties. Fire managers are charged with the 
fire to restore forest ecosystem health. These 
task of increasing the use of fire to ac-
two requirements are interrelated: 
complish important land stewardship 
• The purity of the air we breathe is essen-
objectives and, at the same time, are 
tial to our health and quality of our lives 
entrusted to protect public safety and 
and smoke from wildland and prescribed 
health. 
fire can have adverse effects on public 
health. 
Purpose of a Smoke 
• The national forests, national parks and 
Management Program
wilderness areas set aside by Congress are
among the nation’s greatest treasures. 
The purpose of a smoke management
They inspire us as individuals and as a 
program is to:
1 See Chapter 4, Regulations for Smoke Management, for details on specific requirements. 
– 21 – 
Chapter 2 – Overview 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
• minimize the amount of smoke entering 
populated areas, preventing public health 
and safety hazards (e.g. visual impairment 
on roadways or runways) and problems at 
sensitive sites (e.g. nursing homes or 
hospitals), 
• avoid significant deterioration of air 
quality and NAAQS violations, and 
• eliminate human-caused visibility impacts 
in Class I areas. 
Smoke management programs create a frame­
work of procedures and requirements for man­
aging smoke from prescribed fires and are 
typically developed by States or tribes with 
cooperation and participation from stakeholders. 
Procedures and requirements developed through 
partnerships are more effective at meeting 
resource management goals, protecting public 
health, and achieving air quality objectives than 
programs that are created in isolation. Sophisti­
cated programs for coordination of burning both 
within a state and across state boundaries are 
vital to obtain and maintain public support of 
burning programs. Fire use professionals are 
increasingly encouraged to burn at a landscape 
level. In some cases, when objectives are based 
in both ecology and fuel reduction, there is a 
need to consider burning during challenging 
times of the year (e.g. during the growing 
season rather than the cooler dormant season). 
Multiple objectectives for fire use are likely to 
increase the challenges, consequently increasing 
the value of partnerships for smoke manage­
ment. 
Smoke management is increasingly recognized 
as a critical component of a state or tribal air 
quality program for protecting public health and 
welfare while still providing for necessary 
wildland burning. 
Usually, either a state or tribal natural resources 
agency or air quality agency is responsible for 
developing and administering the smoke man­
agement program. Occasionally a smoke 
management program may be administered by a 
local agency.  California, for example, relies on 
local area smoke management programs. Gen­
erally, on a daily basis the administering agency 
approves or denies permits for individual burns 
or burns meeting some criteria. Permits may be 
required for all fires or only for those that 
exceed an established de minimis level (which 
could be based on projections of acres burned, 
tons consumed, or emissions). Multi-day burns 
may be subject to daily reassessment and re-
approval to ensure compliance with smoke 
management program goals. 
Advanced smoke management programs evalu­
ate individual and multiple burns; coordinate all 
prescribed fire activities in an area; consider 
cross-boundary (landscape) impacts; and weigh 
decisions about fires against possible health, 
visibility, and nuisance effects.  With increasing 
use of fire for forest health and ecosystem 
management, interstate and interregional coordi­
nation of burning will be necessary to prevent 
episodes of poor air quality.  Development of, 
and participation in, an effective smoke manage­
ment program by state agents and land manag­
ers will go a long way towards building and 
maintaining public acceptance of prescribed 
burning. 
The Need for Smoke 
Management Programs 
The call for increasingly effective smoke man­
agement programs has occurred because of 
public and governmental concerns about the 
possible risks to public health and safety, as well 
as nuisance and regional haze impacts of smoke 
– 22 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
2.2 – Smoke Management Imperative 
from wildland and prescribed fires. There are 
also concerns about contributions to health-
related National Ambient Air Quality Standards. 
Each of these areas is summarized below.2 
Public Health Protection: Fine Particle 
National Ambient Air Quality Standards.– 
EPA’s most recent review of the National Ambi­
ent Air Quality Standards for Particulate Matter 
(PM10) concluded that significant changes were 
needed to assure the protection of public health. 
In July of 1997, following an extensive review 
of the global literature, EPA adopted a fine 
particle (PM2.5) standard.3 
These small particles are largely responsible for 
the health effects of greatest concern and for 
visibility reduction in the form of regional haze. 
More on EPA’s fine particle standard is found 
elsewhere in this Guide. 
The close link between regional haze and the 
new fine particle National Ambient Air Quality 
Standards means that smoke from prescribed 
fire is again at the center of attention for air 
regulators charged with adopting control strate­
gies to attain the new standards. 
Public Safety and Nuisance Issues.–Perhaps 
the most immediate need for an effective smoke 
management program is related to smoke 
drifting across roadways and restricting motorist 
visibility.  Each year, people are killed on the 
nation’s highways because of dust storms, 
smoke and fog. Wildland and prescribed fire 
managers must recognize the legal issues related 
to their professional activities. Special care 
must be taken in administering the smoke 
management program to assure that smoke does 
not obscure roadway or airport visibility.  Li­
ability issues vary by state. Some states such as 
Florida have “right-to-burn” laws that provide 
some protection for fire use professionals with 
specific training and certification. 
Probably the most common air quality issues 
facing wildland and prescribed fire managers 
are those related to public complaints about 
nuisance smoke. Complaints may be about the 
odor or soiling effects of smoke, poor visibility, 
and impaired ability to breathe or other health-
related effects. Sometimes complaints come 
from the fact that some people don’t like or are 
fearful of smoke intruding into their lives. 
Whatever the reason, fire managers have a 
responsibility to try to prevent or resolve the 
issue through smoke management plans that 
recognize the importance of proper selection of 
management and burning techniquesand burn 
scheduling based on meteorological conditions. 
In additioncommunity public relations and 
education coupled with pre-burn notification can 
greatly improve public acceptance of fire man­
agement programs. 
Visibility Protection.–Haze that obstructs the 
scenic beauty of the Nation’s wildlands and 
national parks does not respect political bound­
aries. Any program that is intended to reduce 
visibility impairment in the nation’s parks and 
wildlands must be based on multi-state coopera­
tive efforts or on national legislation. 
In 1999, the U.S. EPA issued regional haze 
regulations to manage and mitigate visibility 
impairment from the multitude of regional haze 
sources.4  Regional haze regulations call for 
states to establish goals for improving visibility 
in Class I national parks and wildernesses and to 
develop long-term strategies for reducing emis­
sions of air pollutants that cause visibility 
impairment. Wildland and prescribed fire are 
some of the sources of regional haze covered by 
the new rules. 
2 Details relating to Public Health effects, Problem and Nuisance Smoke, and Regional Haze are given in the sections 
3.1, 3.3 and 4.1, respectively, of this Guide. 
3 One thousand fine particles of this size could fit into the period at the end of this sentence. 
4 [40 CFR Part 51] 
– 23 – 
Chapter 2 – Overview 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Past Success and Commitment 
to Future Efforts 
It is clearly noted in the preface to the 2001 
Smoke Management Guide that conflicts among 
natural resource needs, fire management, and air 
quality issues are expected to increase. It is 
equally important to acknowledge the benefits 
to air quality resulting from the many successful 
smoke management efforts in the past two 
decades. 
Since the 1980s, federal, state, tribal, and local 
land managers have recognized the potential 
impacts of smoke emissions from their activi­
ties. Additionally, they have sponsored and 
pursued new efforts to learn the principles of 
smoke management and to develop appropriate 
smoke management applications. Many early 
smoke management successes resulted from 
proactive, voluntary inclusion of smoke man­
agement components in many burn plans as 
early as the mid-1980s. 
NWCG and its partners are committed to fur­
thering their leadership role in the quest for new 
information, technology, and innovative tech­
niques. These 2001 revisions to the Guide are 
evidence of that commitment. 
– 24 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.1 – Public Health Effects 
Chapter 3
SMOKE IMPACTS
– 25 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
– 26 – 
___________________________________ 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.1 – Public Health Effects 
Public Health and Exposure to Smoke
John E. Core 
Janice L. Peterson 
Introduction 
The purity of the air we breathe is an important 
public health issue. Particles of dust, smoke, 
and soot in the air from many sources, including 
wildland fire, can cause acute health effects. 
The effects of smoke range from irritation of the 
eyes and respiratory tract to more serious disor­
ders including asthma, bronchitis, reduced lung 
function, and premature death. Airborne par­
ticles are respiratory irritants, and high concen­
trations can cause persistent cough, phlegm, 
wheezing, and physical discomfort when breath­
ing. Particulate matter can also alter the body’s 
immune system and affect removal of foreign 
materials from the lung like pollen and bacteria. 
This section discusses the effects of air pollu­
tion, especially particulate matter, on human 
health and morbidity. Wildland fire smoke is 
discussed as one type of air pollution that can be 
harmful to public health1. 
Human Health Effects of 
Particulate Matter 
Many epidemiological studies have shown 
statistically significant associations of ambient 
particulate matter levels with a variety of human 
health effects, including increased mortality, 
hospital admissions, respiratory symptoms and 
illness measured in community surveys (Brauer 
1999, Dockery and others 1993, EPA 1997). 
Health effects from both short-term (usually 
days) and long-term (usually years) particulate 
matter exposures have been documented. The 
consistency of the epidemiological data in­
creases confidence that the results reported in 
numerous studies justify the increased public 
health concerns that have prompted EPA to 
adopt increasingly stringent air quality stan­
dards (Federal Register 1997). There remains, 
however, uncertainty regarding the exact 
mechanisms that air pollutants trigger to cause 
the observed health effects (EPA 1996). 
Figure 3.1.1 illustrates respiratory pathways 
that form the human body’s natural defenses 
against polluted air.  These pathways can be 
divided into two systems - the upper airway 
passage consisting of the nose, nasal passages, 
mouth and pharynx, and the lower airway 
passages consisting of the trachea, bronchial 
tree, and alveoli. While coarse particles (larger 
than about 5 microns in diameter) are deposited 
in the upper respiratory system, fine particles 
(less than 2.5 microns in diameter) can pen­
etrate much deeper into the lungs. These fine 
particles are deposited in the alveoli where the 
body’s defense mechanisms are ineffective in 
removing them (Morgan 1989). 
1 Information on the effects of smoke on firefighters and prescribed burn crews can be found in Section 3.4. 
– 27 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Figure 3.1.1:  Particle deposition in the respiratory system. 
From: Canadian Center for Occupational Health & Safety, available at 
http://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/ chemicals/how_do.html 
On a smoggy day in a major metropolitan area, 
a single breath of air may contain millions of 
fine particles. Some 74 million Americans — 
28% of the population — are regularly exposed 
to harmful levels of particulate air pollution 
(EPA 1997).  In recent studies, exposure to fine 
particles – either alone or in combination with 
other air pollutants – has been linked with many 
health problems, including: 
• An estimated 40,000 Americans die 
prematurely each year from respiratory 
illness and heart attacks that are linked 
with particulate exposure, especially 
elderly people (EPA 1997). 
• Children and adults experience aggravated 
asthma. Asthma in children increased 
118% between 1980 and 1993, and it is 
currently the leading cause of child hospi­
tal admissions (EPA 1997). 
• Children become ill more frequently and 
experience increased respiratory problems, 
including difficult and painful breathing 
(EPA 1997). 
• Hospital admissions, emergency room 
visits and premature deaths increase 
among adults with heart disease, emphy­
sema, chronic bronchitis, and other heart 
and lung diseases (EPA 1997). 
The susceptibility of individuals to particulate 
air pollution (including smoke) is affected by 
many factors. Asthmatics, the elderly, those 
with cardiopulmonary disease, as well as those 
with preexisting infectious respiratory disease 
such as pneumonia may be especially sensitive 
to smoke exposure. Children and adolescents 
may also be susceptible to ambient particulate 
matter effects due to their increased frequency 
of breathing, resulting in greater respiratory 
tract deposition. In children, epidemiological 
studies reveal associations of particulate expo­
sure with increased bronchitis symptoms and 
small decreases in lung function. 
Fine particles showed consistent and statistically 
significant relationships to short-term mortality 
in six U.S. cities while coarse particles showed 
no significant relationship to excess mortality in 
five of the six cities that were studied (Dockery 
and others 1993). 
– 28 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.1 – Public Health Effects 
Impacts of Wildland Fire 
Smoke on Public Health 
There is not much data which specifically 
examines the effects of wildland fire smoke on 
public health, although some studies are 
planned or underway.  We can, however, infer 
health responses from the documented effects of 
particulate air pollutants. Eighty to ninety 
percent of wildfire smoke (by mass) is within 
the fine particle size class (PM2.5), making 
public exposure to smoke a significant concern. 
The Environmental Protection Agency has 
developed some general public health warnings 
for specific air pollutants including PM2.5 
(table 3.1.1) (EPA 1999).  The concentrations in 
table 3.1.1 are 24-hour averages, which can be 
problematic when dealing with smoke impacts 
that may be severe for a short period of time and 
then virtually non-existent soon after.  Another 
guidance document was developed recently to 
relate short-term, 1-hour averages to the poten­
tial human health effects given in table 3.1.1 
(Therriault 2001). 
Figure 3.1.2 contains these short-term averages 
plus approximate corresponding visual range in 
miles. Members of the public can use the 
methods described to estimate visual range and 
determine when air quality may be hazardous to 
their health even if they are located in an area 
that is not served by an official state air quality 
monitor. 
Figure 3.1.3 is an information sheet developed 
during a prolonged wildfire smoke episode in 
Montana during the summer of 2000. The 
questions and answers address many common 
concerns voiced by the public during smoke 
episodes. 
Other Pollutants of Concern 
in Smoke 
Although the principal air pollutant of concern 
is particulate matter, there are literally hundreds 
of compounds emitted by wildland fires that are 
found in very low concentrations. Some of 
these compounds that also deserve mention 
include: 
• Carbon monoxide has well known, serious 
health effects including dizziness, nausea 
and impaired mental functions but is 
usually only of concern when people are in 
close proximity to a fire (including fire­
fighters). Blood levels of carboxyhemo­
globin tend to decline rapidly to normal 
levels after a brief period free from expo­
sure (Sharkey 1997). 
• Benzo(a)pyrene, anthracene, benzene and 
numerous other components found in 
smoke from wildland fires can cause head­
aches, dizziness, nausea, and breathing 
difficulties.  In addition, they are of con­
cern because of long term cancer risks 
associated with repeated exposure to 
smoke. 
• Acrolein and formaldehyde are eye and 
upper respriatory irritants to which some 
segments of the public are especially 
sensitive. 
– 29 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts
2001 Smoke Management Guide
– 30 –
Table 3.1.1.  EPA’s pollutant standard index for PM2.5 can be used for general assessment of health risks from existing air quality.
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.1 – Public Health Effects 
Figure 3.1.2. Visibility range can be used by the public to assess air quality in areas with no state air 
pollution monitors. 
Conclusions 
The health effects of wildland smoke are of real 
concern to wildland fire managers, public health 
officials, air quality regulators and all segments 
of the public. Fire practitioners have an impor­
tant responsibility to understand the potential 
health impacts of fine particulate matter and 
minimize the public’s exposure to smoke. 
Wildland fire managers should be aware of 
sensitive populations and sites that may be 
affected by prescribed fires, such as medical 
facilities, schools or nursing homes, and plan 
burns to minimize the smoke impacts. This is 
especially true when exposure may be pro­
longed. Days or weeks of smoke exposure are 
problematic because the lung’s ability to sweep 
these particles out of the respiratory passages 
may be suppressed over time. Prolonged expo­
sure may occur as the result of topographic or 
meteorological conditions that trap smoke in an 
area. Familiarity with the location and seasonal 
weather patterns can be invaluable in anticipat­
ing and avoiding potential problems while still 
in the planning phase. 
– 31 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
What’s in smoke from a wildfire? 
Smoke is made up of small particles, gases and water vapor. 
Water vapor makes up the majority of smoke. The remainder 
includes carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxide, irritant 
volatile organic compounds, air toxics and very small particles. 
Is smoke bad for me? 
Yes. It’s a good idea to avoid breathing smoke if you can help it. If 
you are healthy, you usually are not at a major risk from smoke. 
But there are people who are at risk, including people with heart or 
lung diseases, such as congestive heart disease, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema or asthma. Children 
and the elderly also are more susceptible. 
What can I do to protect myself? 
•	 Many areas report EPA’s Air Quality Index for particulate 
matter, or PM. PM (tiny particles) is one of the biggest 
dangers from smoke. As smoke gets worse, that index 
changes — and so do guidelines for protecting yourself. So 
listen to your local air quality reports. 
•	 Use common sense. If it looks smoky outside, that’s probably 
not a good time to go for a run. And it’s probably a good time 
for your children to remain indoors. 
•	 If you’re advised to stay indoors, keep your windows and 
doors closed. Run your air conditioner, if you have one. Keep 
the fresh air intake closed and the filter clean. 
•	 Help keep particle levels inside lower by avoiding using 
anything that burns, such as wood stoves and gas stoves – 
even candles. And don’t smoke. That puts even more pollution 
in your lungs – and those of the people around you. 
•	 If you have asthma, be vigilant about taking your medicines, 
as prescribed by your doctor. If you’re supposed to measure 
your peak flows, make sure you do so. Call your doctor if your 
symptoms worsen. 
How can I tell when smoke levels are dangerous? I don’t live 
near a monitor. 
Generally, the worse the visibility, the worse the smoke. In 
Montana, the Department of Environmental Quality uses visibility 
to help you gauge wildfire smoke levels. 
How do I know if I’m being affected? 
You may have a scratchy throat, cough, irritated sinuses, head­
aches, runny nose and stinging eyes. Children and people with 
lung diseases may find it difficult to breathe as deeply or vigorously 
as usual, and they may cough or feel short of breath. People with 
diseases such as asthma or chronic bronchitis may find their 
symptoms worsening. 
Should I leave my home because of smoke? 
The tiny particles in smoke do get inside your home. If smoke 
levels are high for a prolonged period of time, these particles can 
build up indoors. If you have symptoms indoors (coughing, burning 
eyes, runny nose, etc.), talk with your doctor or call your county 
health department. This is particularly important for people with 
heart or respiratory diseases, the elderly and children. 
Are the effects of smoke permanent? 
Healthy adults generally find that their symptoms (runny noses, 
coughing, etc.) disappear after the smoke is gone. 
Do air filters help? 
They do. Indoor air filtration devices with HEPA filters can reduce 
the levels of particles indoors. Make sure to change your HEPA 
filter regularly. Don’t use an air cleaner that works by generating 
ozone. That puts more pollution in your home. 
Do dust masks help? 
Paper “comfort” or “nuisance” masks are designed to trap large 
dust particles — not the tiny particles found in smoke. 
These masks generally will not protect your lungs from wildfire 
smoke. 
How long is the smoke going to last? 
That depends on a number of factors, including the number of 
fires in the area, fire behavior, weather and topography.  Smoke 
also can travel long distances, so fires in other areas can affect 
smoke levels in your area. 
I’m concerned about what the smoke is doing to my animals. 
What can I do? 
The same particles that cause problems for people may cause 
some problems for animals. Don’t force your animals to run or 
work in smoky conditions. Contact your veterinarian or county 
extension office for more information. 
How does smoke harm my health? 
One of the biggest dangers of smoke comes from particulate 
matter — solid particles and liquid droplets found in air. In smoke, 
these particles often are very tiny, smaller than 2.5 micrometers in 
diameter. How small is that? Think of this: the diameter of the 
average human hair is about 30 times bigger. 
These particles can build up in your respiratory system, causing a 
number of health problems, including burning eyes, runny noses 
and illnesses such as bronchitis. The particles also can aggravate 
heart and lung diseases, such as congestive heart failure, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, emphysema and asthma. 
What about firefighters? 
Firefighters do experience short-term effects of smoke, such as 
stinging, watery eyes, coughing and runny noses. Firefighters 
must be in good physical condition, which helps to offset adverse 
effects of smoke. In addition to being affected by particles, 
firefighters can be affected by carbon monoxide from smoke. A 
recent Forest Service study showed a very small percentage of 
firefighters working on wildfires were exposed to levels higher 
than occupational safety limits for carbon monoxide and irritants. 
Why can’t the firefighters do something about the smoke? 
Firefighters first priorities in fighting a fire are, by necessity, 
protecting lives, protecting homes and containing the wildfire. 
Sometimes the conditions that are good for keeping the air clear 
of smoke can be bad for containing fires. A windy day helps 
smoke disperse, but it can help a fire spread. 
Firefighters do try to manage smoke when possible. As they 
develop their strategies for fighting a fire, firefighters consider fire 
behavior and weather forecasts, topography and proximity to 
communities – all factors than can affect smoke. 
Why doesn’t it seem to be as smoky when firefighters are 
working on prescribed fires. 
Land managers are able to plan for prescribed fires. They get to 
choose the areas they want to burn, the size of those areas and 
the weather and wind conditions that must exist before they begin 
burning. This allows them to control the fire more easily and limit 
its size. Those choices don’t exist with wildfires. In addition, 
wildfires that start in areas that haven’t been managed with 
prescribed fire often have more fuel, because vegetation in the 
forest understory has built up, and dead vegetation has not been 
removed. 
This document was prepared by the Air Program, U.S. Forest Service – Northern Region, with assistance from the Office of Air 
Quality Planning & Standards in the US Environmental Protection Agency. For more information, call 406-329-3493. August 2000. 
Figure 3.1.3.  Public health information developed during the Montana wildfires of 2000. 
– 32 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.1 – Public Health Effects 
Literature Citations 
Brauer, Michael. 1999. Health impacts of biomass 
air pollution. In: Health guidelines for vegeta­
tion fire events: background papers. Edited by 
Kee-Tai Goh, Dietrich Schwela, Johann G. 
Goldammer, and Orman Simpson. World 
Health Organization. Available at http:// 
www.who.int/peh/air/vegetationfirbackgr.htm. 
69p. 
Dockery DW, Pope CA III, Xu X, Spengler JD, 
Ware JH, Fay ME, Ferris BG Jr, and Speizer 
FE. 1993. An association between air pollution 
and mortality in six U.S. cities. New England 
Journal of Medicine. 329:1753-1759. 
Environmental Protection Agency-Region 8. 1997. 
Public health effects of ozone and fine particle 
pollution. Environmental Fact Sheet. Available 
at http://www.epa.gov/region08/news/ 
news9697/ofpo.html 
Environmental Protection Agency. 1996. Air quality 
criteria for particulate matter - Volume 1. US 
Environmental Protection Agency, Research 
Triangle Park, NC. EPA/600/P-95/001aF. 
Environmental Protection Agency. 1999. Guideline 
for reporting of daily air quality – air quality 
index (AQI). EPA-454/R-99-010. U.S. EPA 
Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27711. 25p. 
Federal Register. 1997. Memorandum from the 
President re: Implementation of Revised Air 
Quality Standards for Ozone and Particulate 
Matter. Federal Register Vol. 62, No. 138. July 
18, 1997. 
Morgan, Michael S. 1989. Health risks from slash 
fire smoke. In: The Burning Decision – Re­
gional Perspectives on Slash. University of 
Washington College of Forest Resources. 
Seattle, WA.  pp. 226-236. 
Sharkey, Brian, ed. 1997. Health hazards of smoke: 
recommendations of the April 1997 Consensus 
Conference. Tech. Rep. 9751-2836-MTDC. 
Missoula, MT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Missoula Technology and 
Development Center. 84 p. 
Therriault, Shannon. 2001. Wildfire smoke: a guide 
for public health officials.  Missoula City-
County Health Department. Missoula, MT. 13p. 
Available at:  http://depts.washington.edu/ 
wildfire/resources/pubhealthguide.pdf 
– 33 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
– 34 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.2 – Visibility 
Visibility 
John E. Core 
Introduction 
Every year there are over 280 million visitors to 
our nation’s wilderness areas and national parks. 
Congress has set these special places aside for 
the enjoyment of all that seek spectacular and 
inspiring vistas. Unfortunately, many visitors 
are not able to see the beautiful scenery they 
expect. During much of the year, a veil of haze 
often blurs their view.  The haze is caused by 
many sources of both natural and manmade air 
pollution sources, including wildland fire. 
This section describes measures of scenic 
visibility, the properties of the atmosphere and 
how these properties are affected by smoke from 
wildland fires, natural and current visibility 
conditions, as well as sources that contribute to 
visibility degradation. This is an important 
issue to wildland fire practitioners because 
smoke is of increasing interest to air regulators 
responsible for solving regional haze problems. 
Measures of Visibility Impairment 
Visibility is most often thought of in terms of 
visual range or the furthest distance a person can 
see a landscape feature. However, visibility is 
more than how far one can see; it also encom­
passes how well scenic landscape features can 
be seen and appreciated. Changes in visual 
range are not proportional to human perception. 
For example, a five-mile change in visual range 
can result in a scene change that is either imper­
ceptible or very obvious depending on the 
baseline visibility conditions. Therefore, a more 
meaningful visibility index has been adopted. 
The scale of this index, expressed in deciviews 
(dv) is linear with respect to perceived visual 
changes over its entire range, analogous to the 
decibel scale for sound. A one-deciview change 
represents a change in scenic quality that would 
be noticeable to most people regardless of the 
initial visibility conditions. A deciview of zero 
is equivalent to clear air while deciviews greater 
than zero depict proportionally increased visibil­
ity impairment (IMPROVE 1994). The more 
deciviews measured, the greater the impairment, 
which limits the distance you can see. Finally, 
extinction in inverse megameters (Mm-1) is 
proportional to the amount of light lost as it 
travels through a million meters of atmosphere 
and is most useful for relating visibility directly 
to particulate concentrations. Table 3.2.1 com­
pares each of these three forms of measurement 
(Malm 1999). 
Properties of the Atmosphere & 
Wildland Fire Smoke 
An observer sees an image of a distant object 
because light is reflected from the object along 
the sight path to the observer’s eye.  Any of this 
image-forming light that is removed from the 
sight path by scattering or light absorption 
– 35 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Table 3.2.1. Comparison of the four expressions of visibility measurement. 
reduces the image-forming information and 
thereby diminishes the clarity of the landscape 
feature. Ambient light is also scattered into the 
sight path, competing with the image-forming 
light to reduce the clarity of the object of 
interest. This “competition” between image-
forming light and scattered light is commonly 
experienced while driving in a snowstorm at 
night with the car headlights on. 
In addition, relative humidity also indirectly 
affects visibility.  Although relative humidity 
does not by itself cause visibility to be de­
graded, some particles, especially sulfates, 
accumulate water from the atmosphere and 
grow to a size where they are particularly 
efficient at scattering light.  Poor visibility in 
the eastern states during the summer months is 
a result of the combination of high sulfate 
concentrations and high relative humidity. 
The sum of scattering and absorption is referred 
to as atmospheric light extinction. Particles that 
are responsible for scattering are categorized as 
primary and secondary where primary sources 
include smoke from wildland fires and wind­
blown dust. Other sources of secondary par­
ticles include sulfate and nitrate particles 
formed in the atmosphere. The closer the 
particle size is to the wavelength of light, the 
more effective the particle is in scattering light. 
As a result, relatively large particles of wind­
blown dust are far less efficient in scattering 
light per unit mass than are the fine particles 
found in smoke from wildland fires. Finally, an 
important component of smoke from wildland 
fires is elemental carbon (also known as soot), 
which is highly effective in absorbing light 
within the sight path. This combination of light 
absorption by elemental carbon and light 
scattering caused by the very small particles 
that make up wildland fire smoke explains why 
emissions from wildland fire play such an 
important role in visibility impairment. 
The effect of regional haze on a Glacier Na­
tional Park vista is shown in the four panels of 
figure 3.2.1. The view is of the Garden Wall 
from across Lake McDonald. Particulate 
concentrations associated with these photo­
graphs correspond to 7.6, 12.0, 21.7 and 
65.3 µg/m3, respectively (Malm 1999).  Note 
the loss of color and detail in the mountains as 
the particulate concentrations increase and 
visibility decreases. 
– 36 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.2 – Visibility 
7.6 µg/m3 
12.0 µg/m3 
21.7 µg/m3 
65.3 µg/m3 
Figure 3.2.1. The eff ect of regional haz e on a Glacier National P a r k vista. 
Photo courtesy of the National Park Service, Air Resources Division. 
Natural Visibility Conditions 
Some light extinction occurs naturally due to 
scattering caused by the molecules that make up 
the atmosphere. This is called Rayleigh scatter­
ing and is the reason why the sky appears blue. 
But even without the influence of human-caused 
air pollution, visibility would not always reach 
the approximately 240-mile limit defined by 
Rayleigh scattering. Naturally occurring par­
ticles, such as windblown dust, smoke from 
natural fires, volcanic activity, and biogenic 
emissions (e.g. pollen and gaseous hydrocarbon) 
also contribute to visibility impairment although 
the concentrations and sources of some of these 
particles remain a point of investigation. 
Average natural visibility in the eastern U.S. is 
estimated to be about 60-80 miles (8-11 dv), 
whereas in the western US it is about 110-115 
miles (4.5-5 dv) (Malm 1999). Lower natural 
visibility in the eastern U.S. is due to higher 
average humidity.  Humidity causes fine par­
ticles to stick together, grow in size, and become 
more efficient at scattering light.  Under natural 
conditions, carbon-based particles are respon­
sible for most of the non-Rayleigh particle­
– 37 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Figure 3.2.2. Average annual visual range, in miles, for the years 1996-1998 measured at IMPROVE network 
monitors. 
associated visibility reduction, with all other 
particle species contributing significantly less. 
Scattering from naturally occurring sulfate 
particles from volcanic sulfur dioxide emis­
sions and oceanic sources of primary sulfate 
particles are estimated to account for 9-12% of 
the impairment in the East and 5% in the West 
(NPS 1997). It is expected that coastlines and 
highly vegetated areas may be lower than these 
averages, while some elevated areas (moun­
tains) could exceed these background esti­
mates. 
Current Visibility Conditions 
Currently, average visual range in the eastern 
U.S. is about 15-30 miles, or about one-third
of the estimated natural background for the 
East. In the West, visual range currently aver­
ages about 60-90 miles, or about one-half of the 
estimated natural background for the West. 
Current annual visual range conditions ex­
pressed in miles are shown in figure 3.2.2. 
Notice how much more impaired visibility is in 
the East versus the West. 
In the East, 60-70% of the visibility impairment 
is attributed to sulfates. Sulfate particles form 
from sulfur dioxide gas, most of which is re­
leased from coal-burning power plants and other 
industrial sources such as smelters, industrial 
boilers, and oil refineries. Carbon-based par­
ticles contribute about 20% of the impairment in 
the East. Sources of organic carbon particles 
include vehicle exhaust, vehicle refueling, 
solvent evaporation, food cooking, and fires. 
– 38 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.2 – Visibility 
Elemental carbon particles (or light absorbing 
carbon) are emitted by virtually all combustion 
activities, but are especially prevalent in diesel 
exhaust and smoke from wood burning. 
In the West, sulfates contribute less than 30% 
(Oregon, Idaho and Nevada) to 40-50% (Ari­
zona, New Mexico and Southwest Texas) of 
light extinction. Carbon particles in the West 
are a greater percentage of the extinction budget 
ranging from 50% or greater in the Northwest to 
30-40% in the other western regions. The 
higher percentages of the extinction budget 
associated with carbon particles in the West 
appear to be from smoke emitted by wildland 
and agricultural fires (NPS 1994). 
In summary, the physics of light extinction in 
the atmosphere coupled with the chemical 
composition and physical size distribution of 
particles in wildland fire smoke combine to 
make fire (especially in the West) an important 
contributor to visibility impairment. Wildland 
fire managers responsible for the protection of 
the scenic vistas of this nation’s wilderness 
areas and national parks have a difficult chal­
lenge in balancing the need to protect visibility 
with the need to use fire for other resource 
management goals. 
Literature Citations 
IMPROVE. 1994. Visibility protection. Interagency 
Monitoring of Protected Visual Environments 
Brochure. Ft. Collins, Colorado. August 1994. 
Available at: www2.nature.nps.gov/ard/impr/ 
index.htm 
National Park Service. 1997. Visibility protection. 
National Park Service Air Resources Division 
Web Page. Available at www2.nature.nps.gov/ 
ard/vis/visprot.html 
Malm, William C. 1999. Introduction to visibility. 
Cooperative Institute for Research in the 
Atmosphere. NPS Visibility Program, Colorado 
State University, Fort Collins, CO: 79 p. 
– 39 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
– 40 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.3 – Nuisance Smoke 
Problem and Nuisance Smoke
Gary L. Achtemeier 
Bill Jackson 
James D. Brenner 
Introduction 
The particulate matter (or particles) produced 
from wildland fires can be a nuisance or safety 
hazard to people who come in contact with the 
smoke – whether the contact is directly through 
personal exposure, or indirectly through visibil­
ity impairment. Nuisance smoke is defined by 
the US Environmental Protection Agency as the 
amount of smoke in the ambient air that inter­
feres with a right or privilege common to 
members of the public, including the use or 
enjoyment of public or private resources (US 
EPA 1990). 
Although the vast majority of prescribed burns 
occur without negative smoke impact, wildland 
fire smoke can be a problem anywhere in the 
country.  Complaints about loss of visibility, 
odors, and soiling from ash fallout are not 
unique to any region. Reduced visibility from 
smoke has caused fatal collisions on highways 
in several states, from Florida to Oregon. Ac­
rolein (and possibly formaldehyde) in smoke is 
likely to cause eye and nose irritation for dis­
tances up to a mile from the fire, exacerbating 
public nuisance conditions (Sandberg and Dost 
1990). The abatement of nuisance or problem 
smoke is one of the most important objectives of 
any wildland fire smoke management plan 
(Shelby and Speaker 1990). 
This section provides information on the issue 
of visibility reduction from wildland fire smoke, 
and focuses particularly on smoke as a major 
concern in the Southern states. Meteorology, 
climate and topography combine with popula­
tion density and fire frequency to make nuisance 
smoke a chronic issue in the South. Lessons 
from this regional example can be extrapolated 
and applied to other parts of the country.  This 
section also briefly summarizes tools currently 
used or under development to aid the land 
manager in reducing the problematic effects of 
smoke. 
Wildland fire smoke may also be a nuisance to 
the public by producing a regional haze, which 
is discussed in Section 3.2. 
Nuisance Smoke and 
Visibility Reduction 
A prescribed fire is a combustion process that 
has no pollution control devices to remove the 
pollutants. Instead, prescribed fire practitioners 
often rely on favorable atmospheric conditions 
to successfully disperse the smoke away from 
smoke-sensitive areas, such as communities, 
– 41 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
areas of heavy vehicle traffic, and scenic vistas. 
At times, however, unexpected changes in 
weather (especially wind), or planning which 
does not adequately factor in such elements as 
topography, diurnal weather patterns, or residual 
combustion, may result in an intrusion of smoke 
that causes negative impacts on the public. 
Smoke intrusions and nuisance- or safety-
related episodes may happen at any time during 
the course of a wildland fire, but they frequently 
occur in valley bottoms and drainages during the 
night. Within approximately one half hour of 
sunset, air cools rapidly near the ground, and 
wind speeds decline as the cooled stable airmass 
“disconnects” from faster-moving air just above 
it. High concentrations of smoke accumulate 
near the ground, particularly smoke from smol­
dering fuels that don’t generate much heat. 
Smoke then tends to be carried through drain­
ages with little dispersion or dilution. If the 
drainages are wet, smoke can act as a nucleating 
agent and can actually assist the formation of 
local fog, a particular problem in the Southeast. 
Typically, the greatest fog occurs where smoke 
accumulates in a low drainage. This can cause 
hazardous conditions where a drainage crosses a 
road or bridge, reducing visibility for traffic. 
Visibility reduction may also result from the 
direct impact of the smoke plume. Fine par­
ticles (less than 2.5 microns in diameter) of 
smoke are usually transported to the upper 
reaches of the atmospheric mixing height, where 
they are dispersed. They may, however, disperse 
gradually back to ground level in an unstable 
atmosphere (figure 3.3.1). When this occurs, 
such intrusions of smoke can cause numerous 
nuisance impacts as well as specific safety 
hazards. 
Visibility reduction is used as a metric of smoke 
intrusions in several State smoke management 
programs. The State of Oregon program opera­
tional guidance defines a “moderately” intense 
intrusion as a reduction of visibility from 4.6 to 
11.4 miles from a background visibility of more
than 50 miles (Oregon Dept. Forestry 1992). 
The State of Washington smoke intrusion 
reporting system uses “slightly visible, notice­
able impact on visibility, or excessive impact on 
visibility” to define light, medium and heavy 
intrusions (Washington Dept. Natural Resources 
1993). The New Mexico program requires that 
visibility impacts of smoke be considered in 
development of the unit’s burn prescription 
(New Mexico Environmental Improvement 
Board 1995). 
Smoke plume-related visibility degradation in 
urban and rural communities is not subject to 
regulation under the Clean Air Act.  Nuisance 
smoke is usually regulated under state and local 
laws and is frequently based on either public 
complaint or compromise of highway safety 
(Eshee 1995). Public outcry regarding nuisance 
smoke often occurs before smoke exposures 
reach levels that violate National Ambient Air 
Quality Standards. The Courts have ruled that 
the taking of private property by interfering with 
its use and enjoyment caused by smoke without 
just compensation is in violation of federal 
constitutional provisions under the Fifth 
Amendment. The trespass of smoke may 
diminish the value of the property, resulting in 
losses to the owner (Supreme Court of Iowa 
1998). 
Smoke as a Southern Problem 
The Forest Atlas of the United States (figure 
3.3.2) shows that the thirteen Southern states 
contain approximately 40% of U.S. forests – 
about 200 million acres. While not all of this 
forested land is regularly burned, the extensive 
forest type generally known as “southern pines” 
burns with a high fire frequency, about every 2-5 
years. When shrublands and grasslands are 
added to the total, from four to six million acres 
of southern wildlands are subjected to pre­
– 42 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.3 – Nuisance Smoke 
Figure 3.3.1.  Graphic from the dispersion model VSmoke-GIS, showing the rise and 
descent of a smoke plume during a daytime prescribed fire, assuming 25% of the 
smoke disperses at ground level. 
Figure 3.3.2.  National Atlas of Forest Cover Types.  Southern forests (outlined in blue extend 
from Virginia to Texas and from the Ohio River southward and account for approximately 40% of 
U.S. forest land. 
– 43 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
scribed fire each year.  This is by far the largest 
acreage of wildlland subjected to prescribed fire 
in any region of the country. 
Figure 3.3.3 shows the 1998 Population Density 
Classes for the United States. Of particular 
importance regarding problem smoke is the 
class “Wildland/Urban Interface,” designated in 
red. A comparison with figure 3.3.2 shows that 
the wildland/urban interface falls within much 
of the range of Southern forests. Southern 
forests, with highest treatment intervals of 
prescribed fire and with the largest acreages 
subjected to prescribed fire, are connected with 
human habitation and activity through an enor­
mous wildland/urban interface. The potential 
exists for significant smoke problems in this 
region. 
Smoke and Southern Climate 
Several factors regarding climate add to the 
smoke problem in the South. The long growing 
season allows time for more annual biomass 
production relative to other areas of the country 
with shorter growing seasons. Most of the 
Southern forests are located farther south than 
forests elsewhere in the country.  Consequently, 
the sun angle is higher in the South and is 
capable of supplying warmth well into the late 
fall and early winter.  Further, most southern 
wildlands are located at low elevations where 
the air is warmer.  These factors contribute to 
the long growing season, which runs from 
March/April through October/November. 
Abundant rainfall also encourages growth of a 
large number of grasses, shrubs, and trees. 
Most of the South receives 40-60 inches (100­
150 cm) of precipitation annually.  This copious 
rainfall, in combination with the long growing 
season, creates conditions for rapid buildup of 
both dead and live fuels. If burns are not con­
ducted frequently, the increase in emissions 
from the accumulated fuels may enhance the 
likelihood of negative smoke impacts when fires 
do occur. 
Figure 3.3.3.  Population density classes showing wildland/urban interface in red. 
Southern forests outlined in blue.  [http://www.fs.fed.us/fire/fuelman] 
– 44 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.3 – Nuisance Smoke 
The coincidence of dormant-season burning 
with the winter rain season is a third factor 
contributing to nuisance smoke. Although 
burning is conducted year round throughout the 
South, a significant amount of burning is done 
during January through March. In a typical 
year, anywhere from 10-20 inches (25-50 cm) of 
rain will fall over Southern forests during this 
three-month period. In some areas of the coun­
try, the question might be, “Is it wet enough to 
burn?” In the South, the question is commonly, 
“Is it dry enough to burn?” Fires burning into 
moist fuel burn less efficiently and smolder 
longer than fires burning dry fuels. Both factors 
increase smoke production. In addition, less 
heat is produced during inefficient combustion 
and smoldering. Therefore, more smoke stays 
near the ground and increases the risk of prob­
lem smoke. 
Smoke and 
Southern Meteorology 
All thirteen Southern states have implemented 
burning regulations designed to limit open 
burning to those days when burning is consid­
ered “safe” and the risks of fire escapes are 
minimal. Many have implemented smoke 
management regulations. The need to conduct 
burning in a manner to reduce impacts on air 
quality over sensitive targets has encouraged 
“best practice” approaches to open burning. 
Efforts to avoid smoke incursions over sensitive 
targets are often complicated by the highly 
variable meteorology of Southern weather 
systems during the extensive burn season. Four 
weather features that cause frequent wind shifts 
and may be accompanied by rapid changes in air 
mass stability and mixing height are described 
below. 
1. Synoptic scale high- and low-pressure 
systems and accompanying fronts frequent 
the South during the winter burn season. 
In a typical sequence of events, the winds 
shift to blow from the southeast through 
southwest in advance of a storm, then shift 
rapidly to the northwest with cold front 
passage. Winds blow from the northwest 
for a day or so but gradually diminish with 
the approach of a high pressure system, 
becoming light and variable as the system 
passes. Then winds shift back to southerly 
in advance of the next storm. Low clouds, 
low mixing heights, and high stability often 
accompany low-pressure systems. De­
pending upon moisture availability, cold 
fronts may be accompanied by bands of 
low clouds and precipitation. Mixing 
heights are more favorable during high-
pressure episodes. Although the movement 
of synoptic scale weather systems into the 
South can be predicted with lead times of 
several days, the timing of arrival of frontal 
wind shifts over specific burn sites is less 
certain. 
2. Much of the Piedmont and Coastal Plain 
are flat and it would be expected that winds 
there are steady and predictable. However, 
the region is frequented by transient eddies 
that can cause unexpected wind shifts and 
carry smoke into sensitive areas. The 
vertical circulation of air that can force 
smoke plumes to the ground or carry 
smoke safely upward are well-understood, 
but the location, timing and strength of the 
vertical eddies cannot be predicted. Hori­
zontal eddies have not been well docu­
mented, and the timing, location and 
intensity cannot be predicted. 
3. The South has the longest coastline of any 
fire-prone area in the country.  Thus it is 
axiomatic that large areas of the South are 
– 45 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
subject to wind shifts brought on by sea 
breezes during the day and by land breezes 
during the night. However, the onset, 
duration, and intensity of these land/water-
induced circulations are not consistent 
from one day to the next. The region is 
subject at different times to warm, humid 
airmasses drawn northward from the Gulf 
of Mexico, or cold, dry airmasses drawn 
southward from Canada. Both systems 
have an impact on land surface tempera­
tures, which results in a significant effect 
on the duration and extent of land and sea 
breezes and whether they form at all. The 
unpredictability of these wind systems adds 
to the difficulties faced by Southern land 
managers planning whether smoke from a 
prescribed burn might impact downwind 
sensitive targets. 
4. The “flying wedge,” a wind system caused 
by cold air channeled southwestward along 
the eastern slopes of the Appalachian 
Mountains, can cause sudden wind shifts 
with large changes in wind direction and 
lowering of mixing heights. Although 
Virginia, the Carolinas and Georgia are 
most frequently impacted, flying wedges 
have been observed as far south as central 
Florida and as far west as the Mississippi 
River. “Flying wedges” occur throughout 
the year but are most intense, and hence 
bring with them strong shifting winds and 
lowering of mixing heights, during winter 
and early spring, the period of maximum 
wildland burning in the South. 
Smoke and Southern Highways 
As previously noted, several million acres of 
Southern wildlands are burned each year, the 
vast majority without incident. However, smoke 
and smoke-induced fog obstructions of visibility 
on highways sometimes cause accidents with 
loss of life and personal injuries. Several 
attempts to compile records of smoke-impli-
cated highway accidents have been made. For 
the 10-year period from 1979-1988, Mobley 
(1989) reported 28 fatalities, over 60 serious 
injuries, numerous minor injuries and millions 
of dollars in lawsuits. During 2000, smoke from 
wildfires drifting across Interstate 10 caused at 
least 10 fatalities, five in Florida and five in 
Mississippi. In their study of the relationship 
between fog and highway accidents in Florida, 
Lavdas and Achtemeier (1995) compared three 
years of accident reports that mentioned fog 
with fog reports at nearby National Weather 
Service stations. Highway accidents were more 
likely to be associated with local ground radia­
tion fogs than with widespread advection fogs. 
Accidents tended to happen when fog created 
conditions of sudden and unexpected changes in 
visibility. 
There are several reasons why smoke on the 
highways is a serious problem in the South, 
some of them interrelated. 
Road density: The density of the road network 
in the South is far greater than in other wildland 
areas in the country where prescribed fire is in 
widespread use. The difference in road density 
between generally forested areas in the west and 
in the south exists primarily because of land use 
history.   While Western forested lands have 
always been in forest, in the Southern area, 
roads and communities remain essentially 
unchanged from the old agricultural South. 
Population in wildland areas: The population 
dwelling near or within Southern wildlands is 
greater than that in other areas of the country 
where prescribed fire is in widespread use 
(figure 3.3.3). Many people live in close prox­
imity to Southern forests; many more live in 
– 46 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide
3.3 – Nuisance Smoke 
areas interfacing fire-prone grasslands and 
shrublands. Southern States are becoming more 
urban, and the numbers of tourists driving to 
resort areas along the Gulf coast, the Atlantic 
coast, and the Florida peninsula are increasing. 
Therefore, the number of accidents related to 
smoke and fog can only be expected to increase. 
Climate and meteorology:  Factors of Southern 
climate and meteorology combine to produce 
airmasses that entrap smoke close to the ground 
at night. Smoke is most often trapped by either 
a surface inversion or inversion aloft. This is a 
condition in which temperature increases with 
height through a layer of the atmosphere. Verti­
cal motion is restricted in this very stable air 
mass. Although most inversions dissipate with 
daytime heating, inversions aloft caused by 
large-scale subsidence may persist for several 
days, resulting in a prolonged smoke manage­
ment problem 
Most smoke-related highway accidents occur 
just before sunrise when temperatures are 
coldest and smoke entrapment has maximized 
under a surface-level inversion. The high sun 
angle during the burn season contributes to 
warm daytime temperatures. Near sunset, under 
clear skies and near calm winds, temperatures in 
shallow stream basins can drop up to 20 degrees 
F. in one hour (Achtemeier 1993). Smoke from 
smoldering heavy fuels can be entrapped near 
the ground and carried by local drainage winds 
into these shallow basins where temperatures 
are colder and relative humidities are higher. 
Hygroscopic particles within smoke can assist in 
development of local dense fog. Weak drainage 
winds of approximately 1 mile per hour (0.5 
m/sec) can carry smoke over 10 miles during the 
night—far enough in many areas to carry the 
smoke or fog over a roadway. 
Problem Smoke: What is being 
done to Minimize the Problem 
As population growth in the South continues, 
there is an increasing likelihood that more 
people will be adversely impacted by smoke. 
Unless methods are found to mitigate the im­
pacts of smoke, increasingly restrictive regula­
tions may curtail the use of prescribed fire, or 
fire as a management tool may be prohibited. 
Several approaches are underway to reduce the 
uncertainty in predicting smoke movement. 
•	 Several states have devised smoke man­
agement guidelines to regulate the amount 
of smoke put into the atmosphere from 
prescribed burning. The South Carolina 
Forestry Commission (1998) has estab­
lished guidelines to define smoke sensitive 
areas, amounts of vegetative debris that 
may be burned, and atmospheric condi­
tions suitable for burning this debris. 
• The Forestry Weather Interpretation 
System (FWIS) was developed by the U.S. 
Forest Service in the late 1970’s and early 
1980’s in cooperation with the southern 
forestry community (Paul 1981; Paul and 
Clayton 1978). The system has been 
enhanced and automated by the Georgia 
Forestry Commission (Paul et al. 2000) to 
serve forestry sources in Georgia and 
clients in other southern states. The GFC 
provides weather information and fore­
casts specified for forest districts, and 
indices used for interpretations for smoke 
management, prescribed fire, fire danger, 
and fire behavior.  Indices include the 
Keetch-Byram Drought Index, National 
Fire Danger Rating System, Ignition 
component, Burning Index, and Manning 
Class Day. 
– 47 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
• High resolution weather prediction models 
promise to provide increased accuracy in 
predictions of wind speeds and directions 
and mixing heights at time and spatial 
scales useful for land managers. The 
Florida Division of Forestry (FDOF) is a 
leader in the use of high resolution model­
ing for forestry applications in the South 
(Brackett et al. 1997). Accurate predic­
tions of sea/land breezes and associated 
changes in temperature, wind direction, 
atmospheric stability and mixing height 
are critical to the success of the FDOF 
system as much of Florida is located 
within 20 miles of a coastline. High 
resolution modeling consortia are also 
being established by the U.S. Forest 
Service to serve clients with interests as 
diverse as fire weather, air quality, ocean­
ography, ecology, and meteorology. 
• Several smoke models are in operation or 
are being developed to predict smoke 
movement over Southern landscapes. 
VSMOKE (Lavdas 1996), a Gaussian 
plume model that assumes level terrain 
and unchanging winds, predicts smoke 
movement and concentration during the 
day.  VSMOKE is now part of the FDOF 
fire and smoke prediction system. It is a 
screening model that aids land managers 
in assessing where smoke might impact 
sensitive targets as part of planning for 
prescribed burns. PB-Piedmont 
(Achtemeier 2001) is a wind and smoke 
model designed to simulate smoke move­
ment near the ground under entrapment 
conditions at night. The smoke plume is 
simulated as an ensemble of particles that 
are transported by local winds over com­
plex terrain characteristic of the shallow 
(30-50 m) interlocking ridge/valley sys­
tems typical of the Piedmont of the South. 
PB-Piedmont does not predict smoke 
concentrations as emissions from smolder­
ing combustion are usually not known. 
Two sister models are planned, one that 
will simulate near ground smoke move­
ment near coastal areas influenced by sea/ 
land circulations and the other for the 
Appalachian mountains. 
In summary, the enormous wildland/urban 
interface and dense road network located in a 
region where up to six million acres of wild­
lands per year are subject to prescribed fire 
combine to make problem smoke the foremost 
land management-related air quality problem in 
the South. During the daytime, smoke becomes 
a problem when it drifts into areas of human 
habitation. At night, smoke can become en­
trapped near the ground and, in combination 
with fog, create visibility reductions that cause 
roadway accidents. Public outcry regarding 
problem smoke usually occurs before smoke 
exposures increase to levels that violate air 
quality standards. With careful planning and 
knowledge of local conditions, the fire manager 
can usually avoid problematic smoke intrusions 
on the public. 
Literature Citations 
Achtemeier, G.L. 2001.  Simulating nocturnal smoke 
movement. Fire Management Today, 61: 28-33 
Achtemeier, G. L. 1993.  Measurements of drainage 
winds along a small ridge. In: Proceedings of 
the 86th Annual Meeting and Exhibition, Air & 
Waste Management Association, 93-FA-155.06, 
15 pp. 
Brackett, D.P., L. G. Arvanitus, J. Brenner, and M. 
Long, 1997. A high-tech approach to open-
burning authorization and wildfire response. J. 
Forestry, 95: 10-15. 
– 48 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.3 – Nuisance Smoke 
Eshee, W.D. 1995.  Legal implications of using 
prescribed fire. In: Proceedings: Environmental 
regulation & prescribed fire conference. D.C. 
Bryan, ed. Division of Forestry, Florida Depart­
ment of Agriculture and Consumer Services, 
Tallahassee, Florida. pp. 126-130. 
Lavdas, L. G. 1996. Program VSMOKE–users 
manual. USDA Forest Service General Techni­
cal Report SRS-6. 147 pp. 
Lavdas, L., and G. L. Achtemeier. 1995.  A fog and 
smoke risk index for estimating roadway 
visibility hazard. National Weather Digest, 20: 
26-33. 
Mobley, H. E. 1989.  Summary of smoke-related 
accidents in the South from prescribed fire 
(1979-1988). American Pulpwood Association 
Technical Release 90-R-11. 
New Mexico Environmental Improvement Board 
Rules. 1995. Open Burning 20-NMAC2.60. 
Santa Fe, New Mexico. 
Paul, J. T., 1981: A real-time weather system for 
forestry (FWIS). Bulletin of the American 
Meteorological Society, 62: 1466-1472. 
Paul, J. T., and J. Clayton, 1978.  User manual: 
Forestry Weather Interpretation System 
(FWIS). Asheville, NC: U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, Forest Service, Southeastern 
Forest Experiment Station and Atlanta, GA: 
Southeastern Area State and Private Forestry, in 
cooperation with the U.S. National Weather 
Service, NOAA, Silver Spring, MD, 83pp. 
Paul, J. T., D. Chan, and A. Dozier, 2000. Fire 
Weather and Smoke Management System. 
Georgia Forestry Commission, 74 pp. 
Sandberg, D.V., and F. N. Dost. 1990.  Effects of 
prescribed fire on air quality and human health. 
In: Natural and Prescribed Fire in Pacific 
Northwest Forests. J.D. Walstad; S.R. 
Radosevich; D.V. Sandberg, eds. Oregon State 
University Press, Corvallis, OR. pp. 91-298. 
Shelby, B., and R. W. Speaker. 1990.  Public atti­
tudes and perceptions about prescribed burning. 
In: J.D. Walstad; S.R. Radosevich; D.V. 
Sandberg, eds. Natural and Prescribed Fire in 
Pacific Northwest Forests. Oregon State 
University Press. Corvallis, OR. pp. 253-260. 
South Carolina Forestry Commission, 1998. Smoke 
Management Guidelines for Vegetative Debris 
Burning Operations in the State of South 
Carolina. SCFC 4th Printing, 21 p. 
State of Oregon Department of Forestry. 1992. 
Smoke Management Program Directives, 
Appendix 2. Salem, Oregon. 
State of Washington Department of Natural Re­
sources. 1993. Smoke Management Program 
Appendix 5. Olympia, Washington. 
Supreme Court of Iowa, No. 192/96-2276. 
Bormann, et al vs. Board of Supervisors in and 
for Kossuth County Iowa. September 23, 1998. 
{http://www.webcom.com/bi /iowa.htm} 
US Environmental Protection Agency. 1990.  Air 
Quality Criteria for Particulate Matter Volume 
II of III. Office of Research and Development. 
EPA/600/P-95/00ibF. pp. 8-82 – 8-89. 
– 49 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
– 50 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.4 – Smoke Exposure 
Smoke Exposure Among 
Fireline Personnel 
Roger D. Ottmar 
Timothy R. Reinhardt 
Wildland firefighting presents many hazards to 
fireline workers, including inhalation exposure 
to smoke (Sharkey 1998; Reinhardt and Ottmar 
1997; Sharkey 1997). Many experienced 
fireline personnel consider this to be only an 
inconvenience, occasionally causing acute cases 
of eye and respiratory irritation, nausea and 
headache. Others express concern about long-
term health impacts, especially when large-
scale fires occur in terrain and atmospheric 
conditions that force fireline workers to work 
for many days in smoky conditions. At the 
present time, no one can say whether there are 
long-term adverse health effects from occupa­
tional smoke exposure. This is because there 
have been no epidemiological studies to track 
the health of fireline personnel and compare it 
with other workers to see if fireline personnel 
have more or fewer health problems during and 
after their careers. Until such long-term data 
are examined to tell us if a problem exists, we 
can only assess the occurrence of relatively 
short-term adverse health effects.  We can 
measure fireline worker’s exposure to particles 
and individual chemicals found in smoke and 
compare these exposures to standards estab­
lished to protect worker health (Reinhardt and 
Ottmar 2000; Reinhardt and others 2000; 
Reinhardt and others 1999). We can evaluate 
the relative risk of disease among fireline 
workers based on the exposure data and the 
potency of the health hazards (Booze and 
Reinhardt 1996). 
Health Hazards in Smoke 
Smoke from wildland fires is composed of 
hundreds of chemicals in gaseous, liquid, and 
solid forms (Sandberg and Dost 1990; Reinhardt 
and Ottmar 2000; Reinhardt and others 2000; 
Sharkey 1998; Sharkey 1997). The chief inhala­
tion hazards for fireline personnel and to the 
general public when they are exposed to smoke 
appear to be carbon monoxide and respirable 
irritants which include particulate matter, ac­
rolein, and formaldehyde. 
Carbon Monoxide — Carbon monoxide (CO) 
has long been known to interfere with the body’s 
ability to transport oxygen. It does this by 
bonding with hemoglobin, the molecule in the 
bloodstream which shuttles oxygen from the 
lungs throughout the body, to form carboxyhe­
moglobin (COHb). When people are exposed to 
CO, the time until a toxic level of COHb results 
can be predicted as a function of CO concentra­
tion, breathing rate, altitude, and other factors 
(Coburn, Forster and Kane 1965). The harder 
the work and the higher the altitude, the more 
– 51 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
rapidly COHb forms at a given level of atmo­
spheric CO. At the highest CO levels found in 
heavy smoke, symptoms of excessive COHb can 
result in 15 minutes during hard physical labor. 
Carbon monoxide causes acute effects ranging 
from diminished work capacity to nausea, 
headache, and loss of mental acuity.  It has a 
well-established mechanism of action, causing 
displacement of oxygen from hemoglobin in the 
blood and affecting tissues that do not stand the 
loss of oxygen very well, such as the brain, 
heart, and unborn children. Fortunately, most of 
these effects are reversible and CO is rapidly 
removed from the body, with a half-life on the 
order of 4 hours. Some studies have linked CO 
exposure to longer-term heart disease, but the 
evidence is not clearcut. 
Respirable Irritants — Experienced fireline 
workers can attest to eye, nose and throat irrita­
tion at both wildfires and prescribed burns. 
Burning eyes, runny nose, and scratchy throat 
are common symptoms in smoky areas at 
wildland fires, caused by the irritation of mu­
cous membranes. These adverse health effects 
are symptoms of exposure to aldehydes, includ­
ing formaldehyde, acrolein, as well as respirable 
particulate matter (PM2.5)—very fine particles 
less than a few micrometers (µm) in diameter— 
composed mostly of condensed organic and 
inorganic carbon (Dost 1991).  Other rapid 
adverse health effects of aldehydes include 
temporary paralysis of the respiratory tract cilia 
(microscopic hairs which help to remove dust 
and bacteria from the respiratory tract) and 
depression of breathing rates (Kane and Alarie 
1977), while over the long term, formaldehyde 
is considered a potential cause of nasal cancer 
(U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration 1987). 
Adverse health effects of smoke exposure begin 
with acute, instantaneous eye and respiratory 
irritation and shortness of breath but can de­
velop into headaches, dizziness and nausea 
lasting up to several hours. The aldehydes, such 
as acrolein and formaldehyde, and PM2.5 cause 
rapid minor to severe eye and upper respiratory 
tract irritation. Total supsended particulate 
(TSP) also irritates the eyes, upper respiratory 
tract and mucous membranes, but the larger 
particulates in TSP do not penetrate as deeply 
into the lungs as the finer PM2.5 particles. 
Longer-term health effects lasting days to 
perhaps months have recently been identified 
among fireline workers, including modest losses 
of pulmonary function. These include a slightly 
diminished capacity to breathe, constriction of 
the repsiratory tract, and hypersensitivity of the 
small airways (Letts and others 1991; Reh and 
others 1994). 
A discussion of particulate inhalation hazards 
faced by fireline personnel is incomplete with­
out mentioning crystalline silica, which can be 
an additional hazard in the presence of smoke. 
If crystalline silica is a component of the soil at 
a site, dust stirred up by walking, digging, mop-
up, or vehicles may be a significant irritation 
hazard, and the threat of silicosis (fibrous 
scarring of the lungs decreasing oxygenation 
capability) is a possibility. 
Evaluation Criteria 
On what basis do we decide whether smoke 
exposure is safe or unsafe? Workplace expo­
sures to health hazards must be evaluated with 
care for several reasons. First, people vary in 
their sensitivity to pollutants. Second, personal 
habits and physical condition are important 
factors. For example, smokers already com­
monly experience 5% COHb because of the CO 
– 52 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.4 – Smoke Exposure 
from their cigarettes, thus they may be at greater 
risk of adverse health effects from additional 
CO exposure at fires. Assumptions are made by 
regulatory agencies when establishing exposure 
limits. These assumptions may not be valid for 
the wildland fire workplace. For example, the 
current CO standard was set to protect a seden­
tary worker in an 8-hour per day job over a 
working lifetime, not a hard-working fireline 
worker on a 12-hour/day job for a few summers. 
Given these issues, how should we judge the 
safety of smoke exposure? At a minimum, a 
fireline worker’s inhalation exposures must 
comply with the occupational exposure limits, 
called “Permissible Exposure Limits” (PEL’s), 
by the Occupational Safety and Health Adminis­
tration (OSHA) (U.S. Department of Labor, 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration 
1994). These limits are set at levels considered 
feasible to attain, and necessary to protect most 
workers from adverse health effects over their 
working lifetime. The more stringent expo­
sure limits recommended by the American 
Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygien­
ists (ACGIH) are the “Threshold Limit Values” 
(TLVs) (American Conference of Governmental 
Ta b le 3.4.1. Occupational e xposure limitsa 
Industrial Hygienists 2000). These are also 
established to prevent adverse health effects in 
most workers, but without adjustment for 
economic feasibility.  The ACGIH limits are 
periodically updated to incorporate the latest 
scientific knowledge where as many of the 
PEL’s have not been revised since the 1960’s. 
All exposure limits are expressed in terms of a 
time-weighted average (TWA) exposure, which 
is an average exposure over the workshift. For 
health hazards which quickly cause adverse 
effects from acute exposures, the limits are 
supplemented by short-term exposure limits 
(STELs) for 15-minute periods in a workshift 
and ceiling exposure limits (C), which are not to 
be exceeded at any time. These various expo­
sure limits are listed in table 3.4.1, along with a 
third set of “Recommended Exposure Limits” 
established by the National Institute for Occupa­
tional Safety and Health; these also incorporate 
recent scientific evidence. Depending on the 
pollutant, the units of measure are either milli­
grams per cubic meter of air (mg/m3) or parts 
per million by volume (ppm). Without a more 
detailed analysis of a given work/rest regime, 
adhering to the ACGIH TLV limits should 
provide reasonable protection for workers. 
– 53 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Smoke Exposure at Prescribed 
Burns and Wildfires 
Several studies (Reinhardt and Ottmar 1997) 
have evaluated smoke exposure during pre­
scribed burns by obtaining personal exposure 
samples, which are collected within a foot of a 
worker’s face (the breathing zone) while they 
are on the job (figure 3.4.1). One study in 
particular measured smoke exposure among 
fireline workers at 39 prescribed burns in the 
Pacific Northwest. The study found that about 
10% of firefighter exposures to respiratory 
irritants and CO exceeded recommended occu­
pational exposure limits (Reinhardt and others 
2000) and could pose a hazard. The actual 
incidence of illness and mortality among wild­
land fireline workers has not been systemati­
cally studied, but short-term adverse health 
impacts have been observed among fireline 
personnel at prescribed fires. A study in 1992­
93 found small losses in lung function among 76 
fireline personnel working at prescribed burns 
(Betchley and others 1995). 
Between 1992 and 1995 a study of smoke 
exposure and health effects at wildfires in the 
western United States found results similar to 
those at prescribed fires. Exposure to carbon 
monoxide and respiratory irritants exceeded 
recommended occupational exposure limits for 
5 percent of workers (Reinhardt and Ottmar 
2000). 
At wildfires where fireline workers encounter 
concentrated smoke, or moderate smoke over 
longer times, there is a likelihood that many will 
develop symptoms similar to those seen at 
prescribed fires. In 1988, engine-based 
firefighters of the California Department of 
Forestry and Fire Protection underwent lung 
function testing before and after the fire season. 
Small (0.3 to 2%) losses in lung function were 
observed among the firefighters. These losses 
Figure 3.4.1. Bitterroot Hotshot crew member wearing backpack that obtains smoke 
exposure samples collected within several inches of a worker’s face. 
– 54 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.4 – Smoke Exposure 
were associated with the amount of recent 
firefighting activity in the study period. The 
firefighters also reported increased eye and nose 
irritation and wheezing during the fire season. 
Monitoring Smoke Exposure of 
Fireline workers 
During prescribed fire and wildfire exposure 
studies, it was found that exposure to respiratory 
irritants could be predicted from measurements 
of carbon monoxide (Reinhardt and Ottmar 
2000). Fire managers and safety officers con­
cerned with smoke exposure among fire crews 
can use electronic carbon monoxide (CO) 
monitors to track and prevent overexposure to 
smoke (figure 3.4.2). Commonly referred to as 
dosimeters, these lightweight instruments 
measure the concentration of CO in the air 
thatfireline personnel breath. Protocols have 
been developed for sampling smoke exposure 
among fireline workers with CO dosimeters. 
These protocols and a basic template have been 
outlined by Reinhardt and others (1999) for 
managers and safety officers interested in 
establishing their own smoke-exposure monitor­
ing program. 
Respirator Protection 
The Missoula Technology and Development 
Center (MTDC) has the lead role in studying 
respiratory protection for fireline workers 
(Thompson and Sharkey 1966, Sharkey 1997). 
Figure 3.4.2. Carbon monoxide exposure data from a electronic CO data recorder for a fireline worker 
during a work-shift on a prescribed fire (Reinhardt and others 2000) 
– 55 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
Although respirators reduce work capacity, they 
may have merit under certain circumstances to 
minimize hazardous exposures. Field evalua­
tions by MTDC found that disposable respira­
tors were acceptable for short-term use but they 
deteriorated in the heat during several hours of 
use (Sharkey 1997). Maintenance free half-
mask devices were satisfactory, except for the 
heat stress found with all facemasks. Full-face 
masks were preferred for the long-term use on 
prescribed fires because of the eye protection 
they provided, but workers often complained of 
headaches, a sign of excess CO exposure since 
respirators do not eliminate the intake of CO 
(Sharkey 1997). Full-face respirators protect the 
eyes, removing eye irritation as an important 
early warning of exposure to smoke. Any respi­
ratory protection program for fireline workers 
would require employees to be instructed and 
trained in the proper use and limitations of the 
respirators issued to them. 
Management Implications 
Evidence to date suggests that fireline workers 
exceed recommended exposure limits during 
prescribed burns and wildfires less than 10 
percent of the time (Reinhardt and others 2000; 
Reinhardt and Ottmar 2000). The concept that 
few fireline personnel spend a working lifetime 
in the fire profession and should be exempt from 
occupational exposure standards which are set 
to protect workers over their careers is little 
comfort to those who do, and irrelevant for 
irritants and fast-acting hazards such as CO. 
Most of the exposure limits that are exceeded 
are established to prevent acute health effects, 
such as eye and respiratory irritation, headache, 
nausea and angina. An exposure standard 
specifically for fireline workers, and appropriate 
respiratory protection, needs to be developed. 
In addition, a long-term program to manage 
smoke exposure at wildland fires is needed 
(Sharkey 1997). The program could include: 
1) hazard awareness training; 2) implementation 
of practices to reduce smoke exposure; 3) 
routine CO monitoring with electronic dosim­
eters (Reinhardt and others 1999); 4) improved 
record keeping on accident reports to include 
separation of smoke related illness among 
fireline workers and fire camp personnel; and 4) 
implementing and training for an OSHA-
compliant respirator program to protect fireline 
personnel from respiratory irritants and CO 
when they must work in smoky conditions. 
Literature Citations 
American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists. 2000. 2000 TLVs® and BEIs®: 
Threshold Limit Values for chemical substances 
and physical agents and biological exposure 
indices. Cincinnati, OH 192 p. 
Betchley, C.; Koenig, J.Q.; van Belle G.; 
Checkoway, H. and Reinhardt, T. 1995. Pulmo­
nary function and respiratory symptoms in 
forest firefighters, Unpublished report, Univer­
sity of Washington, Departments of Environ­
mental Health and Epidemiology, Seattle, WA 
Booze, Tom F.; Reinhardt, Timothy E.  1996. 
Assessment of the health risks of chronic smoke 
exposure for wildland firefighters. Unpublished 
report, Pacific Northwest Research Station, 
Seattle forestry Science Laboratory, 4043 
Roosevelt Way N.E., Seattle, WA. 29 p. 
Coburn, R.F.; Forster, R.E.; Kane, P.B. 1965. Con­
siderations of the physiological variables that 
determine the blood carboxyhemoglobin 
concentration in man. Journal of Clinical 
Investigation 44: 1899-1910. 
– 56 – 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
3.4 – Smoke Exposure 
Dost, F.N. 1991. Acute toxicology of components of 
vegetation smoke. In: Reviews of Environmen­
tal Contamination and Toxicology, Vol 119, 
Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., New York, NY, 
1991 pp 2-46. 
Kane, L.E.; Alarie, Y. 1977. Sensory irritation to 
formaldehyde and acrolein during single and 
repeated exposures in mice. American Industrial 
Hygiene Association Journal 38(10): 509-522. 
Letts, D.; Fidler, A.T.; Deitchman, S.; Reh, C.M. 
1991. Health hazard evaluation report 91-152-
2140. U.S. Department of the Interior, National 
Park Service, Southern California, U.S. Depart­
ment of Health and Human Services, Public 
Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health, Cincinnati, OH. 
Reh, C.M.; Letts, D.; Deitchman, S.D. 1994. Health 
hazard evaluation report 90-0365-2415. U.S. 
Department of the Interior, National Park 
Service, Yosemite National Park, California, 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser­
vices, Public Health Service, Centers for 
Disease Control, National Institute for Occupa­
tional Safety and Health, Cincinnati, OH. 
Reinhardt, Timothy E.; Ottmar, Roger D. 1997. 
Smoke exposure among wildland firefighters: a 
review and discussion of current literature. Gen. 
Tech. Rep. GTR-373. Portland, OR: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest service, 
Pacific Northwest research Station. 61 p. 
Reinhardt, Timothy E.; Ottmar, Roger D. 2000. 
Smoke exposure at western wildfires. Res. Pap. 
PNW-RP-525. Portland, OR: U.S. Department 
of Agriculture, Forest Service, Pacific North­
west Research Station. 72 p. 
Reinhardt, Timothy E.; Ottmar, Roger D.; 
Hanneman, Andrew J.S. 2000. Smoke exposure 
among firefighters at prescribed burns in the 
Pacific Northwest. Res. Pap. PNW-RP-526. 
Portland, OR: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research 
Station. 45 p. 
Reinhardt, Tim E.; Ottmar, Roger D.; Hallett, 
Michael R. 1999. Guide to monitoring smoke 
exposure of wildland firefighters. Gen. Tech. 
Rep. PNW-GTR-448. Portland, OR: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest service, 
Pacific Northwest Research Station. 17 p. 
Sandberg, David V.; Dost, Frank N. 1990. Effects of 
prescribed fire on air quality and human health. 
In: Walstad, John D.; Radosevich, Steven R.; 
Sandberg, David V., eds. Natural and prescribed 
fire in the Pacific Northwest forests. Corvallis, 
OR: Oregon State University Press: 191-298. 
Sharkey, Brian, ed. 1997. Health hazards of smoke: 
recommendations of the April 1997 Consensus 
Conference. Tech. Rep. 9751-2836-MTDC. 
Missoula, MT: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 
Forest Service, Missoula Technology and 
Development Center. 84 p. 
Sharkey, Brian, ed. 1998. Health hazards of smoke. 
Closed caption video. Missoula, MT: U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, 
Missoula Technology and Development Center. 
19 minutes. 
Thompson, S.; Sharkey, B. 1966. Physiological cost 
and air flow resistance of respiratory protective 
devices. Ergonomics 9:495. 
U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and 
Health Admnistration. 1987. Occupational 
exposure to formaldehyde, final rule. Federal 
Register 52(233): 46312, Washington D.C. 
1987. 
U.S. Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration. 1994. Code of Federal 
Regulations, Title 29, Part 1910.1048(d)(2)(i), 
Washington, DC, 1994. 
– 57 – 
Chapter 3 – Smoke Impacts 
2001 Smoke Management Guide 
– 58 – 
