NASA Occupational Health  
Employee-Directed and  
Management-Directed Principles 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 2 
Table of Contents 
 
Section Title 
 
__________________________________________________________________ 
 
Forward....................................................................................................................3 
Employee-Directed Principles................................................................................4 
Managing Employee Assessment (MEA)....................................................................4 
Employee Care Process (ECP) ..................................................................................7 
Coordinating Employee Care (CEC) ........................................................................10 
Employee Care Rights (ECR)...................................................................................12 
Employee Healthcare Education (EDU)....................................................................14 
 
Management-Directed Principles ........................................................................15 
Facility and Safety Management (FSM)....................................................................15 
Governance (GOV) .................................................................................................17 
Information Management Services (IMS)..................................................................19 
Infection Control Services (INF) ..............................................................................22 
Performance Improvement Management (PIM) ........................................................24 
Staff Qualifications and Competency (SQC).............................................................27 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 3 
Foreword 
 
The NASA Office of the Chief Health and Medical Officer (OCHMO), Headquarters 
and located at the Kennedy Space Center developed this Desk Guide to assist 
program personnel in meeting medical quality assurance goals. 
 
The broad overall authority for the NASA Medical Quality Assurance Desk Guide is 
Executive Order 12196, dated February 26,1980, “Occupational Safety and Health 
Programs for Federal Employees”, (3 CFR 1980 Compilation) and 29 CFR, Part 1960, 
“Basic Program Elements for Federal Employee Occupational Safety and Health 
Programs and Related Matters.”  The general supporting implementation guidance 
can be found in NPG 1800.1, NASA Occupational Health Program Procedures.  
Chapter 2, Occupational Health Program, Section 2.3 Quality Assurance Program.   
Section 2.3 covers a variety of quality assurance topics including credentialing and 
privileging, peer review, quality improvement, risk management, standardization, 
environment of care, etc.  This Desk Guide and its companion document provide more 
detailed information on employee and management-directed quality assurance 
principals, measurable elements, and examples of processes, forms, study guides and 
tests. 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 4 
Section I: Employee-Directed Principles 
Managing Employee (Patient) Assessment 
 
When an employee comes to a NASA clinic, qualified clinic staff members 
initially determine the reason for the visit and will collect the specific information.  The 
type of visit (e.g., health screening, acute injury) determines the process for collecting 
the required information.  The actual assessment process, defined in writing, is 
performed by the appropriate discipline within the scope of practice, licensure, 
applicable laws and regulation, or certification.  Treatment is rendered as quickly as 
possible after assessment.  Findings as well as follow-up and reevaluation processes 
are documented. 
 
MEA.1  
All employees cared for by the NASA Occupational Health (OH) clinics have 
their health care needs identified through an established assessment process. 
 
MEA.1.1 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services have determined the scope and 
content of assessments, based on applicable laws and regulations. 
 
MEA.1.2 
 Occupational health clinical practice guidelines, adopted by the NASA OH, are 
used to guide employee assessments and reduce unwanted variation. 
 
MEA.1.3  NASA OH assures that clinics and services complete assessments within a 
prescribed timeframe. 
 
MEA.1.4  NASA OH assures that clinic assessment findings are documented in the 
employee’s medical record and are readily available to those responsible for the 
employee’s care. 
 
 
The initial assessment information is critical, detailed, and considers a variety of 
familial, cultural, and behavioral factors.  The initial assessment, a nursing assessment 
if required, further in-depth assessments, outside referrals, reevaluation and 
reassessments are all documented in the medical record. 
 
MEA.2 
NASA OH assures that each clinic patient’s initial assessment contains an 
evaluation of physical, psychological, and social factors, including a physical 
examination and health history. 
 
MEA.2.1  NASA OH assures that clinics or services identify the employee’s medical needs 
from the initial assessment. 
 
MEA.2.1.1   NASA OH assures that clinics or services document the initial medical 
assessment in the employee’s medical record.  
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 5 
MEA.2.1.2   NASA OH assures that clinics or services document the initial medical 
assessment before administering local anesthesia or minor surgical treatment. 
 
MEA.2.1.3   NASA OH assures that clinics or services provide an initial medical assessment 
of emergency patients, appropriate to their needs and conditions. 
 
MEA.2.1.4   NASA OH assures those clinics and services document the initial nursing 
assessment in the employee’s medical record within established timeframes. 
 
MEA.2.2 
NASA OH assures that clinic patients are screened for nutritional status and 
functional needs, and are referred for further assessment and treatment when 
necessary. 
 
MEA.2.3  NASA OH assures that the clinic provides an initial evaluation that includes 
determining the need for coordinated care planning and/or additional specialized 
assessments. 
 
MEA.3  
 NASA OH assures that the clinics and services have a process for reevaluating 
all employees at appropriate intervals, to determine their response to treatment 
and to plan for continued treatment or referral. 
 
MEA.4  
NASA OH assures that qualified clinic staff conducts the assessments and 
reassessments. 
 
MEA.4.1  NASA OH assures that clinic and service processes address assessment and 
reassessment responsibilities, and are defined in writing. 
 
Clinics have a system for providing laboratory services, either within house utilizing 
adequately trained individuals or through qualified outside laboratory services with 
appropriate quality control and safety management programs and policies.  A timeline 
for reporting laboratory test results is established and adhered to.  If it is an in-house 
facility, there is a written process for routine equipment maintenance and calibration 
and the storage and handling of reagents. All laboratories will have established 
reference ranges for tests and sound quality control systems. 
 
MEA.5 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services have laboratory services available to 
meet employee needs, and all such services meet applicable local and national 
standards, laws, and regulations. 
 
MEA.5.1 
NASA OH assures that contracted clinical pathology services are available to 
meet employee needs. All such services meet applicable local and national 
standards, laws, and regulations. 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 6 
MEA.5.2 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services have a laboratory safety program in 
place, followed, and documented. 
 
MEA.5.3 
NASA OH assures that clinic individuals have adequate training, skills, 
orientation, and experience administer the laboratory tests and interpret the 
results. 
 
MEA.5.4 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services have a process for receiving 
laboratory results in a timely manner. 
 
MEA.5.5 
NASA OH assures all clinics and service laboratory equipment is regularly 
inspected, maintained, and calibrated, and appropriate records are maintained for 
these activities. 
 
MEA.5.6 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services provide for essential reagents and 
other supplies to be regularly available. 
 
MEA.5.7 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services have procedures for collecting, 
identifying, handling, safely transporting and disposing of specimens. The identified 
procedures are followed. 
 
MEA.5.8 
NASA OH assures clinics and services have established norms and ranges that 
are used to interpret and report clinical laboratory results. 
 
MEA.5.9 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services provide for quality control 
procedures that are established, followed, and documented. 
 
MEA.5.9.1  NASA OH assures that clinics and services provide a process for proficiency 
testing. 
 
MEA.5.10 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services have a process for regular reviews of 
quality control results for all outside sources of laboratory services. 
 
MEA.5.11 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services have access to experts in specialized 
diagnostic areas when necessary. 
 
Not all clinics provide radiology services, but those that have services on site will meet 
applicable local and national standards, laws and regulations.  This is true for outside 
sources in addition to maintaining a history of accurate, timely services.  Appropriate 
level radiation safety programs, written policies, and training programs will be 
established if radiology services are on site. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 7 
MEA.6 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services provide radiology services that meet 
applicable local and national standards, laws, and regulations. 
 
MEA.6.2 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services have a radiation safety program that 
is established, followed, and documented. 
 
MEA.6.3 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services provide for individuals with 
adequate training, skills, orientation, and experience to administer the imaging tests 
and interpret the results. 
 
MEA.6.4 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services provide for radiology results in a 
timely manner, as defined by the organization. 
 
MEA.6.5 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services have a process that provides for 
diagnostic equipment to be regularly inspected, maintained, and calibrated, and 
appropriate records are maintained for these activities. 
 
MEA.6.6 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services provide for X-ray film and other 
supplies to be available as needed. 
 
MEA.6.7 
NASA OH assures that quality control procedures are established, followed, and 
documented. 
 
MEA.6.8 
NASA OH assures that regular reviews are conducted by the clinics or services, 
to provide for quality control results from all outside sources of diagnostic 
services. 
 
Employee-Directed Principles 
Employee (Patient) Care Process 
 
Employees with similar occupational health problems and medical care needs have a 
right to receive the same quality of service throughout NASA.  The level of basic care 
provided to employees is the same throughout the Program.  Care is planned for 
optimal outcome and orders are executed either in writing or verbally as permitted. 
 
ECP.1  
NASA OH policies and procedures, and applicable laws and regulations guide 
the uniform care of all employees in the clinics and services. 
 
ECP.2  
NASA OH provides for processes to integrate and coordinate the care provided 
to each patient. 
 
ECP.2.1 
The care provided to each NASA OH employee is planned and written in the 
employee’s medical record as defined by the clinics or services. 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 8 
 
ECP.2.2 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services provide a mechanism that those 
permitted to write patient care orders, will write the order in the employee’s 
medical record in a standardized location. 
 
ECP.2.3 
NASA OH clinic and service tests and procedures performed within the 
employee care process are written into the employee’s medical record. 
 
ECP.3  
NASA OH clinics and services have clinical practice guidelines that are used to 
direct the employee’s clinical care. 
 
A few employees may be considered high-risk.  The Clinic medical director has the 
responsibility for identifying employees and services considered at high risk.  Policy 
relating to high-risk cases will cover planning, documentation and staff qualification 
 
ECP.4  
NASA OH clinics and services have policies and procedures that guide the care 
of high-risk patients and the provision of high-risk services. 
 
ECP.4.1.  
NASA OH clinics and services have policies and procedures that guide the care 
of emergency patients. 
 
ECP.4.2  
Policies and procedures guide the use of resuscitation services throughout the 
clinics and services of NASA OH. 
 
If medications are dispensed, the clinic will have a medication management policy 
defining the stocked medications available, a plan for acquiring medications from a 
readily available outside source, appropriate storage, and procedures to prevent abuse 
or theft and to ensure against expired medications.  Clinics will have a policy and 
process for retrieving or destroying recalled or expired drugs in accordance with DEA 
and FDA and for reporting medication errors. 
 
ECP.5   
NASA OH assures that clinics and services address medication use and provide 
for an efficient, organized process that meet employee needs. 
 
ECP.5.1 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services address pharmacy or pharmaceutical 
services, and provide that medication use complies with applicable federal and 
state laws and regulations. 
 
ECP.5.2 
NASA OH assures clinics and services address the need for an appropriate 
selection of medications for prescribing or ordering, and are well stocked or 
readily available. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 9 
ECP.5.2.1   NASA OH assures that the clinics or services have a method for overseeing the 
medication formulary and medication use. 
 
ECP.5.2.2   NASA OH assures that the clinics or services have a method for obtaining 
medications not normally stocked or available. 
 
ECP.5.2.3   NASA OH assures that the clinics or services have a process for obtaining 
medications when the pharmacy or pharmaceutical supply service is closed. 
 
ECP.5.2.4   NASA OH emergency medications are available, monitored, and secure. 
 
ECP.5.3 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services define prescribing, ordering, and 
administration of medications and are guided by policies and procedures. 
 
ECP.5.3.1 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services identify those qualified individuals 
permitted to prescribe or order medications and those permitted to administer 
medications. Standing medication orders are discouraged. Standing protocols that 
can be individualized to the employee are preferred. 
 
ECP.5.3.2  NASA OH assures that the clinics and services have policies and procedures to 
govern the control of medication samples, the use of any medications brought into 
the clinic by the employee, and the dispensing of medications from the program. 
 
ECP.5.4 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services provide for medications to be stored, 
prepared, and dispensed in a safe and clean environment. 
 
ECP.5.4.1  NASA OH assures that the clinics and services have policies and procedures 
providing for appropriately licensed personnel to supervise the storage, 
preparation, and dispensing of medications. 
 
ECP.5.4.2 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services provide for medication orders to 
be reviewed and verified. 
 
ECP.5.4.3 
NASA OH clinics and services have medication management programs that 
provide a system for recalling medications when necessary. 
 
ECP.5.4.4 
NASA OH clinics and services have a defined system that assures proper 
dispensing of medications. Medication administration should adhere to the five 
rights: The right drug, in the right dose, given to the right patient, by the right route, 
at the right time. 
 
ECP.5.5 
NASA OH clinics and services have a procedure to assure that employees are 
identified before medications are administered. 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 10 
 
ECP.5.5.1 
NASA OH clinics and services support efforts to assure the five rights of 
medication administration. The right dose of the right medication is administered to 
the right patient, by the right route, and at the right time. 
 
ECP.5.6 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services provide for the effects of medication 
treatment to be monitored as a part of quality employee care. 
 
ECP.5.6.1 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services address the need for medications 
prescribed and administered to be written in the employee’s medical record. 
 
ECP.5.6.2 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services address the need for adverse 
medication effects to be noted in the employee’s medical record. 
 
ECP.5.6.3  NASA OH assures that the clinics and services address the need for medication 
errors to be reported through a process, and within a time frame defined by policy 
and procedure. 
 
ECP.6  
NASA OH clinics and services provide nutritious snacks that are appropriate for 
employee needs and consistent with his or her clinical treatment plan. 
 
ECP.6.1 
NASA OH clinics and services provide an appropriate supply of foodstuff that 
meets any applicable food preparation, handling, and storage standards and are in 
compliance with laws, regulations, and current acceptable practices. 
 
Employee-Directed Principles 
Coordinating Employee Care (CEC) 
 
All NASA employees are eligible for a health maintenance exam.  Designated 
employees and contractors, depending on the scope of their contracts, are eligible for 
surveillance exposure exams.  All are eligible for urgent or emergency care, which will 
be provided on a priority basis.  Clinics must establish triage criteria and train staff 
members on how to evaluate for urgent care.  
 
CEC.1 
Employees have access to the NASA OH services based on identified health care 
needs and the organization’s mission and resources. 
 
CEC.1.1 
The NASA OH clinics and services have a process for accepting employees for 
health care.  
 
CEC.1.1.1 
NASA OH employees with urgent or emergency needs are given priority for 
assessment and treatment, as defined by the clinics and services. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 11 
CEC.1.1.2 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services provide for employee preventive 
services, needs are prioritized based on the employee’s condition at the time of 
entry to the program. 
 
CEC.1.2 
At registration, NASA OH clinics or services provide information to employees 
and/or decision-makers regarding medical care. Information concerning the 
proposed care, expected results of that care, and any expected cost for care 
should be discussed. Patients need to be informed regarding the financial 
differences they may encounter when receiving care that is work vs. non-work 
related. 
 
CEC.1.3 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services seek to reduce cultural and language, 
physical and other barriers to health care and delivery of services. 
 
CEC.1.4 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services have a process for using diagnostic 
tests that are useful additions to the process of determining employee medical 
needs. Tests are completed and used as appropriate to determine whether the 
employee should be treated by the organization, or referred to an alternate care 
setting. 
 
The medical record is the primary source for documentation of the care process and 
contains essential information that should accompany the employee while receiving 
care in the clinic or in the unlikely event of a care transfer.  Clinics must establish a 
written process for patient care referral and maintain a formal or informal relationship 
with community providers 
 
CEC.2  
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services design and carry out processes 
that provide continuity of patient care services within the program, and include 
effective coordination among health professionals for work-related healthcare 
issues. 
 
CEC.2.1 
NASA OH clinics and services assure that there is a qualified individual identified 
and accountable for care management during all phases of employee care. 
 
CEC.2.2 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services have a process for providing that 
employee medical records are available to care providers for the purpose of 
facilitating information exchange. 
 
CEC.2.3 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services have a process that provides for 
information related to the employee’s care to be transferred with the employee, 
when care responsibilities are reassigned. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 12 
CEC.3  
NASA OH assures that clinics and services have a process by which employees 
are appropriately referred for care. 
 
CEC.3.1 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services cooperate with health care 
practitioners and outside agencies to assure timely and appropriate referrals. 
 
CEC.3.2 
Employees are given understandable follow-up instructions at the time of referral 
or discharge from the NASA OH. 
 
Employee-Directed Standards 
Employee Care Rights (ECR) 
 
Patient (employee) rights are a fundamental element of all employee contacts.  
Employees have the right to accurate information, tolerance for their values and 
beliefs, privacy, and safety.  Employee rights also include participative care, treatment 
discontinuation, and appropriate treatment of pain.  Employees must be informed of 
their rights as well as being informed of any proposed tests, procedures or treatments. 
 
ECR.1 
The NASA OH is responsible for assuring that clinic processes support employee 
rights while providing care. 
 
ECR.1.1 
Employees are informed about the services offered by NASA OH and how to 
access those services. 
 
ECR.1.2 
NASA OH employee care is considerate and respectful of the patient’s personal 
values and beliefs. 
 
ECR.1.3 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services address the need for care processes 
that are respectful of the employee’s need for privacy. 
 
ECR.1.4 
NASA OH clinics and services take measures to protect employee possessions 
from theft or loss. 
ECR.1.5 
NASA OH employees are protected from physical assault. 
 
ECR.1.6 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services have processes addressing employee 
information as confidential and protected from loss or misuse. 
 
ECR.2 
The NASA OH assures that clinics and services support the right of the employee 
to participate in the care process. The family of the patient is included in the care 
process when appropriate, e.g., Employee Assistance Program (EAP), based on 
the overall treatment plan. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 13 
ECR.2.1 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services define how employees are informed 
as to how they will be told of medical conditions and treatments, and how they 
can participate in care decisions, to the extent they wish to participate. 
 
ECR.2.2 
NASA OH assures that the clinics or services inform employees about their rights 
and responsibilities related to refusing or discontinuing treatment. 
 
ECR.2.3 
NASA OH assures that the clinics or services have processes established to 
assess and manage pain appropriately. 
 
ECR.3  
NASA OH clinics and services assure that employees are informed about the 
process to receive and act on complaints, conflicts, and differences of opinion 
about employee care, and the employee’s right to participate in these processes. 
 
ECR.4 
NASA OH clinics and services assure that staff members are educated about 
their roles in the identification of employee values and beliefs and the protection of 
employee rights. 
 
ECR.5 
NASA OH employees are given information about their rights in a manner they 
can understand, according to a procedure defined by the clinic. If the organization 
elects to meet this standard by a public posting of a patient’s rights, a copy should 
be provided to the individual on request. 
 
General consent for employee treatment is not required.  Some high-risk procedures 
require a formal separate informed consent with a signed consent form.  When written 
consent cannot be obtained the provider should document verbal consent in the chart 
and witnesses in attendance. 
 
ECR.6 
NASA OH assures that employee informed consent is obtained through a 
process defined by the clinic, and carried out by trained staff members. 
 
ECR.6.1 
NASA OH assures that clinic patients receive adequate information about their 
injuries or illnesses, treatment proposed, and care providers so that care decisions 
can be made. The processes are defined by the clinics and services. 
 
ECR.6.1.1 
NASA OH assures that clinics or services have a process addressing the need for 
staff members to provide employee care information in a manner and language 
understood by those that are making the care decisions and providing informed 
consent. 
 
ECR.6.2 
NASA OH assures that the clinics or services establish a process, within the 
context of existing law and culture, for when others can grant consent (if 
applicable) for an employee’s care. 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 14 
 
ECR.6.2.1 
When someone other than the NASA OH employee gives informed consent for 
specific treatments, that individual is noted in the employee’s medical record. 
 
ECR.6.2.2 
NASA OH assures that lists of those categories or types of treatments and 
procedures that require specific informed consent above are defined by the clinics 
or services. 
 
 
Section I: Employee-Directed Standards 
Employee Education (EDU) 
 
Health care programs and Center health promotion programs educate employees.  
Education programs must be built into the care process based on services provided and 
the population served.  Center health promotion programs are based on the needs of 
the population served.  Standardized materials from approved sources with appropriate 
format and language are the basis for NASA health education programs whether the 
program scope is comprehensive or more limited.  
 
EDU.1 
 NASA OH assures that education efforts support employee participation in care 
decisions and care processes in the clinics and services. 
 
EDU.1.1 
 At each NASA OH visit employees should have an educational needs assessment 
that is documented in the medical record. 
 
EDU.1.2 
 Each NASA OH employee receives education designed to help them give 
informed consent, participate in care processes, and understand any financial 
implications of care choices. The latter is particularly important when care is 
related to non-work related health care needs. 
 
EDU.2 
 NASA OH assures that education and training are provided by clinics and 
services to help meet the ongoing health needs of the employees they serve. 
 
EDU.2.1 
NASA OH assures clinic cooperation with available community resources, to 
provide health promotion and disease prevention education. 
 
EDU.3 
NASA OH assures that patient education practiced in the clinics or services 
include topics as appropriate to the treatment plans. Safe use of medications, 
medical equipment, diet, and return to work methods should be considered. 
 
EDU.4 
 NASA OH clinics and services assure that education methods consider employee 
values and preferences and allow sufficient interaction among the employee, 
family, and staff members for learning to occur. 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 15 
 
EDU.4.1 
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services teach employees in a format and 
language that they understand.    
 
EDU.4.2 
NASA OH assures that clinic health professionals caring for the employee 
collaborate to provide adequate and effective education. 
 
EDU.4.2.1 
NASA OH assures that these professionals have the knowledge and skills 
required for informing and teaching effectively. 
 
Section II: Management-Directed Principles 
Facility and Safety Management 
 
Laws, regulations and other requirements to the facility (ies) take precedent.  Clinic 
leaders are responsible for being knowledgeable about national and local regulations 
and planning and budgeting for their necessary upgrade.  If needed repairs are beyond 
the scope of contractual agreements, the leaders have responsibility to notify the 
appropriate NASA official.  Prevention planning, inspections, and risk reduction 
planning are key to effective resources management and should be documented. 
 
FSM.1  
NASA OH assures that the clinics and services are compliant with relevant laws, 
regulations, and facility inspection requirements. 
 
FSM.1.1  NASA OH plans and budgets for upgrading or replacing essential systems, 
buildings, or components. 
 
FSM.2  
NASA OH assures the planning and implementation of a program designed to 
manage the physical environment. 
 
FSM.2.1  NASA OH assures inspection of employee care buildings for fire safety and has a 
plan to reduce evident risks and provide a safe physical facility for employees and 
staff. 
 
FSM.3  
 
NASA OH plans and implements a program to assure that all occupants are safe 
from fire, smoke, or other emergencies in the facility (ies). 
 
FSM.3.1  The NASA OH plan includes prevention, early detection, suppression, 
abatement, and safe exit from the facility (ies) in response to fires and non-fire 
emergencies. 
 
FSM.3.2  The organization assures the occurrence and documentation of the regular testing 
of its fire and smoke safety plan, including any devices related to early detection 
and suppression. 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 16 
 
FSM.3.3  NASA OH assures that clinics and services develop and implement a plan to limit 
smoking at the clinic site. 
 
FSM.3.4 
NASA OH supports clinics in establishing emergency processes to protect facility 
occupants in the event of water and/or electrical system disruption, contamination, 
or failure. 
 
FSM.3.5  NASA OH supports clinics in testing its emergency water and electrical systems 
(including batteries) on a regular basis, appropriate to the system and documents 
the results. 
 
Clinics must plan for community emergencies by developing and testing or inspecting 
emergency response plans, equipment, and utility systems.  This process also includes 
addressing hazardous materials and waste, and designating the individual responsible 
for leadership and oversight. 
 
FSM.4  
NASA OH assures development of a plan to respond to likely community 
emergencies, epidemics, and natural or other disasters. 
 
FSM.4.1  NASA OH has tested responses to emergencies, epidemics, and disasters. 
 
FSM.4.2  NASA OH clinics and services have access to any medical supplies, 
communication equipment, and other materials to support adequate responses to 
emergencies, epidemics, and disasters. 
 
FSM.5  
 
NASA OH clinics and services plan for the inventory, handling, storage, and use 
of hazardous materials including the control and disposal of hazardous materials 
and waste. 
 
FSM.6  
NASA OH assures that one or more qualified individuals oversee the planning 
and implementation of the program to provide safe and effective physical facilities. 
 
FSM.6.1  NASA OH assures that a monitoring program provides data on incidents, 
injuries, and other events that support planning and further risk reduction. 
 
FSM.6.2  NASA OH assures that management of this program is consistent and 
continuous. 
 
FSM.7  
NASA OH assures planning and implementation of a program for inspecting, 
testing, and maintaining medical equipment and documenting the results. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 17 
FSM.7.1  NASA OH assures the collection of monitoring data for the medical equipment 
management program. These data are used to plan the organization’s long-term 
needs for upgrading or replacing equipment. 
 
FSM.8  
NASA OH assures that electrical, water, waste, ventilation, medical gas, and 
other key systems are regularly inspected, maintained, and when appropriate, 
improved. 
 
FSM.9 
 NASA OH assures that all clinic and service staff members are educated and 
trained about their roles in providing a safe and effective patient care facility. 
 
FSM.9.1  Staff members are trained and knowledgeable about their roles in the NASA OH 
plans for fire safety, security, hazardous materials, and emergencies. 
 
FSM.9.2  NASA OH clinic and services staff members are trained to operate and maintain 
medical equipment and utility systems. 
 
FSM.9.3  NASA OH clinics and services periodically test staff knowledge through 
demonstration, mock events, and other suitable methods. This testing is 
documented. 
 
Management-Directed Principles 
Governance (GOV) 
 
NASA Occupational Health governance and management structure is detailed in its 
core NPDs and supporting implementation NPGs.  The location and titles of those 
listed in the organization chart are secondary to their responsibilities. 
 
GOV.1 
NASA OH governance responsibilities and accountabilities are described in 
bylaws, policies and procedures, or similar documents that guide how they are to 
be carried out. 
 
GOV.1.1 
Those responsible for governance approve the NASA OH mission statement. 
 
GOV.1.2  Those responsible for governance approve the policies and plan that operate the 
NASA OH. 
 
GOV.1.3  Those responsible for governance approve the budget and allocate resources 
required to meet the mission of the organization. 
 
GOV.1.4  Those responsible for governance appoint the senior manager(s) or director(s) of 
the organization. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 18 
GOV.1.5  Those responsible for governance of NASA OH support and promote quality 
management and improvement efforts. 
 
GOV.1.6  Those responsible for governance collaborate with NASA OH managers and 
leaders. 
 
GOV.2 
A senior manager or medical director is responsible for the day-to-day operation of 
NASA OH clinics and for assuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
 
GOV.3 
The clinical leaders identify and plan the types of services required to meet the 
needs of employees served by NASA OH. 
 
GOV.3.1 
The clinical leaders provide oversight of contracts for medical or management 
services. 
 
GOV.3.2  
Medical, nursing, and other clinical leaders are educated in the concepts of quality 
management and improvement.  
 
GOV.3.3  
NASA OH leaders assure that there are uniform programs for the recruitment, 
retention, development, and continuing education of all staff members.  
 
GOV.3.4  
Organization leaders foster communication and coordination among those 
individuals and departments responsible for providing clinical services. 
 
GOV.4 
 NASA OH medical, nursing, and other clinical leaders plan and implement an 
effective organizational structure to support their responsibilities and authority. 
 
GOV.4.1  
NASA OH organizational structure and agency processes support professional 
communication. 
 
GOV.4.2  
NASA OH organizational structure and agency processes support clinical 
planning and policy development. 
 
GOV.4.3   NASA OH organizational structure and agency processes support the oversight 
of professional ethical issues. 
 
GOV.4.4   NASA OH organizational structure and agency processes support the oversight 
of the quality of clinical services. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 19 
The clinical care, employee outcomes, and overall management at the local health care 
program level are only as good as the leadership.  Medical directors are responsible 
for assuring staff members are oriented, trained and competent within their respective 
areas of responsibility. 
 
GOV.5 
One or more qualified individuals provide direction for each occupational health 
clinic in the NASA OH. 
 
GOV.5.1 
NASA OH clinic directors are responsible for written identification of services to 
be provided. 
 
GOV.5.1.1 NASA OH clinic services are coordinated and integrated. 
 
GOV.5.2  
NASA OH medical directors recommend space, staffing, and other resources 
needed. 
 
GOV.5.3 
NASA OH medical directors suggest criteria for selecting the clinic’s professional 
staff, and choose individuals who meet those criteria. 
 
GOV.5.4 
NASA OH medical directors assure the provision of orientation and training for 
all staff members within their respective areas of responsibility, appropriate to the 
staff member’s responsibilities. 
 
GOV.5.5  
NASA OH medical directors monitor the clinic’s performance as well as 
individual staff performance. 
 
GOV.5.5.1 NASA OH medical directors have the data and information needed to effectively 
manage, and continuously improve the services provided by their areas of 
responsibility. 
 
GOV.5.5.2 NASA OH medical directors integrate clinic activities into the organization’s 
quality management and improvement program. 
 
Management-Directed Principles 
Information Management Services (IMS) 
 
Critical information is generated and utilized during employee care.  Care providers, 
clinic managers and leaders, priorities, and even those outside NASA OH influence 
information management strategies.   Security and confidentiality of records is 
maintained at all times with written processes designating authority for access and 
entry.  Medical record retention schedules are established and followed. 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 20 
 
IMS.1  
NASA OH plans and implements processes to meet the information needs of all 
those who provide clinical services, those who manage the services, and those 
outside the organization who require certain data and information. 
 
IMS.1.1 
NASA OH has a plan to meet information needs. 
 
IMS.1.2 
The plan is based on an assessment of the needs of those within and outside the 
occupational health program. 
 
IMS.1.3 
The plan is appropriate to the occupational health program’s size and complexity 
of services. 
 
IMS.1.4 
The NASA OH information plan includes how confidentiality, security, and 
integrity of data and information will be maintained. 
 
IMS.1.5 
 The NASA OH information plan defines the levels of security needed. 
 
IMS.1.5.1  The NASA OH has a policy identifying those authorized to make entries in 
employee medical records and determines content and format. 
 
IMS.1.5.2  Only authorized providers make entries in employee medical records. 
 
IMS.1.5.3 
 Each employee medical record entry identifies the author and notes date of entry. 
 
IMS.1.6 
NASA OH has a policy on the retention time of patient medical records, data, 
and other information. 
 
IMS.1.7 
The NASA OH information management plan is implemented and supported by 
sufficient personnel and other resources. 
 
IMS.1.8 
 Standardized diagnosis codes, procedure codes, symbols, and definitions are 
used within the NASA OH. 
 
IMS.1.9 
The data and information needs of those within and outside NASA OH are met 
on a timely basis and in a format that meets user expectations, with the desired 
frequency. 
 
IMS.1.10 
Appropriate NASA OH clinical and managerial staff members participate in 
selecting, integrating, and using information management technology. 
 
IMS.1.11 
NASA OH staff members have access to the level of information related to their 
needs and job responsibilities. 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 21 
 
IMS.1.12 
NASA OH assures that clinics and services have policies and procedures to 
protect medical records and information from loss, destruction, tampering, and 
unauthorized access or use. 
 
IMS.1.13 
Clinical and managerial information is integrated to support the NASA OH 
governance and leadership. 
 
IMS.1.14 
NASA OH decision-makers and other appropriate staff members are educated 
and trained in the principles of information management. 
 
 
Every employee who is assessed or treated in the clinic has a medical record with 
sufficient information to support diagnosis, justify provided treatment, and the 
subsequent course and results of that treatment.  Medical records are available to the 
provider at each visit.  In order to proactively practice medicine, continuously improve 
and detect occupational health trends NASA may collect and analyze aggregate health 
data to compare with other National health databases. 
 
IMS.2  
NASA OH initiates and maintains a medical record for every employee assessed 
or treated. 
 
IMS.2.1 
NASA OH medical records contain sufficient information to identify the 
employee, support the diagnoses, justify treatment, document the course and 
results of treatment, and promote continuity of care among health care providers. 
 
IMS.2.1.1 
NASA OH medical records for emergency employees include identification (see 
DSS.2.1), arrival time, means of arrival, conclusions at the termination of 
treatment, a description of the employee’s condition at discharge or transfer, and 
any follow-up care recommended. 
 
IMS.2.2 
As part of its performance improvement activities, NASA OH regularly evaluates 
employee medical record content and comprehensiveness. 
 
IMS.2.3 
 NASA OH health care providers have access to the information in a employee’s 
medical record each time the patient is seen for a new or continuing care episode. 
 
IMS.3 
NASA OH aggregate data and information support employee care, program 
management, and the quality management program. 
 
IMS.3.1 
 NASA OH has a process to aggregate data and has determined what data and 
information are to be regularly aggregated, in order to meet the needs of clinical 
and managerial staff, and agencies outside the organization. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 22 
IMS.3.2 
 NASA OH supports employee care, education, research, and management with 
timely information from current sources. 
 
IMS.3.3 
 NASA OH has a process for using or participating in external databases such as 
Medline on the Internet. 
 
IMS.3.3.1  NASA OH uses occupational medicine external reference databases for 
comparative purposes, where appropriate. 
 
IMS.3.3.2 
NASA OH assures that the security and confidentiality of data and information 
are maintained when contributing to or using external databases. 
 
Management-Directed Principles 
Infection Control Services (INF) 
 
Infection control is critical to employee care and employee health.  Each clinic will 
identify its epidemiologically important infections, infection sites, and associated 
devices to reduce the incidence of nosocomial infections.  The clinic staff is educated 
on infection control practices and processes for infection risk reduction should be 
regularly reviewed.   An infection control program is based on current scientific 
information and applicable laws and regulations and contains an information 
management element to support the tracking of risks, rates and trends in nosocomial 
infections. 
 
INF.1 
NASA OH designs and implements a coordinated process to reduce the risks of 
nosocomial infections in employee s and health care workers. 
 
INF.1.1 
All employee, staff, and visitor areas of the NASA OH are included in the 
infection control program. 
 
INF.2 
NASA OH establishes the focus of the nosocomial infection prevention and 
reduction program. 
 
INF.3  
NASA OH identifies the procedures and processes associated with the risk of 
infection and implements strategies to reduce infection risk. 
 
INF.4  
NASA OH assures that gloves, masks, soap, and disinfectants are available and 
used correctly when required. 
 
INF.5  
Environmental cultures are obtained on a routine basis from designated sites in the 
NASA OH that are associated with significant infection risk. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 23 
INF.6  
NASA OH assures that one or more individuals oversee all infection control 
activities. This individual(s) is qualified in infection control practices through 
continuing education, training, experience, or certification. 
 
INF.7  
NASA OH assures that a designated individual or group monitors and 
coordinates infection control activities in the organization. 
 
INF.8  
 Coordination of infection control activities involves medicine, nursing, and other 
disciplines as appropriate to NASA OH. 
 
INF.9  
NASA OH assures that the infection control program is based on current 
scientific knowledge, accepted practice guidelines, and applicable laws and 
regulations. 
 
INF.10 
NASA OH information management systems support the infection control 
program. 
 
INF.11 
NASA OH assures that the infection control program is integrated with the 
program for quality management and improvement. 
 
INF.11.1  NASA OH assures that the infection control program tracks infection risks, 
infection rates, and trends in nosocomial infections. 
 
INF.11.2  Monitoring includes using indicators related to infection issues that are 
epidemiologically important to NASA OH. 
 
INF.11.3  The NASA OH infection control program uses risk, rate, and trend information 
to design or modify processes in order to reduce nosocomial infections to the 
lowest possible levels. 
 
INF.11.4 
The NASA OH infection control program compares its infection control rates 
with other programs through comparative databases. 
 
INF.11.5  The results of infection monitoring in the NASA OH are regularly communicated 
to staff members, doctors, and management. 
 
INF.11.6  The NASA OH infection control program reports information regarding infections 
to appropriate external public health agencies. 
 
INF.12  
The program provides education on infection control practices to staff, doctors, 
employee s, and, as appropriate, other caregivers. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 24 
INF.12.1  All staff receives an orientation to the occupational health program’s infection 
control policies and practices. 
 
INF.12.2  All staff is educated in infection control when new policies are implemented and 
when significant trends are noted in surveillance data. 
 
Management-Directed Principles 
Performance Improvement Management (PIM) 
 
Center OH leaders, clinic managers, and medical directors are all stakeholders and 
participate in establishing the organization’s commitment, approach to improvement, 
management and oversight.  Leaders prioritize critical, high-risk, problem-prone, 
primary processes directly related to the quality of care and safety of the environment. 
 Staff members are selected to participate in quality management and improvements 
based on their relationship to a particular process, but over time both managerial and 
clinic staff has the opportunity to be trained and participate 
 
PIM.1  
 Those responsible for governing and leading NASA OH participate in planning 
and monitoring a quality management and improvement program. 
 
PIM.1.1 
 The clinical and managerial leaders of NASA OH collaborate in carrying out the 
quality management and improvement program. 
 
PIM.1.1.1  NASA OH assures there is a written plan for a program-wide quality 
management and improvement program. 
 
PIM.1.1.2  The program includes all components of NASA OH quality monitoring and 
control activities, including risk management. 
 
PIM.1.2   NASA OH leaders prioritize which processes should be monitored and which 
improvement activities should be carried out. 
 
PIM.1.3   NASA OH leaders provide technological and other support to the quality 
management and improvement program. 
 
PIM.1.4   NASA OH quality management and improvement program is coordinated, and 
program information is communicated to staff. 
 
 
PIM.1.5   NASA OH assures that staff members are trained to participate in the quality 
improvement program. 
 
PIM.1.6  
All staff involved in managing the NASA OH and providing clinical and support 
services participate in the program. 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 25 
 
PIM.2  
 The NASA OH quality improvement program designs new and modified systems 
and processes according to quality improvement principles. 
 
PIM.2.1 
 New and modified processes incorporate design elements relevant to the 
process. 
 
PIM.2.2 
 The NASA OH quality improvement program sets expectations for how new and 
modified processes should operate. 
 
PIM.2.3 
 The NASA OH quality improvement program collects data to see if new and 
modified processes meet operational expectations. 
 
PIM.3.  
 NASA OH leaders identify key measures (indicators) to monitor the 
organization’s clinical and managerial structures, processes, and outcomes. 
 
The clinical areas identified in standards PIM.3 through PIM.3.7, among others, are 
included in NASA OH quality monitoring and are assessed regularly by the Agency 
OH leadership. 
 
PIM.3.1 
 Clinical monitoring includes employee assessment. 
 
PIM.3.2 
 Clinical monitoring includes laboratory and radiology safety and quality control 
programs. 
 
PIM.3.3 
 Clinical monitoring includes special procedures (if performed). 
 
PIM.3.4 
 Clinical monitoring includes the use of antibiotics and other medications and 
medication errors. 
 
PIM.3.5 
 Clinical monitoring includes the use of mild sedation (if used). 
 
PIM.3.6   Clinical monitoring includes the availability, content, and use of employee medical 
records. 
 
PIM.3.7 
 Clinical monitoring includes infection control, surveillance, and reporting. 
 
The managerial areas identified in standards PIM.3.8 through PIM.3.16 are included 
in NASA OH quality monitoring and are assessed regularly by the Agency OH 
leadership.. 
 
PIM.3.8 
 Managerial monitoring includes financial management. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 26 
PIM.3.9  
Managerial monitoring includes the surveillance, control, and prevention of events 
that jeopardize the safety of  employees and staff members. 
 
PIM.3.10  Managerial monitoring includes the procurement of routinely required supplies 
and medications essential to meet patient needs. 
 
PIM.3.11  Managerial monitoring includes reporting of activities as required by laws and 
regulations. 
 
PIM.3.12 
Managerial monitoring includes risk management. 
 
PIM.3.13  Managerial monitoring includes utilization management. 
 
PIM.3.14  Managerial monitoring includes employee expectations and satisfaction. 
 
PIM.3.15  Managerial monitoring includes staff expectations and satisfaction. 
 
PIM.3.16  Managerial monitoring includes employee demographics and diagnoses. 
 
Quality management and improvement are data driven.  Data is aggregated, analyzed, 
and transformed into useful information.  Most monitoring data is based on mission; 
employee needs and services focusing on the processes that are high risk to 
employees, offered in high-volume, or known to be problematic. The general data 
collection areas identified below in standards PIM.3.17 and PIM.3.18 are supported by 
NASA OH quality monitoring.  The goal of data analysis is to evaluate the program 
against itself over time, with similar programs, with national standards, and with 
desirable practices identified in the current literature. 
 
PIM.3.17  
Data collection supports further study of areas targeted for study and 
improvement. 
 
PIM.3.18  
Data collection supports evaluation of the effectiveness of implemented 
improvements. 
 
PIM.4  
Individuals with appropriate experience, knowledge, and skills systematically 
aggregate and analyze data in the NASA OH. 
 
PIM.4.1   NASA OH assures that the frequency of data analysis is appropriate to the 
process being studied and meets program requirements. 
 
PIM.4.2   NASA OH assures that data are intensively assessed when significant unexpected 
events and undesirable trends and variation occur. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 27 
PIM.4.3   NASA OH assures that the analysis process includes comparisons internally, with 
other occupational medicine programs when available, and with scientific 
standards and desirable practices. 
 
PIM.4.4  
 NASA OH assures that statistical tool and techniques suitable to the process or 
outcome under study are utilized. 
 
PIM.5  
 NASA OH assures that improvement in quality is achieved and sustained. 
 
PIM.5.1 
 NASA OH assures that the organization’s leaders undertake improvement 
activities for areas identified as priority. 
 
PIM.5.2 
 NASA OH assures that assignments are made and support provided for the 
purpose of quality improvement. 
 
PIM.5.3 
 NASA OH assures that staff members are trained, appropriate policy changes 
are made, and necessary resources are allocated. 
 
PIM.5.4   NASA OH assures that changes toward improvement are planned and tested, 
and successful changes are carried out. 
 
PIM.5.5   NASA OH collects data to show that improvements are sustained. 
 
PIM.5.6   NASA OH documents continuing, systematic improvement and uses the 
information to develop strategic improvement plans. 
 
Management-Directed Principles 
Staff Qualifications and Competency (SQC) 
 
Projected staff needs are based on Center mission, the mix of employees served, the 
complexity and severity of their needs, the services provided, and utilized technology.  
Each facility will establish a written staffing plan that identifies the number and types 
of staff with defined skills, knowledge, and other requirements critical to quality 
employee care.  Staff members receive ongoing in-service and other educational 
training to maintain and advance professional skills and competencies. 
 
SQC.1  
NASA OH leaders define the desired education, skills, knowledge, and other 
requirements of all staff members. 
 
SQC.1.1  NASA OH assures that staff member responsibilities are defined in a current job 
description. 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 28 
SQC.2 
Organization leaders develop and implement processes for recruiting, evaluating, 
and appointing staff, as well as other procedures as identified. 
 
SQC.3     NASA OH uses a defined process to assure that staff knowledge and skills are 
consistent with patient needs. 
 
SQC 3.1   NASA OH assures that each staff member’s ability to carry out their respective 
job responsibilities is evaluated at the time of appointment and regularly 
thereafter. 
 
SQC.3.2  NASA OH assures that there is documented personnel information for each staff 
member. 
 
SQC.4    
A staffing plan for the NASA OH, developed collaboratively by the clinical and 
managerial leaders, identifies the number, types, and desired qualifications of staff 
members. 
 
SQC.4.1 
The NASA OH staffing plan is reviewed on an ongoing basis and updated as 
necessary. 
 
SQC.5   
 All staff members are oriented to the NASA OH, and to their specific job 
responsibilities at the time of appointment to the staff. 
 
SQC.6  
NASA OH assures that each staff member receives ongoing in-service and other 
education and training to maintain or advance his or her skills and knowledge. 
 
SQC.6.1 
NASA OH staff members who provide employee care and other staff as 
identified by the organization are annually trained in basic or advanced cardiac life 
support. 
 
SQC.6.2  Aggregate data on staff education needs are the basis for the NASA OH’s 
ongoing education program. 
 
SQC.6.3  NASA OH provides facilities, as appropriate, time for staff education, and 
training. 
 
SQC.6.4  NASA OH staff members are given the opportunity to participate in advanced 
education, research, and other educational experiences, to acquire new skills and 
knowledge and to support job advancement. 
 
A process is established for verifying and evaluating credentials of the medical staff 
before they are permitted to provide employee medical treatment. NASA assures that 
providers of Centers’ contracted medical services have a medical staff credentialing 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 29 
process.  Center OH management is responsible for gathering information and 
verifying credentials on clinic allied health professionals.  
 
SQC.7   
 NASA OH has an effective process for gathering, verifying, and evaluating the 
credentials (license, education, training, and experience) of those medical staff 
permitted to provide patient care without supervision. 
 
SQC.7.1  NASA OH maintains a record of the education, current professional license, 
training, specialty certifications and experience, of every medical staff member 
including med-level providers or licensed ancillary providers. 
 
SQC.7.2  NASA OH assures that the credentials and privileges of medical staff members 
are reevaluated at least every three years to determine that their qualifications and 
current competence allow continued practice in the organization. 
 
SQC.8   
NASA OH has an effective process for granting privileges to all medical staff 
members to treat employees and provide other clinical services, consistent with 
their qualifications and the facilities scope of care. 
 
SQC.9   
NASA OH has an effective process for medical staff participation in the 
organization’s quality improvement program, including peer review activities for 
periodically reevaluating the current competency of all medical staff members. 
 
SQC.10  
NASA OH has an effective process to gather, verify, and evaluate nursing staff 
member’s credentials (license, education, training, and experience). 
 
SQC.10.1  NASA OH maintains a record of the current professional license, certificate, or 
registration, when required by laws, regulations, or the organization, of every 
nursing staff member.  
 
SQC.11    NASA OH has an effective process to identify job responsibilities and assign 
clinical work based on the nursing staff member’s credentials and any regulatory 
requirements. 
 
SQC.12  
NASA OH has an effective process for nursing staff member participation in 
quality improvement activities, including evaluating individual performance when 
indicated. 
 
SQC.13   NASA OH has an effective process to gather, verify, and evaluate other health 
professional staff member credentials (license, education, training, and 
experience). 
 
NASA Occupational Health Medical Quality Assurance Program - Page 30 
SQC.13.1   NASA OH maintains a record of the current professional license, certificate, or 
registration, when required by law or regulation, of each health professional staff 
member. 
 
SQC.14   NASA OH has an effective process to identify job responsibilities and assign 
clinical work based on the credentials and regulatory requirements of the other 
health professionals. 
 
SQC.15   NASA OH has an effective process for other health professional staff member 
participation in the organization’s quality improvement activities. 
 
 
 
END OF DOCUMENT 
