The new IGAC Science Plan and Implementation Strategy, available on the IGAC web
page (www.igac.noaa.gov), has been approved by our parent organizations, IGBP and
CACGP. We would again like to thank all those who have commented so positively and
provided written material and graphics. The new IGAC Scientific Steering Committee
(SSC) has also been approved by IGBP.  Tim Bates (USA), Sandro Fuzzi (ITA), and Shaw
Liu (CHN-Taipei) will be sharing the duties of co-chairs of the SSC. We would like to wel-
come the other members of the SSC: John Burrows (DEU), Laura Gallardo (CHL), Ilia
Illyin (RUS), Achuthan Jayaraman (IND), Makoto Koike (JPN), Kathy Law (FRA), Ulrike
Lohmann (CAN), Dave Lowe (NZL), Martin Manning (USA), David Parrish (USA), Phil
Rasch (USA), Mary Scholes (ZAF), Eric Wolff (UK), and Yongfu Xu (CHN-Beijing). We
look forward to working with them as we begin the second phase of IGAC.
The International Project Office (IPO) responsibilities for the new IGAC will be split
between three offices: a North American IPO in Seattle USA, an Asian IPO in China –
Taipei, and a European IPO in Italy.  The North American IPO will be the main point of
contact for IGAC for the next two years while the Asian and European IPOs are coming
on line.  With the move of the North American IPO from New Hampshire to Seattle we
would like to welcome the new North American IGAC Executive Officer, Dr. Sarah
Masonis.  Sarah will be working for IGAC half time and continuing her research on opti-
cal properties of atmospheric aerosol particles at the University of Washington half time.
Sarah can be contacted at igac@noaa.gov; www.igac.noaa.gov.  We would like to thank
our outgoing Executive Officer, Peter Czepiel, for his many contributions to IGAC over
the past year and a half.  Peter will be returning to a research position at the University of
New Hampshire.
Certainly a highlight of IGAC is the biannual international science symposium. Our last
symposium, held jointly with the CACGP in September 2002 in Crete, Greece was a
tremendous success with over 550 participants.  We would like to again extend our sincere
appreciation to Maria Kanakidou, the local organizing committee, the international scien-
tific steering committee, and our many sponsors for this outstanding event. The science
articles in this issue of IGACtivities highlight some of the invited presentations and sci-
entific discussions We envision that many of these topics (e.g., the oxidizing capacity of
the atmosphere; intercontinental transport and chemical transformation; developing the
potential of satellite remote sensing through the integration of in-situ measurements, mod-
els and satellite observations; processes controlling tropospheric ozone concentrations)
will become the first “Tasks” of the new IGAC. A guide to submitting proposals for IGAC
Tasks can be found on the IGAC website at http://www.igac.noaa.gov/proposals.php.
Issue No. 28
May 2003
In this Issue
A Note from the 
Co-Chairs
Science Features
2 
IGAC-GHOST
6 
Tropical Troposperhic
Ozone
12 Composition of Asian
Deposition
14 SCIAMACHY on
ENVISAT
20 The Regional 
Integrated Project
Mediterranean
24 Comparison of Aerosol
Chemical and Optical
Properties
31 Announcements
A Note from the IGAC Co-Chairs:
Tim Bates, Sandro Fuzzi, and Shaw Liu
of the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry Project
Newsletter
tivities
Investigation of the Global 
Atmospheric Oxidation
Efficiency and Its Trends:
A Proposal to  Initiate
IGAC-GHOST (Global HO
Systematic Tests) 
Contributed 
by 
Patrick 
Jöckel, 
Carl 
A. M.
Brenninkmeijer (joeckel@mpch-mainz.mpg.de) Max-
Planck-Institute for Chemistry, Air Chemistry, P.O. Box
3060, 55020 Mainz, Germany, Hanwant B. Singh, NASA
Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 245-5, Moffett Field, CA
94035, USA and Paul J. Crutzen, Max-Planck-Institute
for Chemistry and Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
University of California, San Diego, USA.
Introduction
The main chemical characteristic of the earth’s atmos-
phere is its self cleansing efficiency, which for instance
limits the average lifetime of methane molecules to less
than 10 years. By and large, the input of reduced gases into
the atmosphere and their rate of removal are in dynamical
balance. 
The main tropospheric cleansing agent, the “detergent of
the atmosphere”, is the OH radical (hydroxyl, sometimes
designated HO). Its presence is due to the photolysis of
ozone by which excited oxygen atoms are formed. When
these react with water molecules before becoming
quenched through collision with other air molecules lead-
ing to the re-formation of ozone, two OH radicals are
formed. Other primary sources of OH may also exist and
can be important, such as for instance organic molecules
like acetone in the upper troposphere. 
Tropospheric ozone, the presence of which is of funda-
mental importance, has 2 source categories. One is its
import from the stratosphere, the other is in situ photo-
chemical formation within the troposphere. The only sig-
nificant chemical source of tropospheric ozone is the pho-
tolysis of NO2, followed by direct O + O2 →O3. A lot of
O3 net production takes place in the upper troposphere. 
In the background troposphere, hydroxyl radicals react
mainly with methane (CH4) and carbon monoxide (CO),
providing the main removal process of these gases from the
atmosphere. The reactions, however, constitute not neces-
sarily a sink for OH. In the presence of NO, hydroxyl rad-
icals can be recycled, for instance via the reaction
sequences 
OH + CO(+O2) →CO2 + HO2
(1)
HO2 + NO →OH + NO2
(2)
NO2 + hν (+O2) →NO + O3
(3)
net: CO + 2O2 →CO2 + O3
(4)
or via 
OH + CH4(+O2) →CH3O2 + H2O
(5)
CH3O2 + NO →CH3O + NO2
(6)
CH3O + O2 →CH2O + HO2
(7)
HO2 + NO →OH + NO2
(8)
2x  NO2 + hν + O2 →NO + O3
(9)
net: CH4 + 4O2 →CH2O + H2O + 2O3,
(10)
providing sources for tropospheric ozone. Photolysis of
CH2O can next lead to the production of HO2 radicals,
which are converted into OH radicals by reaction with NO. 
The importance of OH for the chemistry of the troposphere
is undisputed. Yet, although our knowledge has increased
considerably since OH was recognized for its importance
(Levy, 1971), it has remained a rather elusive species. Its
very high reactivity towards many trace gases makes it
responsible for ridding the atmosphere of a host of reduced
gases, but at the same time this extreme reactivity reduces
its lifetime to less than a second. This leads to a low abun-
dance and to extreme spatial and temporal variability. But
also the sources of OH are highly variable. Its primary pro-
duction depends on UV radiation, that is diurnally variable,
and particularly the amount of water vapor is very variable.
All in all we are dealing with a highly variable trace species
at a concentration of only about 1 million per cm3, corre-
sponding to about 3 OH radicals per 1014 air molecules. As
a result, we cannot reconstruct the ever changing global
tropospheric distribution of OH from direct measurements
of OH. Also important is the question, how stable the glob-
al OH abundance is on the time scale of decades (Crutzen
and Zimmermann, 1991; Prinn et al., 2001; Lelieveld et al.,
2002). 
Enormous progress has been made in the detection of
OH. Several groups worldwide master the techniques for
reliably detecting OH, even from aircraft (Crosley, 1995;
Hausmann et al., 1997; Hofzumahaus et al., 1998; Hard et
al., 1995; Wennberg et al., 1998; Tan et al., 2001; Tanner et
al., 1997; Crosley, 1997; Brune et al., 1999). This all has
contributed enormously to our improved understanding of
the basic chemistry of the atmosphere. 
Since one cannot reconstruct the global distribution of
OH, and therefore, the atmosphere’s oxidation efficiency
from in situ measurements, much of what is known about
the distribution of OH is derived from modeling (e.g.
Spivakovsky et al., 2000). However, it is largely unknown
how closely the global tropospheric OH distributions as
derived from 3D chemistry-transport models reflect reality.
There are quite different global OH distributions “in use”,
all of them showing the characteristic maximum in the
tropics, but showing differences between the hemispheres
IGACtivities  2
SCIENCE FEATURES
for instance (e.g, Lawrence et al., 2001, and references
therein).
Because direct measurements only offer limited help,
indirect methods are being used. The basic idea is to meas-
ure the concentration and change in time of a trace gas that
is predominantly removed from the troposphere through
reaction by OH, and whose source strength is known
(Singh, 1977a). In this way the ‘global average’ OH abun-
dance, and its changes can be derived (Lovelock, 1977;
Singh, 1977a,b). In the simplest case a box model is used,
but 2D and 3D models have become more common. At the
outset, and parts of the following discussion will touch
upon this, it is clear that this indirect estimation of OH is
biased by the choice of model, and of the trace gas that is
scavenged by OH. 
One could propose to use methane as a tracer for OH, yet,
the sources of methane are far from being accurately
defined. In fact, there are basically 2 serious options for
assessing OH. One is based on industrial tracers, the other
uses a cosmogenic tracer. 
For over 20 years the increase and subsequent decline of
the tropospheric abundance of the industrial tracer
methylchloroform (MCF) (phased out under the Montreal
Protocol) has been followed with increasingly more refined
methods from several measurement sites with the impor-
tant goal to obtain a measure of the total amount of OH,
and to obtain information about possible trends. The meas-
urement of MCF by several researchers forms by far the
main basis for the independent experimental verification of
model derived distributions of OH (Spivakovsky et al.,
1990; Prinn et al., 1995; Krol et al., 1998; Montzka et al.,
2000; Prinn et al., 2001; Krol et al., 2003). Other studies
focused on the use of HCFCs (Prather and Spivakovsky,
1990; Kanakidou et al., 1995; Ehhalt et al., 1998; Miller et
al., 1998). 
Besides the use of MCF, some groups have measured the
abundance of 14CO, the concentration of which is mainly
determined by its production from cosmogenically gener-
ated 14C, by the degree of importation from the strato-
sphere where about 50% is formed, and by its reaction with
OH. Because 14CO measurements (abundance a mere 5 to
25 molecules per cm3 STP) are elaborate and expensive,
the 14CO method has been applied on a small scale only
(Volz et al., 1981; Brenninkmeijer et al., 1992; Mak and
Southon, 1998; Tyler et al., 1999; Quay et al., 2000; Jöckel
and Brenninkmeijer, 2002; Jöckel et al., 2002b).
Basically what is done in using the indirect methods
(MCF, or occasionally 14CO, and in the future other indus-
trial or perhaps ’dedicated’ tracers), is to verify to what
degree a given model, and its corresponding OH distribu-
tion correctly simulates the behavior of a tracer. If this sim-
ulation is excellent, we have successfully tested very
important aspects of the model, and it is probable that the
model will do a reasonable job concerning the removal of
other trace gases, e.g. methane or carbon monoxide. We
could then also predict future changes of OH by knowing
the future changes in the input parameters of the model. 
However, thus far there seems to be considerable uncer-
tainties about what MCF tells us, as is witnessed by the
vivid debates in the literature (Butler et al., 1991; Hartley
and Prinn, 1991; Spivakovsky et al., 1991; Cunnold and
Prinn, 1991; Spivakovsky, 1991; Prinn and Huang, 2001;
Krol et al., 2001).
The idea to assess the local OH concentration by inject-
ing dedicated OH tracers at least on short time scales (< 1
day) has been discussed earlier (Davenport and Singh,
1987 and references therein), but has never been success-
fully implemented. 
In a recent paper some issues related to the determination
of “global average OH” have been explored (Jöckel et al.,
2002a), and briefly the following issues were raised:
1. the use of a dedicated tracer on the global scale, 
so that the quantitative input of tracer is undisputed 
2. the use of 2 tracers of different lifetimes to
partially separate the effects of transport from
those of chemistry 
3. the optimization of such a tracer (reaction rate 
constant, temperature dependence) 
4. the optimization of the observation sites for following
the decay of the tracer 
5. the possibility of deriving “global average OH”, 
independent of a chemistry-transport model 
At the IGAC/CACGP meeting in Crete, September 2002,
preliminary discussions were held concerning steps to
increase our knowledge to derive the global average oxida-
tion efficiency (“global average OH”) and its potential
trend. As a result of these discussions it was proposed to
develop an IGAC activity ‘IGAC-GHOST’ to optimize
progress. IGAC-GHOST is an integrated initiative that is
global in scope and cuts across many disciplines such as
modeling, ultra-sensitive analytical methods, synthesis of
idealized chemicals, and the necessary kinetic and physical
property determinations including toxity.
Proposed Tasks
The following questions should be addressed: 
• Which properties of the global OH abundance/
distribution have to be known and for what reason? 
(spatio-temporal distribution, total abundance, 
trends, variability, time scale) 
• How variable is the global OH distribution? 
• How and to what degree do natural processes (e.g. El
Niño) and man made disturbances perturb the global
OH distribution? Can these perturbations be 
observed? 
• What are the benefits and limitations of tracer 
methods? 
- What can tracer methods actually tell us about
the OH distribution? 
- What is the relationship between the effective
tracer lifetime and global OH distribution? 
- How sensitive are tracer methods to the 
boundary conditions? 
- Which information is needed for scaling tracer 
lifetimes of different tracers? 
IGACtivities  3
- Which spatio-temporal averaging of the OH
distribution is implied in tracer methods? 
- Which additional information can be gained by
using multiple tracers? 
- How well can dynamical and chemical effects be
distinguished from observations of tracer
abundances? 
- What are the fundamental limitations resulting
from the lack of information? (How) can the 
spatio-temporal OH distribution be 
re-constructed from a limited number of 
observations? 
• What are the benefits and limitations of in-situ 
methods; how can in-situ measurements be used to
complement the global tracer methods? 
• Can a “global atmospheric oxidation efficiency” be 
defined unambiguously as an intrinsic property of
the atmosphere, and what is its relation to the OH 
distribution? 
In using tracers, two approaches can be distinguished: 
1. existing natural and industrial tracers (i.e.,“tracers of
opportunity”) 
• What are the largest uncertainties which limit the 
quantification of the global OH abundance? 
• With what accuracy can emission estimates be 
established? 
• Which tracers can be used for probing which
property of the global OH abundance? 
• What is the optimal sampling strategy to gain
maximum information? 
(Note: Much of this is already ongoing!) 
2. dedicated tracers (tailor-made) 
• What property of the OH abundance/distribution
can be addressed by the use of dedicated tracers 
(time scale, spatial scale) 
• Which are the properties of the ’ideal’ tracer(s)
(pressure-, temperature- dependence of the 
reaction coefficient, additional sinks (ocean, 
photolysis, soil, chemistry, ...))? Which of these 
properties can be designed as ’real’ tracers? 
• What is the optimal sampling strategy to gain 
maximum information? 
We suggest the following questions to be considered: 
1. Theoretical investigations, e.g., Computer Aided 
Gedanken Experiments (CAGEs) of dedicated tracers 
to answer the following questions: 
• Are tracer method 1 (tracers of opportunity) 
and/or 2 (dedicated tracers) feasible to measure 
the required properties of the global OH 
distribution. 
• Which tracers are best suited? 
• What can be gained by using multiple tracers of 
different lifetimes / properties? 
• What is the optimal release strategy to gain 
maximum information? 
• What is the optimal sampling strategy to gain 
maximum information? 
• How can the spatio-temporal OH abundance/
distribution be reconstructed from tracer 
observations? 
• What can we learn from applying statistical
methods (e.g. lifetime versus variability)? 
• Advanced inversion techniques: What are the
limitations? 
• 3D global atmospheric models: What are the
largest uncertainties? 
• The issue of lacking information: How robust 
are the results of the ‘reconstruction methods’?
Which additional information can profitably be
added? How sensitive are the results to 
uncertainties of this additional information? 
• Is it possible to trace accurately the uncertainties
of the various methods? 
• Can systematic errors be investigated? 
2. If the outcome of 1. is favorable to perform a real, 
dedicated tracer experiment: 
• Which tracer compounds can be used? 
• What are the necessary detection limits for
reasonable tracer release rates? 
• Which measurement techniques are available? 
• Which observational accuracy/precision is 
needed? 
• Cost calculations 
• Where and how to release the tracers? 
• Where and how to monitor the tracer decay? 
• Execution of dedicated tracer experiments 
We further suggest an approach starting from an ‘ideal’
world, i.e., addressing the fundamental issues (e.g. lack of
information, sampling strategy, etc.), passing successively
over to more and more ‘realistic’ conditions, i.e., address-
ing at the end also the practical issues (e.g. tracer mass,
cost, measurement technique, etc.). This allows a complete
trace of uncertainties and limitations of the method: 
1. Feasibility of the tracer method: General
considerations and limitations 
2. Additional information: How robust are model /
inversion results; what are the limitations 
3. Design of an ’optimal experiment’ in an ‘ideal world’
4. Transition from the ‘ideal world’ to the ‘real world’
For a start, we suggest the following Computer Aided
Gedanken Experiment (CAGE): 
1. A 3D atmospheric model is used to generate 
‘pseudo-tracer observations’ at a number of sites with 
perfectly known rate coefficient of OH with the tracer 
complete knowledge of emitted tracer mass 
OH as the only sink of the tracer 
IGACtivities  4
2. Reconstruction methods’ are applied to the
’pseudo-observations’ in order to retrieve global 
average information about the original 3D 
OH distribution. 
3. Comparison of the results (retrieved information) with
the original 3D OH distribution: Differences between
original and reconstructed OH are due to the lack of 
information from a limited number of sites and 
uncertainties of the additional information used for the
various reconstruction methods.
4. Model inter-comparison: Repetition of 3., using 
different chemistry-transport models (CTMs) and 
general circulation models (GCMs) using the same 3D
OH distribution. 
References
Brenninkmeijer, C. A. M., Manning, M. R., Lowe, D. C., Wallace, G., Sparks, R. J.,
and Volz-Thomas, A., Interhemispheric asymmetry in OH abundance inferred from
measurements of atmospheric 14CO, Nature, 356 , 50-52, 1992.
Brune, W. H., Tan, D., Faloona, I. F., Jaegle, L., Jacob, D. J., Heikes, B. G., Snow,
J., Kondo, Y., Shetter, R., Sachse, G. W., Anderson, B., Gregory, G. L., Vay, S.,
Singh, H. B., Davis, D. D., Crawford, J. H., and Blake, D. R., OH and HO2 chem-
istry in the North Atlantic free troposphere, Geophys. Res. Lett., 26, 3077-3080,
1999.
Butler, J. H., Elkins, J. W., Thompson, T. M., Hall, B. D., Swanson, T. H., and
Koropalov, V., Oceanic consumption of CH3CCl3: Implications for tropospheric
OH, J. Geophys. Res., 96 , 22347-22355, 1991.
Crosley, D. R., The measurement of OH and HO2 in the atmosphere, J. Atm. Sci.,
52 , 3299-3314, 1995.
Crosley, D. R., 1993 tropospheric OH photochemistry experiment - a summary and
perspective, J. Geophys. Res., 102 , 6495-6510, 1997.
Crutzen, P. J. and Zimmermann, P. H., The changing photochemistry of the tropo-
sphere, Tellus, 43AB, 136-151, 1991.
Cunnold, D. M. and Prinn, R. G., Comment on “Tropospheric OH in a three dimen-
sional chemical tracer model: An assessment based on observations of CH3CCl3” by
C. M. Spivakovsky et al., J. Geophys. Res., 96 , 17391-17393, 1991.
Davenport, J. and Singh, H. B., Systematic development of reactive tracer technolo-
gy for the measurement of tropospheric hydroxyl radical, Atmos. Environ., 21 ,
1969-1981, 1987.
Ehhalt, D. H., Rohrer, F., Wahner, A., Prather, M. J., and Blake, D. R., On the use of
hydrocarbons for the determination of tropospheric OH concentrations, J. Geophys.
Res., 103 , 18981-18997, 1998.
Hard, T. M., George, L. A., and Obrien, R. J., FAGE determination of tropospheric
HO and HO2, J. Atm. Sci., 52 , 3354-3372, 1995.
Hartley, D. and Prinn, R., Comment on “Tropospheric OH in a three dimensional
chemical tracer model: An assessment based on observations of CH3CCl3” by C. M.
Spivakovsky et al., J. Geophys. Res., 96 , 17383-17387, 1991.
Hausmann, M., Brandenburger, U., Brauers, T., and Dorn, H.-P., Detection of tro-
pospheric OH radicals by long-path-differential-optical-absorption spectroscopy:
Experimental setup, accuracy, and precision, J. Geophys. Res., 102 , 16011-16022,
1997.
Hofzumahaus, A., Aschmutat, U., Brandenburger, U., Brauers, T., Dorn, H. P.,
Hausmann, M., Hessling, M., Holland, F., Plass-Dulmer, C., and Ehhalt, D. H.,
Intercomparison of tropospheric OH measurements by different laser techniques
during the POPCORN campaign 1994, J. Atmos. Chem., 31 , 227-246, 1998.
Jöckel, P. and Brenninkmeijer, C. A. M., The seasonal cycle of cosmogenic 14CO at
the surface level: A solar cycle adjusted, zonal average climatology based on obser-
vations, J. Geophys. Res., in press, 2002.
Jöckel, P., Brenninkmeijer, C. A. M., and Crutzen, P. J., A discussion on the deter-
mination of atmospheric OH and its trends?, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Disc., 2 , 1261-
1286, 2002a.
Jöckel, P., Brenninkmeijer, C. A. M., Lawrence, M. G., Jeuken, A. B. M., and van
Velthoven, P. F., Evaluation of stratosphere - troposphere exchange and the hydrox-
yl radical distribution in 3-dimensional global atmospheric models using observa-
tions of cosmogenic 14CO, J. Geophys. Res., 107 , 2002b.
Kanakidou, M., Dentener, F. J., and Crutzen, P. J., A global three dimensional study
of the fate of HCFCs and HFC-134a in the troposphere, J. Geophys. Res., 100 ,
18781-18801, 1995.
Krol, M., van Leeuwen, P. J., and Lelieveld, J., Global OH trend inferred from
methylchloroform measurements, J. Geophys. Res., 103 , 10697-10711, 1998.
Krol, M., van Leeuwen, P. J., and Lelieveld, J., Comment on “Global OH trend
inferred from methylchloroform measurements” by Maarten Krol et al. - Reply, J.
Geophys. Res., 106 , 23159-23164, 2001.
Krol, M. C., Lelieveld, J., Oram, D. E., Sturrock, G. A., Penkett, S. A.,
Brenninkmeijer, C. A. M., Gros, V., Williams, J., and Scheeren, H. A., Continuing
emissions of methyl chloroform from Europe, Nature, 421 , 131-135, 2003.
Lawrence, M. G., Jockel, P., and von Kuhlmann, R., What does the global mean OH
concentration tell us?, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 1 , 43-75, 2001.
Lelieveld, J., Peters, W., Dentener, F. J., and Krol, M. C., Stability of tropospheric
hydroxyl chemistry, J. Geophys. Res., 107 , 2002.
Levy, H., Normal atmosphere: Large radical and formaldehyde concentrations pre-
dicted, Science, 173 , 141-143, 1971.
Lovelock, J. E., Methyl chloroform in the troposphere as indicator of OH radical
abundance, Nature, 267 , 32, 1977.
Mak, J. E. and Southon, J. R., Assessment of tropical OH seasonality using atmos-
pheric 14CO measurements from Barbados, Geophys. Res. Lett., 25 , 2801-2804,
1998.
Miller, B. R., Huang, J., Weiss, R. F., Prinn, R. G., and Fraser, P. J.,
Atmospheric trend and lifetime of chlorodiuoromethane (HCFC-22) and  the global
tropospheric OH concentration, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 13237-13248, 1998.
Montzka, S. A., Spivakovsky, C. M., Butler, J. H., Elkins, J. W., Lock, L. T., and
Mondeel, D. J., New observational constraints for atmospheric hydroxyl on global
and hemispheric scales, Science, 288 , 500-503, 2000.
Prather, M. and Spivakovsky, C. M., Tropospheric OH and the lifetimes of
hydrochlorouorocarbons, J. Geophys. Res., 95 , 18723-18729, 1990.
Prinn, R. G. and Huang, J., Comment on “Global OH trend inferred from
methylchloroform measurements” by Maarten Krol et al., J. Geophys. Res., 106 ,
23151-23157, 2001.
Prinn, R. G., Weiss, R. F., Miller, B. R., Huang, J., Alyea, F. N., Cunnold, D. M.,
Fraser, P. J., Hartley, D. E., and Simmonds, P. G., Atmospheric trends and lifetime
of CH3CCl3 and global OH concentrations, Science, 269 , 187-192, 1995.
Prinn, R. G., Huang, J., Weiss, R. F., Cunnold, D. M., Fraser, P. J., Simmonds, P. G.,
McCulloch, A., Harth, C., Salameh, P., O’Doherty, S.,Wang, R. H. J., Porter, L., and
Miller, B. R., Evidence for substantial variations of atmospheric hydroxyl radicals in
the past two decades, Science, 292, 1882-1888, 2001.
Quay, P., King, S., White, D., Brockington, M., Plotkin, B., Gammon, R., Gerst, S.,
and Stutsman, J., Atmospheric 14CO: A tracer of OH concentration and mixing rates,
J. Geophys. Res., 105 , 15147-15166, 2000.
Singh, H. B., Atmospheric halocarbons: Evidence in favour of reduced average
hydroxyl radical concentration in the troposphere, Geophys. Res. Lett., 4 , 101-104,
1977a.
Singh, H. B., Preliminary estimation of average tropospheric HO concentrations in
the northern and southern hemispheres, Geophys. Res. Lett., 4, 453-456, 1977b.
Spivakovsky, C. M., Reply on comment on “Tropospheric OH in a three dimension-
al chemical tracer model: An assessment based on observations of CH3CCl3” by C.
M. Spivakovsky et al., J. Geophys. Res., 96 , 17395-17398, 1991.
Spivakovsky, C. M., Yevich, R., Logan, J. A., Wofsy, S. C., McElroy, M. B., and
Prather, M. J., Tropospheric OH in a three-dimensional chemical tracer model: An
assessment based on observations of CH3CCl3, J. Geophys. Res., 95 , 18441-18471,
1990.
Spivakovsky, C. M., Yevich, R., Logan, J. A., Wofsy, S. C., McElroy, M. B., and
Prather, M. J., Reply on comment on “Tropospheric OH in a three dimensional
chemical tracer model: An assessment based on observations of CH3CCl3” by C. M.
Spivakovsky et al., J. Geophys. Res., 96 , 17389-17390, 1991.
Spivakovsky, C. M., Logan, J. A., Montzka, S. A., Balkanski, Y. J., Foreman-Fowler,
M., Jones, D. B. A., Horowitz, L. W., Fusco, A. C., Brenninkmeijer, C. A. M.,
Prather, M. J., Wofsy, S. C., and McElroy, M. B., Three dimensional climatological
distribution of tropospheric OH: Update and evaluation, J. Geophys. Res., 105 ,
8931-8980, 2000.
Tan, D., Faloona, I., Simpas, J. B., Brune, W., Olson, J., Crawford, J., Avery, M.,
Sachse, G., Vay, S., Sandholm, S., Guan, H. W., Vaughn, T., Mastromarino, J.,
Heikes, B., Snow, J., Podolske, J., and Singh, H., OH and HO2 in the tropical
Pacific: Results from PEM-Tropics B, J. Geophys. Res., 106 , 32667-32681, 2001.
Tanner, D. J., Jefferson, A., and Eisele, F. L., Selected ion chemical ionization mass
spectrometric measurement of OH, J. Geophys. Res., 102 , 6415-6425, 1997.
Tyler, S. C., Klouda, G. A., Brailsford, G. W., Manning, A. C., Conny, J. M., and Jull,
A. J. T., Seasonal snapshots of the isotopic (14C, 13C) composition of tropospheric
carbon monoxide at Niwot Ridge, Colorado, Chemosphere Glob. Change Sci., 1,
185-203, 1999.
Volz, A., Ehhalt, D. H., and Derwent, R. G., Seasonal and latitudinal variation of
14CO and the tropospheric concentration of OH radicals, J. Geophys. Res., 86 ,
5163-5171, 1981.
Wennberg, P. O., Hanisco, T. F., Jaegle, L., Jacob, D. J., Hintsa, E. J., Lanzendorf, E.
J., Anderson, J. G., Gao, R. S., Keim, E. R., Donnelly, S. G., Delnegro, L. A., Fahey,
D. W., Mckeen, S. A., Salawitch, R. J., Webster, C. R., May, R. D., Herman, R. L.,
Pro_tt, M. H., Margitan, J. J., Atlas, E. L., Schau_er, S. M., Flocke, F., McElroy, C.
T., and Bui, T. P., Hydrogen radicals, nitrogen radicals, and the production of O3 in
the upper troposphere, Science, 279 , 49-53, 1998.
IGACtivities  5
Tropical Tropospheric
Ozone: A Perspective on
Photochemical and
Dynamical Interactions
from Observations in the
Past Five Years
Contributed by Anne M. Thompson (anne.m.thomp-
son@nasa.gov) NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center -
Laboratory for Atmospheres Greenbelt, Maryland USA
20771; 
Background: Chemistry and
Dynamics in Tropical
Tropospheric Ozone
For many years ozone was regarded as a passive tracer in
the troposphere, in balance between a stratospheric source
and destruction at the surface. With the realization that
free-radical chemical reactions among trace gases emitted
through human activities (“ozone precursors,” NO, CO,
hydrocarbons) can lead to ozone formation, attention was
directed at photochemical sources of ozone. To complicate
matters, note that various natural processes also produce
ozone precursors, e.g. vegetation releases fast-reacting
hydrocarbons; soils and lightning release nitric oxide.
In the tropics, field experiments and satellite data of the
1980’s [Fishman et al., 1986] emphasized pollution sources
of ozone. Causes of pollution include urban activities in
developing countries and biomass fires. The latter are nat-
ural or related to agriculture, domestic cooking and heat-
ing, or to deforestation. Lightning production of NO is also
thought to be a significant ozone source because the trop-
ics is the region of most concentrated lightning on earth. A
series of field campaigns in the 1990’s (some under the
auspices of IGAC BIBEX), confirmed the importance of
biomass burning sources, lightning and the ubiquity of
ozone pollution throughout the tropics.
In 1984 and again a decade later, global plumes of carbon
monoxide were measured from space on the Shuttle MAPS
instrument (Reichle et al., 1990; Pougatchev et al., 1999).
The lifetime of each pollutant is sufficiently long (3-6
weeks for free tropospheric ozone, several months for CO)
that long-range transport (thousands of km) can occur
(Chatfield et al., 1998). The ubiquity of ozone pollution
layers as surveyed by aircraft over the remote Pacific was
pointed out by Newell et al. (1999) In general, the thin lay-
ers of elevated ozone alternated with cleaner background
amounts of ozone (5-20 ppbv), occasionally < 5 ppbv as
was discovered in the late 1970’s (Routhier et al., 1980).
Figure 1 - Time-series of tropospheric ozone column (solid) and absorbing aerosols (dashed, for smoke from biomass fires) as
measured from Earth-Probe/TOMS over the Indonesian region [Thompson et al., 2001].
IGACtivities  6
IGACtivities  7
Shipboard studies of ozone and ozone precursors in the
tropical Pacific (Thompson et al., 1993) demonstrated net
photochemical loss of surface ozone. In convectively
active regions, low ozone at the surface is transported rap-
idly upward, leading to low column ozone amounts and the
pockets of low ozone observed from aircraft and sondes
(Kley et al., 1996).
Even as evidence for photochemical control of ozone was
accumulating in regions affected by human activity, closer
examination of the data pointed to dynamical impacts. For
example, in southern Africa, where biomass burning is a
major contributor to ozone formation, recirculation of
extremely stable layers (Cosijn and Tyson, 1996) is a deci-
sive factor in the accumulation of ozone over that continent
and the adjacent oceans (Thompson et al., 1996). Analysis
of the satellite tropospheric ozone record since 1980
(Thompson and Hudson, 1999) shows photochemically-
induced variations as biomass burning patterns are modi-
fied by drought associated with El-Niño-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) events. El-Niño episodes also alter
patterns of convection, leading to perturbed tropospheric
ozone in non-burning regions. The TROPOZ aircraft sam-
pling in 1991 detected ozone and other trace gases from
biomass 
fires 
crossing 
the 
ITCZ 
(Intertropical
Convergence Zone; Jonquières and Marenco, 1998).
Recent Examples of Chemical-
Dynamical Interactions Affecting
Ozone
Satellite View of El-Niño-Southern Oscillation
Interactions. In Figure 1 a time history of tropospheric
column ozone, from the Earth-Probe TOMS instrument
sampling over the Indonesian maritime continent, reveals
the highest ozone resulting from fires that erupted in the
wake of the 1997 ENSO (Thompson et al., 2001). The
TOMS absorbing aerosol time-series (a proxy for smoke
from biomass fires) is also illustrated. The ozone evolution
reveals two sharp increases and only the second one is due
to the fires (increased smoke between August and
November 1997). The first increase occurred in March
1997 at the onset of the El Niño when a shift in Indian and
Pacific Ocean temperature gradients led to intense subsi-
dence and an increased ozone column. Thus, the earlier
response to the ENSO was associated with perturbed
regional dynamics.
Evidence from Ozone Soundings. The location of the
enhanced ozone (above 8 km prior to the burning, 3-5 km
ozone maxima in early September 1997) over Indonesia
during the ENSO period was detected in sondes launched
at Java (Fujiwara et al., 1999).  Complexity in chemical
and dynamical interactions in tropical ozone has been iden-
tified in other sets of ozone soundings. A phenomenon
characterized as the “tropical Atlantic ozone paradox”
(Thompson et al., 2000) was discovered during an oceano-
Figure 2 -  Mechanisms
interacting to produce the
tropical Atlantic ozone
paradox (Thompson et al.,
2000).  Pollution ozone
and ozone precursors from
north of the ITCZ are
entrained into convection
at low levels, transported
upward and redistributed
on either side of the ITCZ.
See also Edwards et al.
(2003) and Jenkins et al.
(2003).
IGACtivities  8
graphic cruise in early 1999. The paradox refers to the per-
sistent appearance of more tropospheric ozone south of the
ITCZ during the time of year (December-January-
February) when the greatest amount of biomass burning is
north of the ITCZ. The causes include north-to-south inter-
hemispheric transport of pollution through interaction with
convection, subsidence and lightning in the southern hemi-
sphere, as illustrated in Figure 2. The mechanisms are
explored in greater detail using satellite data and meteoro-
logical analyses (Edwards et al., 2003; Jenkins et al.,
2003).
Insights into Tropical Ozone from SHADOZ
Soundings. The above examples show the way in which
multiple chemical and dynamical factors affect tropical tro-
pospheric ozone.  Further insights are gained by examining
profiles from a tropical ozone sounding network, the
SHADOZ 
(Southern 
Hemisphere 
Additional
Ozonesondes) project (Thompson et al., 2003a). Through
comprehensive longitudinal coverage (as shown in Figure
3) and frequent launches, it is possible to examine season-
ality, week-to-week variability and differences in ozone
from station-to-station. Presently nearly 2000 ozone, tem-
perature and relative humidity profiles from SHADOZ are
available to the community at < Most of the profiles
include the stratospheric maximum (~25 km) because the
balloon-borne sondes normally reach 7 hPa pressure
(Thompson et al., 2003b)
1. Zonal Wave-One in Tropospheric
Ozone
A feature that can be studied with SHADOZ data is the
zonal distribution of ozone. As noted by Shiotani (1992), a
greater thickness of ozone over the Atlantic relative to the
Pacific leads to a roughly wave-one pattern in the column
amount of total ozone. This discovery, which was made
with TOMS satellite data, led to debate over whether the
“excess” ozone over the Atlantic is concentrated in the
stratosphere, the troposphere, or both. Satellite data are not
sufficiently precise to determine whether or not the wave-
one is the lower stratosphere. SHADOZ sonde data show
an absence of a wave pattern in that region. However, when
the ozone profiles are viewed zonally, a statistically signif-
icant wave-one is observed in total and troposphere ozone
[Thompson et al., 2003a]. The ozone cross-section (Figure
4) shows the vertical and longitudinal structure of the tro-
pospheric wave.  A broader and lower tropopause layer (the
so-called “tropical tropopause layer” or TTL) is one con-
tributor to the greater concentration of ozone over the
Atlantic.  Although the thickness and location of the TTL
varies over the course of a year, the general appearance of
the ozone zonal structure is always similar to the March-
April-May view (Figure 4). The wave-one feature may
explain the northern hemisphere-southern hemisphere gra-
dient in tropospheric ozone that gives rise to the “paradox”
feature. Satellite observations (Thompson and Hudson,
1999) suggest that at all times of year southern tropical
Atlantic tropospheric ozone is greater than over the north-
ern tropical Atlantic.
Figure 3 -  Location of ozone sounding stations in the SHADOZ network (Thompson et al., 2003a,b)
IGACtivities  9
A second contribution to the wave-one ozone is subsi-
dence over the Atlantic, that causes the ozone column to be
denser than over the Pacific, where convection leads to a
thinner ozone column amount. This contrast reflects the
atmospheric general circulation. Photochemical contribu-
tions to the wave feature include lightning, biomass burn-
ing, both of which are more concentrated over South
America, Africa and the south Atlantic between than they
are over the Pacific.  
The sole northern tropical station in the SHADOZ net-
work is in Surinam (Figure 3). Peters et al. (2003) show
that ozone seasonality at that location is distinct from the
closest southern hemisphere stations because transport pat-
terns and the location of the ITCZ subject Surinam to dif-
ferent influences.
2.  Variability - Week-to-week, 
Seasonal, Interannual
The wave-one phenomenon illustrates the large scale
dynamical impact on tropospheric ozone distributions in
the southern tropics.  When ozone data are examined at
individual stations, meteorologically related short-term
variability is the dominant feature. The SHADOZ stations
are remote from strong sources, so the highest ozone con-
centrations due to pollution usually occur in the free tropo-
sphere. Convection tends to bring clean surface air into the
middle troposphere. In all cases, pollution episodes alter-
nate with nearly pristine conditions, often on a week-to-
week basis (Thompson et al, 2003a).  
A seasonality in tropospheric ozone is normally defined
Figure 4 - Cross-sectional view of mean ozone mixing ratio in March-April-May taken from sondes at the stations indicat-
ed along the abscissa.  Tropopause denoted by stars.  The greater concentration of ozone over the Atlantic relative to the
Pacific is responsible for the wave-one pattern first detected from satellite.
IGACtivities  10
in terms of a mean.  Tropospheric ozone is a maximum in
September-October-November (Figure 5) and a minimum
in March-April-May. However, when the individual pro-
files are compared to the seasonal average, the variability
is so extreme that the mean has little statistical signifi-
cance. A cluster method of classifying tropical tropospher-
ic ozone has shown that distinct distributions of profiles are
associated with different synoptic conditions (Diab et al.,
2003). Classification may be a better way of developing
tropospheric ozone climatologies for remote sensing appli-
cations and determination of tropospheric ozone trends. A
satellite retrieval of ozone in the lower troposphere may be
compromised by the discrepancy between the SHADOZ
observations and the simple climatological profile
employed in a typical algorithm.
Summary
Observations of tropospheric ozone in the tropics in the
past five years have been greatly enhanced by satellite
measurements, aircraft and ground measurements and by
more than 1600 ozone profiles from the SHADOZ net-
work. We have gained insights into the complexity of
dynamical and photochemical influences through a view
from space, from detailed soundings, and from ancillary
data that give information about mechanisms. The variabil-
ity of tropospheric ozone at remote stations is surprisingly
high, reflecting localized short-term meteorological shifts
within a generally stable environment. The structure of the
zonal wave-one, the tropical Atlantic ozone “paradox,” and
El-Niño influences on ozone variability are examples of
the decisive role meteorological influences play in tropical
tropospheric ozone. 
Figure 5 - Seasonal
mean ozone profile below
20 km with all individual
soundings taken in
September-October-
November (1998-2001) at
Fiji.  Note the large 
variability in the 
soundings.
IGACtivities 11
Further progress in evaluating processes affecting ozone
and budgets of this and related trace gases will require
models of various scales. Although the data caution against
oversimplified approaches to ozone climatologies, today’s
models are challenged to simulate the variability captured
by recent tropical observations.
References
Chatfield, R. B., J. A. Vastano, L. Li, G. W. Sachse, V. S. Connors, 1998.  The
Great African plume from biomass burning: A three-dimensional study of
TRACE A carbon monoxide, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 28059-28077.
Cosijn, C. and P. D. Tyson, 1996.  Stable discontinuities in the atmosphere
over South Africa, S. Afr. J. Sci.,  92, 381-386.
Davis Diab, R. D., A. Raghunandran, A. M. Thompson, V. Thouret, 2003.
Classification of tropospheric ozone profiles over Johannesburg based on
MOZAIC aircraft data, Atmos. Chem. Phys., submitted.
Edwards, D., et al.  2003.  Tropospheric ozone over the tropical Atlantic: A
satellite perspective, J. Geophys. Res., in press.
Fishman, J., P. Minnis, H. G. Reichle, 1986.  Use of satellite data to study tro-
pospheric ozone in the tropics, J. Geophys. Res., 91, 14451-14465.
Fujiwara, M., K. Kita, S. Kawakami, T. Ogawa, N. Komala, S. Saraspriya, A.
Suripto, 1999. Tropospheric ozone enhancements during the Indonesian for-
est fire event in 1994 and 1997 as revealed by ground-based observations,
Geophys. Res Lett., 26, 2417-2420.
Jenkins, G. S., J-H. Ryu, A. M. Thompson, J. C. Witte, 2002.  Linking
Horizontal and vertical transport of biomass fire emissions to the tropical
Atlantic Ozone Paradox during the Northern hemisphere winter season. II.
1998-1999, J. Geophys. Res., submitted.
Jonquières, I. and A. Marenco, 1998. Redistribution by deep convection and
long-range transport of CO and CH4 emissions from the Amazon basin, as
observed by the airborne campaign TROPOZ II during the wet season, J.
Geophys. Res., 103, 19075-19091.
Kley, D., P. J. Crutzen, H. G. J. Smit, H. Vömel, S. J. Oltmans, H. Grassl, V.
Ramanathan, Observations of near-zero ozone concentrations over the con-
vective Pacific: Effects on air chemistry, Science, 274, 230-233, 1996.
Newell R. E., V. Thouret, J. Y. N. Cho, P. Stoller, A. Marenco, H. G. Smit,
1999.  Ubiquity of quasi-horizontal layers in the troposphere, Nature, 398,
316-319.
Peters, W., M. C. Krol, J. P. F. Fortuin, H. M. Kelder, C. R. Becker, A. M.
Thompson, J. Lelieveld, P. J. Crutzen, 2003.  Tropospheric ozone over a trop-
ical Atlantic station in the Northern Hemisphere: Paramaribo, Surinam (6N,
55W), Tellus B, in press.
Pougatchev, N., et al., 1999.  Pacific Exploratory Mission-Tropics carbon
monoxide measurements in historical context, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 26,195-
26,208.
Reichle, H., V. S. Connors, J. A. Holland, R. T. Sherrill, H. A. Wallio, J. C.
Casas, E. P. Condon, B. B. Gormsen, W. Seiler, 1990.  The distribution of
middle tropospheric carbon monoxide during early October 1984, J. Geophys.
Res., 95, 9845-9856.
Routhier F., R. Dennett, R. Dennett, D. D. Davis, A. D. Wartburg, P.
Haagenson, A. C. Delany, 1980.  Free tropospheric and boundary layer air-
borne measurements of ozone over the latitude range of 58 degrees S to 70
degrees N, J. Geophys. Res., 85, 7307-7321.
Shiotani, M., 1992.  Annual, quasi-biennial and El Nino-Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) time-scale variations in Equatorial total ozone, J. Geophys. Res., 97,
7625-7634. 
Thompson, A. M. and R. D. Hudson, 1999.  Tropical tropospheric ozone
(TTO) Maps from Nimbus 7 and Earth-Probe TOMS by the modified-resid-
ual method:  Evaluation with sondes, ENSO signals and trends from Atlantic
regional time series, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 26961-26975.
Thompson, A. M., et al., 1993.  SAGA-3 ozone observations and a photo-
chemical model analysis of the marine boundary layer during SAGA-3, J.
Geophys. Res., 98, 16955-16968.
Thompson, A. M., K. E. Pickering, D. P. McNamara, M.R. Schoeberl, R. D.
Hudson, J. H. Kim, E. V. Browell, V. W. J. H. Kirchhoff, D. Nganga, 1996.
Where did tropospheric ozone over southern Africa and the tropical Atlantic
come from in October 1992? Insights from the TOMS GTE/TRACE-A and
SAFARI-92, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 24251-24278.
Thompson, A. M., B. G. Doddridge, J. C. Witte, R. D. Hudson, W. T. Luke, J.
E. Johnson, B. J. Johnson, S. J. Oltmans, R. Weller, 2000.  A tropical Atlantic
paradox: Shipboard and satellite views of a tropospheric ozone maximum and
wave-one in January-February 1999, Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 3317-3320.
Thompson, A. M., J. C. Witte, R. D. Hudson, H. Guo, J. R. Herman, M.
Fujiwara, 2001.  Tropical tropospheric ozone and biomass burning, Science,
291, 2128-2132.
Thompson, A. M., J. C. Witte, M. T. Freiman, N. A. Phahlane, G. J. R.
Coetzee, 2002.   Lusaka, Zambia, during SAFARI-2000: Convergence of
local and imported ozone pollution, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29, 1976, doi:
10.129/2002GL015399.
Thompson, A. M., et al., 2003a.  Southern Hemisphere Additional
Ozonesondes (SHADOZ) 1998-2000 tropical ozone climatology. 2.
Tropospheric variability and the zonal wave-one, J. Geophys. Res., 108, 8241,
doi: 10.129/2002JD002241.
Thompson, A. M., et al., 2003b.  Southern Hemisphere Additional
Ozonesondes (SHADOZ) 1998-2000 tropical ozone climatology. 1.
Comparison with TOMS and ground-based measurements, J. Geophys. Res.,
108, 8238, doi: 10.129/2001JD00967.
Composition of Asian
Deposition (CAD): A Task
Within the IGAC DEBITS
Activity
Contributed by
Henning Rodhe, Department of
Meteorology, Stockholm University, Sweden Greg Ayers,
CSIRO Division of Atmospheric Research, Melbourne,
Australia, Leong Chow Peng, Malaysian Meteorological
Service, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia Rajasekhar Bala,
Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering,
The National University of Singapore, Singapore
One of the original tasks of IGAC (Galbally, 1989) was
entitled “Composition and Acidity of Asian Precipitation”
(CAAP), with the objectives:
1) to quantify the wet deposition of S, N, C, P and sea-salt
species, and 
2) to assess the state of rainwater acidity in south and 
south-east Asia.
The prime motivation was a concern that rapidly increas-
ing emissions of S and N compounds in south and south-
east Asian countries could create acid deposition and other
regional pollution problems (Rodhe and Herrera, 1988).  At
that time the number of regionally representative observa-
tions of the chemical composition of precipitation was very
limited (to a large degree this is still true).
Until 2000 the task was coordinated by Greg Ayers and
Henning Rodhe.  At this time the focus was shifted by de-
emphasizing the rainwater acidity issue and by expanding
the goal to include dry deposition.  As a consequence the
task was given its new name, CAD, (composition of Asian
Deposition) and the leadership was taken up by Leong
Chow Peng from Malaysia and Rajasekhar Bala from
Singapore.
CAAP/CAD has operated as a rather loosely coordinated
network, primarily of observational activities, but supple-
mented more recently by modeling studies.  In parallel with
well-focused national and bi-national measurement pro-
grams, mainly in India, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and
Indonesia, a most important component of CAAP/CAD
has been the convening of workshops, the last one held in
Kuala Lumpur in November 2002.  At these workshops the
results of the various measurement programs have been
presented and issues of common concern discussed.  Great
efforts have been made to assure the quality of the data and
their representativeness for regions rather than just for
urban situations.  An important component of technology
transfer/capacity building has also prevailed throughout the
lifetime of the task.
The backbone of CAAP/CAD has been, and still is, pre-
cipitation chemistry measurements.  In recent years sever-
al of the observational stations have included measurement
of the gases SO2, NO2 and NH3, (using passive samplers,
c.f. separate article by Ferm and Carmichael) to enable dry
deposition of these gases to be estimated.  At a few sites
measurements are also made of aerosol particles, separated
into sub-micrometer and super-micrometer sizes. 
A strong commitment to publication has seen most results
of the CAAP/CAD studies reported in the open literature;
a selection of these papers is given below. Some of the
highlights are summarized here.
• A significant number of papers documenting the
state of the regional  environment in terms of chem-
ical gradients of acidity and acidic substances.
• Identification of areas of very high acidic deposi-
tion (in Malaysia and in Indonesia) (Ayers et al.,
2002; Gillett et al., 2000).
• Assessment of the impact of Indonesian smoke haze
episodes on regional air quality (Balasubramanian et
al., 1999).
• Identification of areas where calcium carbonate and
ammonia were important sources of alkalinity in
rainwater (e.g. India: Pillai et al., 2001 and in
Thailand: Granat et al., 1996).
• To the extent that ecosytems are nitrogen saturated,
soils in regions with high ammonia deposition (e.g.
northern India) may be receiving a  substantial input
of acidity even though the pH of rainwater exceeds
5.0  most of the time (Granat et al., 2001).
• Identification of high levels of organic acidity in
rainfall throughout tropical regions, and the role
played by these acids in changing apparent rainfall
composition 
after 
collection 
(Zhung 
and
Balasubramanian, 2001)).
• Characterisation of the relative roles of S and N in
various regions, related to regional source balance.
In addition, CAAP/CAD has provided a legacy that
includes a modest network of people within S and SE Asia
who are now knowledgeable about reactive atmospheric
chemistry and modern measurement techniques as it relates
to sources and sinks of anthropogenic S and N emissions.
Several of these people are now providing advice to gov-
ernments on these matters, and are also now included in
international networks such that they have access to the
latest scientific knowledge and are more and more being
included in regional, international collaborative experi-
ments and environmental assessments. 
IGACtivities  12
References
Ayers, G.P., Gillett, R.W., Ginting, N., Hooper, M., Selleck, P.W. and Tapper
N. (1995) Atmospheric sulfur and nitrogen in West Java. Water, Air, and Soil
Pollution 85, 2083-2088.
Ayers G.P. (1991).  Atmospheric Acidification in the Asian Region, Env.
Monitoring Assessment 19, 225-250.
Ayers G.P. and Yeung K.K. (1996).  Acid deposition in Hong Kong, Atmos.
Environ. 30, 1581-1587.
Ayers G.P., Fukuzaki N., Gillett R.W., Selleck P.W., Powell J.C. and Hara H.
(1998).  Thymol as a biocide in Japanese rainwater, J. Amos. Chem. 30, 301-
310.
Ayers, G. P., Leong Chow Peng, Lim Sze Fook, Cheah Wai Kong, R.W.
Gillett and P.C. Manins (2000), Atmospheric concentrations and deposition of
oxidised sulfur and nitrogen species at Petaling Jaya, Malaysia, 1993-1998,
Tellus B 52, 60-73.
Ayers, G. P., Leong Chow Peng, R.W. Gillett and Lim Sze Fook (2002),
Rainwater composition and acidity at five sites in Malaysia, in 1996, Water,
Air and Soil Pollution 133, 15-30.
Balasubramanian, R., Victor, T. and Begum R. (1999) Impact of biomass
burning on rainwater acidity and composition in Singapore, J. Geophys.Res.
104, 26,881-26,890.
Balasubramanian, R., Victor, T. and Chun, N. (2001) Chemical and Statistical
Analysis of Precipitation in Singapore, Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 130,
451-456.
Engardt, M. and Leong, C. P. (2001) Regional modelling of anthropogenic
sulphur in Southeast Asia. Atmos. Environ. 35, 5935-5947.
Ferm, M. and Rodhe, H. (1997). Measurements of air concentrations of SO2,
NO2 and NH3 at rural and remote sites in Asia. J. Atmos. Chem. 27, 17 – 29.
Galbally, I. (ed.) (1989) The International Global Atmospheric Chemistry
(IGAC) Programme, ISBN 0 643 05062 0.
Gillett R.W., Ayers G.P., Mhwe T., Selleck P.W. and Harjanto H. (2000),
Concentrations of nitrogen and sulfur species in gas and rainwater from sev-
eral sites in Indonesia, Water, Air and Soil Pollution 120, 205-215.
Granat, L., Suksomsankh, K., Simachaya, S., Tabucanon, M., Rodhe, H.
(1996) Regional background acidity and chemical composition of precipita-
tion in Thailand. Atmospheri. Environ. 30, Nos 10/11, 1589-1596.
Granat, L., Das, S.N., Tharkur, R.S. and Rodhe, H. (2001). Atmospheric dep-
osition in a rural area in India - net and potential acidity. Water, Air, and Soil
Pollution 130, 469-474
Norman, M., Das, S.N., Pillai, A.G., Granat, L. and Rodhe, H. (2001)
Influence of air mass trajectories on the chemical composition of precipitation
in India. Atmos. Environ. 35, 4223-4235
Pillai, A.G., Naik, M.S., Momin, G.A., Rao, P.S.P., Safai, P.D., Ali, K., Rodhe,
H. and Granat, L. (2001). Studies of wet deposition and dustfall at Pune,
India, Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 130, 475-480
Rodhe, H. and Herrera, R. (1988) Acidification in tropical countries. SCOPE
Report No. 36, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, 405 pp.
Zhong, Z., Victor, T. and Balasubramanian, R. (2001) Measurement of Major
Organic Acids in Rainwater in Southeast Asia During Burning and Non-burn-
ing Periods, Water, Air, and Soil Pollution 130, 457 - 462.
Hu, G.-P. and Balasubramanian, R. (2003) Wet Deposition of Trace Metals in
Singapore. Water, Air, and Soil Pollution, 2003 (January).
IGACtivities  13
IGACtivities  14
SCIAMACHY on ENVISAT:
Some Highlights from the
First Year in Orbit
Contributed by H. Bovensmann, S. Noëel, A. Richter, A.
Rozanov, M. von König, C. V. Savigny, J. P. Burrows
Institute of Environmental Physics and Remote Sensing
University of Bremen FB1, P.O. Box 330 440, D-28334 
Bremen, Germany e-mail:
heinrich.bovensmann@iup.physik.uni-bremen.de 
URL: http://www.iup.physik.uni-bremen.de/sciamachy
Introduction
SCIAMACHY is a Greek word, which means chasing or
hunting shadows, in the sense  of doing an impossible task.
In spite of this and in addition, SCIAMACHY (SCanning
Imaging Absorption spectroMeter for Atmospheric
CHartographY) is also an innovative and novel Earth
observation experiment successfully making measure-
ments from the European environmental research satellite
ENVISAT operated by ESA. SCIAMACHY is a national
contribution to ENVISAT, being funded by the space agen-
cies of Germany, The Netherlands and Belgium. The main
objective of ENVISAT is the investigation and monitoring
of the Earth’s environment from the surface to the mesos-
phere. Using a variety of instruments, it will determine the
state and provide a  health check of the Earth-Atmosphere
System. ENVISAT was launched successfully by ESA in
March 2002, comprises ESA and European experiments
and has an intended minimum operational lifetime of  five
years. It has ten instruments on board, which make a vari-
ety of different observations of our environment.
ENVISAT flies in a sun synchronous polar orbit in 800 km
height, having an equator crossing time of 10.00 am and an
equivalent ground speed of ~7 km-1. Within the ENVISAT
atmospheric chemistry mission (SCIAMACHY, GOMOS,
MIPAS),  SCIAMACHY aims to deliver important and rel-
evant data about the changing composition of the atmos-
phere from the troposphere up to the mesosphere from the
local to the global scale. Its unique role aboard ENVISAT
is to provide measurements, which yield unambiguously
the composition of trace constituents within the tropo-
sphere down to the boundary layer under cloud free condi-
tions. In addition, the combination of SCIAMACHY obser-
vations with those of MERIS, AATSR and MIPAS pro-
vides some unique synergistic scientific opportunities for
earth observation.
SCIAMACHY’s Mission
SCIAMACHY was conceived end of the 1980’s to
improve our knowledge and understanding of a variety of
issues of importance for the chemistry and physics of the
Earth's atmosphere (troposphere, stratosphere and mesos-
phere) and potential changes resulting from either increas-
ing anthropogenic activity or the variability of natural phe-
nomena (Burrows et al., 1988). Topics of relevance for
SCIAMACHY are:
• tropospheric pollution arising from industrial activity
and biomass burning 
• troposphere - stratosphere exchange processes
• stratospheric ozone chemistry focusing on the 
development of the global ozone layer 
• mesospheric chemistry and dynamics
• solar variability and special events such as 
volcanic eruptions, and related regional and globa
phenomena.
The SCIAMACHY instrument is a spectrometer designed
to measure sunlight transmitted, reflected and scattered by
the Earth's atmosphere or surface in the ultraviolet, visible
and near infrared wavelength region (214 nm - 2380 nm) at
a moderate, channel dependent, spectral resolution (0.2 nm
- 1.5 nm) (Bovensmann et al., 1999). For the majority of an
orbit, SCIAMACHY measures alternately the Earthshine
radiance in limb or nadir viewing geometry. Close to the
terminator in the northern and southern hemispheres, the
solar or lunar light transmitted through the atmosphere are
observed in occultation. In addition to a complete calibra-
tion procedure, the extra-terrestrial solar irradiance and
lunar radiance are determined from observations of the sun
and the moon above the atmosphere. The absorption,
reflection and scattering behaviour of the atmosphere and
the Earth's surface is inferred from a comparison of
Earthshine radiance and solar irradiance. Appropriate
mathematical inversion of the ratio of Earthshine radiance
and solar irradiance yields information about the amounts
and distribution of important atmospheric constituents (see
Figure 1) and the spectral reflectance (or albedo) of the
Earth's surface. GOME, a small scale version of SCIA-
MACHY flying on ERS-2 since 1995, also observes back
scattered solar radiation but only in nadir mode and
restricted to the wavelength range of 240 nm to 790 nm
(Burrows et al., 1999). GOME has made 7 years of suc-
cessful measurements and has been a proof of concept mis-
sion for SCIAMACHY. The extended spectral range of
SCIAMACHY enables many more constituents to be
measured than with GOME. 
A special feature of SCIAMACHY is its ability to com-
bine near simultaneous limb and nadir measurements. The
inversion of this combination of limb and nadir measure-
ments yields the tropospheric column amounts of the gases
O3, CO, SO2, NO2, BrO, CH4, H2O, N2O, H2CO and
aerosol parameters.
SCIAMACHY was constructed, tested and delivered to
ESA in the period from 1994 to 2000. In May of 2001
ENVISAT was successfully transported to Kourou and
launched into a polar sun-synchronous orbit in March
2002. After a few weeks of out-gassing in-orbit, SCIA-
MACHY was switched on successfully. A complex proce-
dure to open the different covers protecting the light path,
to check out the instrument in orbit and to tune it to the
optimum in-flight performance was initiated. Solar and
atmospheric spectra were already taken
from the beginning of April 2002. During
this so-called commissioning phase the
instruments functional and optical per-
formance was verified and instrument cal-
ibration activities were started, with the
result that since end of July 2002 SCIA-
MACHY is fully functional. It achieves
the performance expected from on-ground
tests with only one exception, which
results from ice formation on two of the
SWIR detectors. This issue required some
changes in operational planning to min-
imise its impact. SCIAMACHY has been
performing its regular measurement pro-
gram since the beginning of August 2002
just in time to be ready for validation. Two
intensive validation campaigns organised
by ESA and DLR were executed in late
summer/autumn 2002 and winter/spring 2003. Since
August 2002 the instrument is continuously and success-
fully performing its nominal measurement programme
(limb, nadir, occultation, calibration) and over 99.5 % of all
scientific measurements are working as expected.
SCIAMACHY Instrument and 
Observation Modes
The SCIAMACHY instrument is a passive remote sens-
ing moderate resolution imaging spectrometer. It compris-
es a mirror system, a telescope, a spectrometer, and thermal
and electronic sub systems. With exception of the scan mir-
rors and slit mechanism, all spectrometer parts
within SCIAMACHY are fixed. As a result of the
instrument design, spectra are recorded simulta-
neously from 214 nm to 1750 nm, and in two
smaller windows, 1940 nm - 2040 nm and 2265
nm – 2380 nm, in the short wave infrared. The
spectral and radiometric performance of the
SCIAMACHY spectrometer as well as more
details about the instrument are described else-
where (Bovensmann et al., 1999). The incoming
radiation enters the instrument via one of three
entrances: 
(i) the nadir port, which directs the radiation
from the Earth's scene by the elevation mirror
into a telescope (off axis parabolic mirror) and
thereby focuses the beam onto the entrance slit
of the spectrometer; 
(ii) the limb port which is used for both atmos-
pheric limb and solar/lunar occultation measure-
ments. In this case the radiation is reflected by the
azimuth mirror to the elevation mirror and then into the
telescope, 
(iii) the sub solar port, which directs solar radiation
via the elevation mirror into the telescope.
In addition the instrument has on board spectral line and
broad band light sources for in flight calibration, which are
observed via the elevation mirror. Two diffuser plates are
mounted on the back side of the elevation and azimuth mir-
rors to facilitate the solar observations.
Measurements of SCIAMACHY are performed in the
three different viewing geometries: nadir, limb, and
solar/lunar occultation. A typical orbit starts with a limb
measurement of the twilit atmosphere, followed by the
solar occultation measurement during sunrise over the
north pole and an optimised limb-nadir sequence: lunar
occultations being made where possible. All these different
Figure 1 - Altitude ranges of atmospheric constituents targeted by SCIA-
MACHY. Retrieval from the occultation measurements yield information
over a wider altitude range than the limb measurements, due to its higher
S/N.
Figure 2 - Left: Preliminary upper tropospheric and stratospheric Ozone vertical pro-
file (top) distribution and stratospheric column amount (bottom) derived from limb
backscatter measurements in the spectral range of the Chappuis band of ozone and inte-
grated column amount on April 25, 20032. Right: Preliminary upper stratospheric and
mesospheric Ozone distribution, on July 3, 2002 (Orbit 1779), derived  from limb
backscatter measurements in the spectral range of the Hartley band of ozone..
IGACtivities  15
IGACtivities  16
Figure 3 - Left: Preliminary global stratospheric NO2 distribution from limb backscatter measurements (top) on August 8, 2002 (orbit 2302) compared to noontime values of a
2D climatological-photochemical model (bottom). Right: Preliminary global stratospheric BrO distribution from limb backscatter measurements (top) on August 8, 2002 (orbit
2302) compared to 2D climatological model (bottom).
IGACtivities  17
Figure 4 - Comparison of tropospheric excess column NO2 as seen by GOME-1 on ERS-2 (spatial resolution 40 x 320 km2)
and SCIAMACHY on ENVISAT (30 x 60 km2).
GOME NO2 excess: August 2002
SCIAMCHY NO2 excess: August 2002
Longitude
Longitude
IGACtivities  18
measurements, with the exception of lunar occultation, are
made every orbit, i.e. 14 orbits per day.  
To calibrate the Earthshine spectra, to guarantee the opti-
cal performance and to detect long term changes in the
instrument throughput arising from degradation, calibra-
tion measurements are regularly performed. These include
solar irradiance measurements, spectral calibration, rela-
tive radiometric calibration, and dark current measure-
ments. The degradation of the limb and nadir mirrors is
monitored by using the on board lamps, the lunar and solar
observations via the mirrors and the diffuser plates. This
enables the throughput of the spectrometer optics to be
monitored throughout the mission lifetime. The data pro-
cessing is designed to incorporate these calibration meas-
urements and provide a dynamic update of the spectral and
radiometric calibration. 
First Results from Limb
Measurements
In April 2002 the limb light path was opened by remov-
ing the relevant cover and first solar and limb spectra were
recorded. In limb mode the spectrometer slit is projected
parallel to the horizon in-flight direction tangentially to the
Earth's atmosphere. In this measurement mode the limb
mirror scans the atmosphere in horizontal (azimuth) direc-
tion whereas a step scan of the nadir mirror results in the
vertical (elevation) scan direction from the ground to
approx. 150 km. Each horizontal scan of the atmosphere in
limb covers 960 km in the horizontal (across track direc-
tion). The vertical resolution is approximately 3 km. The
ability of the SCIAMACHY instrument to observe the
same atmospheric volume first in limb and thereafter in
nadir viewing geometries within about 7 min is one of the
novel features. For the dedicated limb-nadir scanning strat-
egy and a total swath width of 960 km global coverage is
achieved after 6 days at the equator. Figure 2 (left) shows
an example of one of the first analysis of global upper tro-
pospheric and stratospheric Ozone retrieved from the spec-
tral signature of  O3 in the Chappius band around 600 nm
[4]. Clearly visible is the tropopause and its typical behav-
iour as function of latitude.
The SCIAMACHY limb measurements also enable
mesospheric ozone to be determined directly.  Figure 2
shows a preliminary analysis of global upper stratospheric
to mesospheric O3 derived from the UV absorption of O3
in the Hartley bands using wavelengths between 240 and
300 nm. A first comparison with the Canadian Middle
Atmosphere Model (CMAM) data corresponding to an
August mean reveals that the overall structure is well rep-
resented. Further work is required to validate the measure-
ments.
In addition to O3, SCIAMACHY measurements yield
profiles of other important trace gases in the upper tropo-
sphere and stratosphere such as NO2 (Eichmann et al.,
2002) and BrO (see Figure 3). Especially the latter will
allow now a more detailed characterisation of the global
stratospheric Bromine budget.
As expected, the stratospheric profile of OClO has
observed during periods of chlorine activation in the polar
vortex in late winter and spring. The presence of both noc-
tilucent clouds in the mesosphere (Von Savigny et al.,
2002) and  Polar Stratospheric Clouds are readily observed
to be detectable by  SCIAMACHY. Additional stratospher-
ic profiles of O3 and NO2 were also derived from the occul-
tation measurements.
First Results from Nadir 
Measurements
In June 2002 the nadir cover was opened as part of the
last phase of switch on activity. In nadir mode up welling
radiation from the atmospheric volume beneath the space-
craft is observed. The nadir mirror scans across the satellite
track. Each full scan covers an area on ground of approxi-
mately 30 km along track by 960 km across track. By read-
ing the data out at an appropriate rate a typical spatial res-
olution of 30 km by 60 km for the spectral data is achieved. 
Figure 4 shows the tropospheric NO2 amounts, derived
from GOME and SCIAMACHY using the tropospheric
excess or residual method averaged for August, 2002.
(Richter and Burrows, 2002) The improvement of the hor-
izontal resolution from 40 km x 320 km (GOME) to 30 km
x 60 km (SCIAMACHY) is obvious. This enables unam-
biguously the accurate detection of the enhanced NO2 val-
ues originating from industrialised areas (Birmingham,
Manchester, Po valley etc.) and large cities (Vienna, Roma
etc.) which are in comparison smoothed out or smeared
over the larger ground scene in the GOME observations. It
should also noted that the maximum column amounts in
the SCIAMACHY measurements are roughly a factor of
two higher than in the GOME data, which demonstrates the
large and expected inhomogeneity of the NO2 plumes. The
good spatial resolution and the high data quality of tropos-
pheric NO2 measurements will yield a much improved
quantification of global emissions of NO2.
In addition to the first results on NO2, it has already been
demonstrated that the column amounts of O3, SO2, BrO,
OClO, CH4, CO2 and CO (see  Buchwitz et al., 2002;
Brastedt et al., 2002) can be retrieved. The retrieval of the
other trace gases is progressing. Furthermore, first attempts
to derive cloud information (cloud top height, cloud optical
thickness, effective droplet radius etc.) and aerosol param-
eters from nadir backscatter measurements are showing
promising results
. Data Products
Operational data products are defined for SCIAMACHY
and ENVISAT purposes as being a regularly generated,
quality controlled and archived data products. For SCIA-
MACHY it is planned that limb and nadir measurements
will be processed operationally within the ENVISAT
IGACtivities  19
ground segment. SCIAMACHY operational data products
are divided into two categories: the fast delivery (FD)
products and the off-line (OL) products. FD products are to
be generated directly after downlink at the ESA ground sta-
tions in near-real time, a few hours after the spectrum is
acquired. OL products comprise a set of consolidated and
fully calibrated products. The latter are to be processed off-
line at the German Processing and Archiving Center (D-
PAC) as part of the ENVISAT ground segment. Scientific
products for process studies from lunar and solar occulta-
tion measurements as well as special scientific products
from limb and nadir measurements are also planned to be
generated for the atmospheric research and related com-
munities by specific scientific groups. Currently calibra-
tion and algorithm improvements coupled with validation
and an iterative systematic data analysis is in progress.
Finally, to ensure a high data quality over the mission life-
time instrument performance is monitored continuously
and an intensive validation campaign and activity are cur-
rently on-going. 
Summary and Outlook
It has shown in the first year that global data sets of pro-
files and/or total column measurements of O3, NO2, BrO,
OClO, SO2, CO, CO2 and CH4 can be derived from SCIA-
MACHY solar backscatter measurements. On the remain-
ing gases, aerosol and cloud parameters first progress is
made. Currently algorithm improvements, validation and
an iterative systematic data analysis is ongoing. SCIA-
MACHY has now the potential to be a unique milestone for
research into the Earth-Atmosphere system. It provides a
wealth of information both in its own right and in combi-
nation with the synergistic measurements from other
instruments aboard ENVISAT about atmospheric composi-
tion of relevance and significance for many of the IGAC
research objectives. It is intended to measure for at least
five years but the mission will hopefully continue its meas-
urements for a significantly longer period. The fact that
there is already a 9 month overlap with GOME-1 data pro-
vides the opportunity to generate a consistent set of data
products  from GOME and SCIAMACHY nadir measure-
ments having the potential to be extended over more than a
decade. Provided SCIAMACHY is successful in meeting
its objectives there is little doubt that the continuity of
these measurements, incorporating technical improve-
ments and developments, are needed. This could be made
within the follow on to the ESA and EUMETSAT Metop
series of platforms in the 2015.   
It is also now well accepted that measurements of tropos-
pheric constituents with higher spatial and temporal reso-
lution are and will be needed for atmospheric and climate
research as well as  for operational meteorological applica-
tions in both traditional and new (e.g. numerical environ-
mental prediction) areas (Lelieveld, 2003). A unique
opportunity to achieve this are synoptic measurements
from geostationary orbit (Lelieveld, 2003; Bovensmann et
al., 2002). The Geostationary SCanning Imaging
Absorption spectrometer (GeoSCIA) (Bovensmann et al,
2002), an evolutionary version of SCIAMACHY, proposed
to ESA as a demonstration mission for post-MSG atmos-
pheric instrumentation, aims to meet the above objective. 
Acknowledgements
There are too many scientists and engineers, who have
contributed to the success of SCIAMACHY, thus far to
name individually. The industrial development of SCIA-
MACHY was managed by a joint agency team formed
between the German Space Agency DLR (then DARA)
and the Dutch space agency NIVR. The University of
Bremen team has performed the role of Principal
Investigator Institution for SCIAMACHY. The mission has
been scientifically supported by scientists from BIRA-
IASB, DLR, KNMI, Max Planck Institute for Chemistry
Mainz, NASA, RAL, SAO, SRON, University of
Heidelberg, and University of Bremen. The work at the
University of Bremen was partly funded by the BMBF
(FKZ 07 UFE 12/8), DLR (FKZ 50 EE 0027) and the Land
Bremen. 
References
Bovensmann, H., J. P. Burrows, M. Buchwitz, J. Frerick, S. Noël, V. V. Rozanov, K.
V. Chance, A. P. H. Goede, SCIAMACHY- Mission Objectives and Measurement
Modes, J. Atmos. Sci., 56, 127-149, 1999
Bovensmann, H., M. Buchwitz, S. Noël, K. U. Eichmann, V. Rozanov, J.P. Burrows,
J. M. Flaud, G. Bergametti, J. Orphal, P. S. Monks, G. K. Corlett, A.P. Goede, T. von
Clarmann, F. Friedl-Valon, T. Steck, H. Fischer, Sensing of Air Quality from
Geostationary Orbit, Proc. of the 2002 EUMETSAT Meteorological Satellite
Conference, Dublin, 2.-6.9.2002, EUMETSAT, Darmstadt, Germany, ISBN 92-
9119-049, p. 89 –96, 2002
Bramstedt, K., M. Buchwitz, U. Blum, T. Blumenstock, C. Frankenberg, P. von der
Gathen, R. Koelemeijer, M. de Maziere, A. Richter, C. von Savigny, H. Schrijver, A.
Schulz, W. Steinbrecht, "Comparison of scientific SCIAMACHY products with
ground-based measurements", ENVISAT Validation Workshop, ESA/ESRIN,
Frascati, Italy, 9-13 December 2002, to be published by ESA Publications Division
as Special Publication SP-531 (on CD-ROM), 2002.
Buchwitz, M., S. Noël, K. Bramstedt, V. V. Rozanov, H. Bovensmann, S. Tsvetkova,
and J. P. Burrows, Retrieval of trace gas vertical columns from
SCIAMACHY/ENVISAT near-infrared nadir spectra: First preliminary results, pre-
sented at COSPAR 2002, submitted to Advances in Space Research, 2002
Burrows et al., SCIAMACHY - A European proposal for atmospheric remote sens-
ing from the ESA Polar Platform, published by Max-Planck-Institut für Chemie,
55122 Mainz, Germany, 1988
Burrows, J.P., M. Weber, M. Buchwitz, V. V. Rozanov, A. Ladstätter-Weißenmayer,
A. Richter, R. De Beek, R. Hoogen, K. Bramstedt and K.U. Eichmann, (1999) The
Global ozone monitoring experiment (GOME): Mission concept and first scientific
results, J.  Atmos. Sci., 56, 151-175 
K.-U. Eichmann, J. W. Kaiser, C. von Savigny, A. Rozanov, V. V. Rozanov, H.
Bovensmann, M. von König, J. P. Burrows, "SCIAMACHY limb measurements in
the UV/VIS spectral region: First results", submitted to Adv. Space Res., 2002.
Lelieveld, J., Geostationary Satellite Observations for Monitoring Atmospheric
Composition and Chemistry Applications, EUMETSAT, http://www.eumetsat.de ,
January 2003
Richter, A. and J.P. Burrows, Retrieval of Tropospheric NO2 from GOME
Measurements, Adv. Space Res., 29(11) ,1673-1683, 2002 
von Savigny, C., A. A. Kokhanovsky, H. Bovensmann, K.-U. Eichmann, J. Kaiser,
S. Noel, A. V. Rozanov, V. V. Rozanov, J. Skupin, J. P. Burrows, 2002: NLC detec-
tion and particle size determination: first results from SCIAMACHY on ENVISAT,
Adv. Space Res., submitted.
Links:
ENVISAT and operational data products:  http://envisat.esa.int
SCIAMACHY "Link Center":  http://www.sciamachy.de
IGACtivities  20
The Regional Integrated
Project Mediterranean
Contributed by Jos Lelieveld (lelieveld@mpch-mainz-
mpg.de), Max Planck Institute for Chemistry, P.O. Box
3060, D-55020 Mainz, Germany, and Nikos Mihalopoulos
(mihalo@chemistry.uoc.gr), Environmental Chemical
Processes Laboratory, University of Crete, P.O. Box 1470,
71409 Heraklion, Greece.
Introduction
In the Mediterranean Intensive Oxidant Study (MINOS)
an international team of scientists from eight countries has
investigated the Mediterranean atmosphere during six
weeks in July-August 2001. Measurements of the chemical
composition and the radiation budget of the Mediterranean
troposphere were performed both from a ground-station
and with the use of aircraft. The objective was to study
long-distance transport of natural and anthropogenic trace
gases and aerosols and their effects on air quality and cli-
mate. The results indicate that anthropogenic emissions
cause a large-scale air quality decrease and may contribute
to a reduction of precipitation. 
The operational base of MINOS was Crete, where a mon-
itoring station was equipped to measure a large number of
gaseous and particulate air constituents as well as solar
radiation scattering and absorption. Measurement details
are provided through the following website, which
includes a link to the MINOS special issue of the online
journal 
Atmospheric 
Chemistry 
and 
Physics:
http://www.mpch-mainz.mpg.de/~reus/minos/. The meas-
urement campaign was hosted by the University of Crete in
Heraklion. Two aircraft, a twinjet Falcon and a King Air,
performed more than 20 research flights to sample the air
over the Mediterranean Sea. 
Air pollution “crossroads”
The measurements give evidence of a remarkably high
level of air pollution from the surface to the top of the tro-
posphere up to15 km altitude. The strongest anthropogenic
influence was observed in the lower 4 km, originating from
both West and East Europe transported by the northerly
flow (Lelieveld et al., 2002; Traub et al., 2003). The
sources are industrial activity, traffic, forest fires, agricul-
tural and domestic burning (Gros et al., 2003; Salisbury et
al., 2003; Xu et al., 2003). Especially over the eastern
Mediterranean Sea biomass burning effluents from the
region north of the Black Sea were abundant during the
campaign 
(Holzinger
et 
al., 
2003). 
Since 
the
Mediterranean region has only few clouds in summer, the
solar radiation levels are high so that noxious reaction
Figure 1- Direct
radiative forcing by
greenhouse gases
(GHG) and aerosols
over the summertime
Mediterranean Sea,
both for the top of the
atmosphere (TOA) and
at the surface. The
GHG effects are based
on model results, that
of the aerosols on
measurements during
MINOS.
IGACtivities  21
products such as ozone and peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN) are
formed in photochemical smog. The oxidation efficiency
of these air masses is high, with diurnal average hydroxyl
concentrations of about 4.5x106 radicals/cm3 and daytime
maximum levels of about 1.5-2x107
radicals/cm3
(Berresheim et al., 2003).
At higher altitudes, above 4 km, strong contributions
from long-distance pollution transport from North America
and Asia were found, for example, for carbon monoxide
(CO) (Lawrence et al., 2002). It is quite remarkable that
about half of the mid-tropospheric CO over the
Mediterranean originates from Asia and 25-30% from
North America. These transports fol-
low the prevailing westerly winds that
are typical for the extra-tropics. These
layers are moreover substantially
affected by ozone that is mixed down
from the stratosphere (Roelofs et al.,
2003). It appears that especially the
middle troposphere in summer is
influenced by stratosphere-tropo-
sphere exchange, leading to a stratos-
pheric contribution to column O3 in
the troposphere up to 25-30%. In addi-
tion, transport of anthropogenic O3
and its precursor gases from the USA
exerts a significant influence in the
free troposphere (Heland et al., 2003).
In the upper troposphere, above 8 km
altitude, another distinct layer can be
distinguished, especially over the east-
ern Mediterranean, associated with
high levels of reactive species such as
formaldehyde (Kormann et al., 2003).
This is caused by anthropogenic emis-
sions transported from South Asia,
following convective lifting into the
upper troposphere by thunderstorms in
the Indian monsoon (Traub et al.,
2003). Subsequently these air parcels
follow the easterly tropical jet and turn
north over the eastern Mediterranean
in a large upper level anticyclone. The
chemical “fingerprint” of biomass
burning (e.g. enhanced CH3CN,
CH3Cl, C2H2), in particular by biofu-
el use in India as also observed during
the Indian Ocean Experiment, is evi-
dent (Scheeren et al., 2003). From the
upper troposphere over the eastern
Mediterranean these species can even
penetrate the lowermost stratosphere.
It appears that the Mediterranean
region is a preferred location for
cross-tropopause exchanges, partly
related to direct convective penetration
of the lower stratosphere over southern Europe (Fischer et
al., 2002; Traub et al., 2003).
Air quality and climate
Near the surface the air pollution has several undesirable
consequences. First, the European Union eight-hourly air
quality standard for ozone (53 nmol/mol) is exceeded
throughout the summer in the entire Mediterranean region.
High ozone concentrations are harmful for human health
and ecosystems, and they also cause agricultural crop loss.
Typical ozone mixing ratios in summer are 55-70
nmol/mol, and the diurnal variability is small (~10%)
Figure 2- Schematic representation of the system forcings and responses, and how
they are investigated in the 5 thematic components of ProMed. The dashed lines imply
mitigation-adaptation responses by society.
IGACtivities  22
(Kouvarakis et al., 2002; Nolle et al., 2002). Because the
Mediterranean background O3 levels are so high, it is dif-
ficult to control ozone in urban and industrial areas.
Second, the concentrations of aerosols are high as well,
affecting human health. The fine aerosol fraction (<1µm) is
mainly composed of sulfate (35-40%), organics (30-35%),
ammonium (10-15%) and black carbon (5-10%), mostly
from fossil fuel and biomass combustion (Lelieveld et al.,
2002; Sciare et al., 2003). The persistent northerly winds in
summer carry large pollution loads from Europe that can
deposit onto the Mediterranean Sea, which affects the
water 
quality 
and 
contributes 
to 
eutrophication
(Kouvarakis et al., 2001).The aerosols furthermore influ-
ence the Mediterranean atmospheric energy budget by
scattering and absorbing solar radiation (Figure 1). They
reduce solar radiation absorption by the sea by about 10%
and they alter the heating profile of the lower troposphere
(Markowicz et al., 2002). As a consequence, evaporation
and moisture transport, in particular to North Africa and the
Middle East, are suppressed. Furthermore, Rosenfeld
(2000; and by personal communication) studied satellite
observations, indicating important perturbations of the
cloud microstructure and convection by aerosols, probably
decreasing precipitation. These effects by aerosols are sub-
stantial today, even though sulfate from Europe has actual-
ly decreased in the past two decades through the abatement
of acidification. Therefore, it is likely that the climate
effects of the aerosols have been much larger in the past.
The radiative forcing by aerosols also influences the ener-
gy budget of the Mediterranean Sea, of which the conse-
quences are yet poorly understood. The Mediterranean Sea
is a small-scale ocean, which has the same phenomenology
of large oceans, including a thermohaline circulation,
showing signs of large perturbations in the 1990s
(Lascaratos et al., 1999). It is quite conceivable that the
changing energy budget and anomalous winds have influ-
enced the ocean circulation (Tragou and Lascaratos, 2003).
It is conceivable that changes in evaporation, for example,
owing to changes in surface heating resulting from aerosol
radiative forcing, substantially influence
the Mediterranean overturning (Myers and
Haines, 2002). The aerosols may thus
affect several components of the regional
atmosphere-ocean system and the water
cycle. 
Project Mediterranean:
ProMed
The atmospheric forcings to the ocean,
climate and water cycle do not act in iso-
lation. Firstly, the regional effects are
linked to large-scale phenomena through
teleconnections, for example, with the
Indian monsoon and the North Atlantic
Oscillation. It is not known, however, how
these system components are linked and
interact under global change. Climate change scenarios
nevertheless 
consistently 
predict 
drying 
of 
the
Mediterranean region, already being under water stress.
Secondly, water availability is also determined by many
other factors, in particular agriculture. Even if the total
amount of precipitation would remain constant, soil crust
formation in dry years and heavy short-duration rainfall in
other years can have dramatic effects, as indicated by
anomalous weather events in the past decade (Bolle, 2003). 
Thus a wide range of environmental processes and socie-
tal conditions are in many ways linked. The goal of
ProMed is to obtain a better understanding of these link-
ages, and to improve the skill to predict how the system
may be affected under climate change and human activi-
ties. The project builds upon previous projects that have
focused on system components. ProMed must bring
together the necessary information to help mitigate prob-
lems, or to adapt to them. Already today several
Mediterranean countries need to make difficult choices
how to use the limited water resources. Others have prob-
lems with the compliance to air pollution and climate
change policies, which sometimes include conflicting
directives. 
Table 1 summarizes several of the main arguments why
an integrated project is needed with a focus on the
Mediterranean region. The project, which is presently
being established, has four thematic components that pri-
marily address biogeophysical and -chemical processes
and feedback mechanisms:
1. Land surface processes;
2. Atmospheric processes and air quality;
3. Ocean-atmosphere interactions;
4. Climate and water cycle;
An additional component aims at:
5. Integration, mitigation and adaptation.
Table 1 - Why an integrated project for the Mediterranean region?
• Small-scale coupled ocean-atmosphere system
• Water resources are vulnerable and under stress
• Climate change scenarios indicate further drying
• Strong influences by long-range air pollution transport
• Large perturbations of the atmospheric energy budget
• Recent changes in weather and ocean circulation
• Environmental changes have large-scale effects
• Collaborations with North-Africa and Middle-East needed
IGACtivities  23
The latter must support the development of societal
strategies and policies. Figure 2 indicates how these five
thematic components are linked to investigate the relation-
ships between human activities, system forcings and
responses. The project furthermore includes “integrating”
experiments to bring together data from anchor stations,
satellites, field measurement campaigns and modeling.
In addition to the environmental and societal arguments,
an important scientific merit of ProMed is that the
Mediterranean Basin is an excellent “natural laboratory” to
investigate feedback mechanisms between the atmosphere
and ocean that control the hydrological cycle and climate,
in particular because the Mediterranean Sea is an “integra-
tor” of natural and anthropogenic changes over long time
periods. The Mediterranean coupled ocean-atmosphere
system moreover responds relatively rapidly to atmospher-
ic forcings, so that research in this area provides clues on
how the global climate system may respond to a changing
environment.
Considering the different levels of knowledge and skills
in the region, capacity building will be prerequisite, to train
young scientists, develop a quality assurance and control
program associated with the regional network of anchor
stations, and to help answer questions of decision makers
and stakeholders. The project must moreover organize net-
works that further the communication between the disci-
plines and activities, and provide links with (inter)national
meteorological and hydrological services and international
programs. Although it is a major challenge to establish
integrated projects such as ProMed, it is an inevitable next
step in environmental science to expand multi-disciplinary
collaborations, and bring the results of atmospheric and cli-
mate change research to the regional level at which the
questions are asked by science and society. 
References
Berresheim, H, C. Plass-Dülmer, T. Elste, N. Mihalopoulos, and F. Rohrer, OH in
the coastal boundary layer of Crete during MINOS: Measurements and relation-
ship with ozone photolysis, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 3, 1183-1212, 2003.
Bolle, H.-J. (Ed.), Mediterranean climate: variability and trends, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, 2003.
Fischer, H., M. de Reus, M. Traub, J. Williams, J. Lelieveld, J. de Gouw, C.
Warneke, H. Schlager, A. Minikin, R. Scheele, and P. Siegmund, Deep convective
injection of boundary layer air into the lowermost stratosphere at midlatitudes,
Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 2, 2003-2019, 2002.
Gros, V., J. Williams, J.A. van Aardenne, G. Salisbury, R. Hofmann, M. Lawrence,
R. Von Kuhlmann, J. Lelieveld, M. Krol, H. Berresheim, J.M. Lobert and E. Atlas,
Origin of anthropogenic hydrocarbons and halocarbons measured in the summer-
time European outflow (on Crete in 2001), Atmos. Chem. Phys. (submitted), 2003.
Heland, J., H. Ziereis, H. Schlager, M. de Reus, M. Traub, J. Lelieveld, G.-J.
Roelofs, P. Stock and A. Roiger, Aircraft measurements of nitrogen oxides, ozone
and carbon monoxide during MINOS 2001: distributions and correlation analyses,
Atmos. Chem. Phys. (submitted), 2003.
Holzinger, R., T. Klüpfel, G. Salisbury, J. Williams, M. De Reus, M. Traub, P.J.
Crutzen and J. Lelieveld, Acetonitrile over the eastern Mediterranean and its use
for assessing biomass burning contribution to the tropospheric burdens of CO,
acetone, methanol and PAN, Atmos. Chem. Phys. (submitted), 2003.
Kormann, R., H. Fischer, M. de Reus, M. Lawrence, Ch. Brühl, R. von Kuhlmann,
R. Holzinger, J. Williams, J. Lelieveld, C. Warneke, J. de Gouw, J. Heland, H.
Ziereis, and H. Schlager, Formaldehyde over the eastern Mediterranean during
MINOS: Comparison of airborne in-situ measurements with 3D-model results,
Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 3, 1303-1331, 2003.
Kouvarakis, G., N. Mihalopoulos, T. Tselepides, S. Stavrakakis, On the impor-
tance of atmospheric nitrogen inputs on the productivity of Eastern
Mediterranean, Glob.l Biogeochem. Cycles, 15, 805-818, 2001.
Kouvarakis, G., M. Vrekoussis, N. Mihalopoulos, K. Kourtidis, B. Rappenglueck,
E. Gerasopoulos, and C. Zerefos, Spatial and temporal variability of tropospheric
ozone (O3) in the boundary layer above the Aegean Sea (eastern Mediterranean),
J. Geophys. Res., 107, doi: 10.1029/2000JD000081, 2002.
Lascaratos, A., W. Roether, K. Nittis, and B. Klein, Recent changes in deep water
formation and spreading in the eastern Mediterranean Sea, Prog. Oceanogr., 44,
5-36, 1999.
Lawrence, M.G., P. J. Rasch, R. von Kuhlmann, J. Williams, H. Fischer, M. de
Reus, J. Lelieveld, P. J. Crutzen, M. Schultz, P. Stier, H. Huntrieser, J. Heland, A.
Stohl, C. Forster, H. Elbern, H. Jakobs, and R. R. Dickerson, Global chemical
weather forecasts for field campaign planning: predictions and observations of
large-scale features during MINOS, CONTRACE, and INDOEX, Atmos. Chem.
Phys., 3, 267–289, 2003.
Lelieveld, J. H. Berresheim, S. Borrmann, P.J. Crutzen, F.J. Dentener, H. Fischer,
J. Feichter, P.J. Flatau, J. Heland, R. Holzinger, R. Korrmann, M.G. Lawrence, Z.
Levin, K.M. Markowicz, N. Mihalopoulos, A. Minikin, V. Ramanathan, M. de
Reus, G.J. Roelofs, H.A. Scheeren, J. Sciare, H. Schlager, M. Schultz, P.
Siegmund, B. Steil, E.G. Stephanou, P. Stier, M. Traub, C. Warneke, J. Williams,
H. Ziereis, Global air pollution crossroads over the Mediterranean, Science, 298,
794-799, 2002.
Markowicz, K.M., P.J. Flatau, M.V. Ramana, P.J. Crutzen, and V. Ramanathan,
Absorbing Mediterranean aerosols lead to a large reduction in the solar radiation
at the surface, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29, doi:10.1029/2002GL015767, 2002.
Myers, P.G., and K. Haines, Stability of the Mediterranean’s thermohaline circu-
lation under modified surface evaporative fluxes, J. Geophys. Res., 107, doi:
10.1029/2000JC000550, 2002.
Nolle, M., R. Ellul, G. Heinrich, and H. Güsten, A long-term study of background
ozone concentrations in the central Mediterranean – diurnal and seasonal varia-
tions on the island of Gozo, Atmos. Environ., 36, 1391-1402, 2002.
Roelofs, G.-J., B. Scheeren, J. Heland, H. Ziereis, and J. Lelieveld, Distribution
and origin of ozone in the eastern Mediterranean free troposphere during MINOS
(August 2001), Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 3, 1247-1272, 2003.
Rosenfeld, D., Suppression of rain and snow by urban and industrial pollution,
Science, 287, 1793-1796, 2000.
Salisbury, G., J. Williams, R. Holzinger, V. Gros, N. Mihalopoulos, M. Vrekoussis,
R. Sarda-Estève, H. Berresheim, R. von Kuhlmann, M. Lawrence, and J.
Lelieveld, Ground-based PTR-MS measurements of reactive organic compounds
during the MINOS campaign in Crete, July-August 2001, Atmos. Chem. Phys.
Discuss., 3, 911-948, 2003.
Scheeren, H.A., J. Lelieveld, G.J. Roelofs, J. Williams, H. Fischer, M. de Reus,
J.A. de Gouw, C. Warneke, R. Holzinger, H. Schlager, T. Klüpfel, M. Bolder, C.
van der Veen, and M. Lawrence, The impact of monsoon outflow from India and
Southeast Asia in the upper troposphere over the eastern Mediterranean, Atmos.
Chem. Phys. Discuss., submitted , 2003.
Sciare, J., H. Bardouki, C. Moulin, and N. Mihalopoulos, Aerosol sources and
their contribution to the chemical composition of aerosols in the Eastern
Mediterranean Sea during summertime, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 3, 291–302, 2003.
Tragou, E., and A. Lascaratos, Role of aerosols on the Mediterranean solar radia-
tion, J. Geophys. Res., 108, doi:10.1029/2001JC001258, 2003.
Traub, M., H. Fischer, M. de Reus, R. Kormann, J. Heland, H. Ziereis, H.
Schlager, R. Holzinger, J. Williams, C. Warneke, J. de Gouw, and J. Lelieveld,
Chemical characteristics assigned to trajectory clusters during the MINOS cam-
paign, Atmos. Chem. Phys. Discuss., 3, 107-134, 2003.
Xu, X., J. Williams, C. Plass-Dülmer, H. Berresheim, G. Salisbury, L. Lange and
J. Lelieveld, GC¥GC measurements of C7-C11 aromatic and n-alkane hydrocar-
bons on Crete, in air from eastern Europe during the MINOS campaign, Atmos.
Chem. Phys. (submitted), 2003.
IGACtivities  24
Comparison of Regional
Aerosol Chemical and
Optical Properties from the
European, Asian, and
North American Plumes
Contributed by Patricia Quinn (Patricia.K.Quinn@noaa.gov)
and Tim Bates (Tim.Bates@noaa.gov)  NOAA PMEL, 7600
Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA 98115 USA
Introduction
Global distributions of aerosol optical depth (AOD)
derived from satellite observations of backscattered radia-
tion indicate persistent seasonal aerosol plumes downwind
of many continental regions (Husar et al., 1997). In March
through May a plume extends from Asia eastward across
the North Pacific Ocean. During the winter monsoon peri-
od (December through April), a plume is located off the
southwest coast of India over the Indian Ocean. In the sum-
mer months of June through August an aerosol plume orig-
inates from the mid-Atlantic states of the United States and
extends across the North Atlantic Ocean. Likewise, in the
spring and summer months a plume is transported from
Europe to the North Atlantic Ocean. Satellite observations
reveal the seasonal regularity and relative magnitude of
regional plumes in terms of backscattered radiation but are
not able to provide information about aerosol chemical
composition, size distributions, optical properties, or mass
loading in the boundary layer. Such information can be
obtained from in situ measurements and is required to fully
understand the regional climate and health effects of the
haze. Recent field campaigns have characterized aerosol
properties in these plumes to better understand their
impacts on regional atmospheric chemistry and climate.
The first Aerosol Characterization Experiment (ACE 1)
purposefully steered clear of any continental plumes in
order to characterize the “background” aerosol upon which
anthropogenic perturbations could be imposed. Following
ACE 1, ACE 2 focused on the European plume, INDOEX
(Indian Ocean Experiment) on the plume emanating from
the Indian subcontinent, ACE Asia on the Asian plume, and
TARFOX (Tropospheric Aerosol Radiative Forcing
Observational Experiment) and NEAQS (New England Air
Quality Study) on the eastern U.S. plume. Table 1 lists the
details of these experiments.     
Results from these experiments have been reported or
soon will be reported in a variety of peer-reviewed jour-
nals. We will not summarize already-reported results here
but rather will use (almost exclusively) the data set collect-
ed by NOAA PMEL to compare regional aerosol chemical
and optical properties. Our approach in these experiments
has been twofold. First, sampling has been done with stan-
dardized protocols so that sampling biases are minimized
and data from the different regions are directly comparable.
Second, we have collected over-determined data sets so
that a measured property such as aerosol mass or light
extinction can be compared to mass or extinction calculat-
ed from an independent set of measurements. Hence, we
can test for internal consistency in our data sets, determine
and quantify sources of uncertainty in the measurement
and model methods, and objectively assess how well we
understand the regional aerosol. Our goal in this short arti-
cle is to point out a few of the intriguing findings from
these regional experiments; and, based on closure studies
using the over-determined data sets, some of the successes
and some of the areas where improvements are needed in
measurement and modeling capabilities.
Methodology
The regional comparisons shown in Figures 1 and 2 and
discussed throughout the text are based on data collected
during ACE 1, ACE 2, INDOEX, ACE Asia, and NEAQS
onboard a variety of ships using identical inlets, sampling
humidities, aerosol samplers, and analysis methods (Quinn
et al., 2002; Quinn and Bates, 2003). Even though different
sampling protocols were used in TARFOX (Hegg et al.,
1997; Novakov et al., 1997), we include it in these com-
parisons since it took place in the vicinity of NEAQS and
contributes to the eastern U.S. plume data set. Since TAR-
FOX was an aircraft study we include only data collected
at altitudes less than or equal to 300 m.  
The samples collected during each of these experiments
were categorized according to air mass back trajectories
(Draxler, 1992). “Marine” refers to sampled air masses that
had not been in contact with land for 5 or more days prior
to reaching the ship. “Continental”, “Polluted”, and
“Polluted with Dust” refer to sampled air masses that had
recent (< 3 days) contact with continental regions with
known sources of pollution and/or dust aerosol.
The degree of variability presented here reflects only that
which was measured during these short-lived campaigns.
However, results from the 1999 INDOEX field campaign
are expected to be representative of other years based on
satellite data for 1996 to 2000 (Ramanathan et al., 2001a).
Seasonally (January to March) and spatially (0∞to 30∞N)
averaged AOD for these 5 years varied by less than 10% of
the 1999 values. Similarly, the summer mean values of
AOD measured at Greenbelt, MD varied by less than 15%
between 1993 and 1996 indicating that the 1996 TARFOX
values were representative of other years (Remer et al.,
1999). In addition, the regional mean AOD measured dur-
ing NEAQS was within 18% of regional mean summer val-
ues derived from 5 Aeronet sites along the mid-Atlantic
coast in 1993 and 1996 (Remer et al., 1999). Dust storms
from northern China and Mongolia have increased notice-
IGACtivities  25
Figure 1 - Left panel:  Absolute submicron concentrations of aerosol mass, non-sea salt (nss) SO4= + NH4+, elemental carbon (EC),
and organic carbon (OC) for the different regions.  All are in mg m-3 except OC which is mg C m-3.  Horizontal lines denote the 25th,
50th, and 75th percentiles.  The solid square in the box denotes the mean. Right panel:  Average mass fractions of sub- and supermicron
dominant chemical components for the different regions.  Mass fractions are based on the gravimetrically-determined aerosol mass and
concentrations of the chemical species.  The mass fraction of H2O is that calculated to be associated with the ionic chemical species at
55% RH.  POM is estimated by multiplying the measured concentration of OC by a factor of 1.6 to 2.1 to account for associated H and O
[Turpin and Lim, 2001].
IGACtivities  26
ably in frequency and intensity during the past three years.
The dust storm sampled during ACE Asia was a major
event that extended across the Pacific, North America, and
the Atlantic (Huebert et al., 2003). Hence, the ACE Asia
time period may represent an upper bound in dust emis-
sions.
The distance of the measurements from the haze source
may also lead to variability in the compared data sets.
During NEAQS, measurements were made 20 to 100 km
downwind of the eastern shore of the U.S. During ACE
Asia measurements were made 100 to 400 km from the
upwind shore, during INDOEX 900 to 1400 km, and dur-
ing ACE 2 20 to 900 km. During NEAQS, ACE Asia, and
INDOEX, back trajectories indicated that the travel time
from the upwind shore to the measurement platform was
less than 2 days. During ACE 2 the travel time was less
than 3 days. The global estimate of the average lifetime of
sulfate aerosol is about 5 days (Langer and Rodhe, 1991).
During INDOEX, the aerosol lifetime was estimated to be
7 to 8 days due to a lack of wet deposition (Rasch et al.,
2001). Similarly dry conditions during NEAQS and ACE
Asia are expected to have led to equivalent lifetimes. Given
short transport times relative to the aerosol lifetime and
assuming minimal dilution of the air from mixing across
the marine boundary layer inversion, the concentration of
particulates in the plume should remain fairly constant 100
to 1400 km from shore. The uniformity of the aerosol con-
centration downwind of India is confirmed by satellite-
derived average AOD for a two week period during
INDOEX (Collins et al., 2001). Values ranged from 0.35 to
0.4 for the region extending westward from the coast of
India to 68˚E longitude. This region encompassed the area
of the ship measurements.
The height of the marine boundary layer was highly vari-
able within and between regions ranging from 0.25 to 3.5
km. Elevated particulate concentrations occurred irrespec-
tive of boundary layer height.
Intriguing Results
1.  Sea salt dominates sub- and supermicron aerosol
mass and light extinction in the remote marine atmos-
phere. Prior to a series of Pacific and Southern Ocean
cruises, including ACE 1, it was commonly believed that
sea salt was a supermicron or coarse mode aerosol chemi-
cal component. As a coarse mode component, it was
thought to persist in a particle size range that is not very
efficient in terms of light scattering and to have a relative-
ly short atmospheric lifetime. Shipboard measurements
during ACE 1 revealed that ~ 70% and 100% of the sub-
and supermicron aerosol mass, respectively, was sea salt
with associated water at 55% RH  (Figure 1) (Murphy et
al., 1998; Quinn et al., 1998).  As a result, sea salt con-
trolled aerosol extinction in the ACE Asia region. This
Southern Ocean result corroborated earlier findings for a
wide latitude range of the Pacific Ocean where sea salt was
found to dominate aerosol mass and light extinction in the
sub- and supermicron size ranges (Quinn and Coffman,
1999). In addition, in all marine air masses shown in Figure
1, sea salt makes a significant contribution to the submi-
cron aerosol mass and dominates the supermicron mass.
These results showed the necessity of including submicron
sea salt in coupled chemical transport/radiative transfer
models to provide an accurate estimate of the radiative
properties of the background marine aerosol.
An extension of the sea salt finding from ACE 1 was that
non-sea salt (nss) SO4= derived from oceanic dimethylsul-
fide (DMS) did not make a significant contribution to
aerosol mass or light extinction nor did it play a role in new
particle production in the marine boundary layer. DMS-
derived sulfur did, however, appear to contribute to the
growth of existing particles in the marine boundary layer
(Bates et al., 1998) and the nucleation of new particles in
the free troposphere in the outflow regions of clouds
(Clarke et al., 1998).  
2.  A large fraction of submicron aerosol mass is not
sulfate. Until the late 1990s, most model estimates as well
as the 1996 IPCC summary of direct aerosol radiative forc-
ing focused on a highly simplified sulfate-only aerosol. A
major advance derived from the aerosol experiments dis-
cussed here, was the identification and quantification of the
chemical components and their relative importance in the
different study regions. Figure 1 shows a regional compar-
ison of the absolute submicron concentrations of a few of
the chemical components and the sub- and supermicron
mass fractions of all dominant chemical components. At
the sampling RH of 55 ± 5%, average submicron mass
fractions of nss SO4+ plus associated NH4+ ranged from
16 to 54% over all study regions. Hence, a large and vari-
able fraction of the submicron aerosol was not sulfate.
This same result has been reported for the Pacific Ocean
and aerosol monitoring stations located across North
America (Quinn et al., 2000). Since aerosol optical and
cloud-nucleating properties are composition dependent, a
complete chemical characterization of aerosol mass is
required for estimating aerosol direct and indirect radiative
effects.
3. Absorbing aerosols have a complex impact on
radiative forcing at the surface. The largest submicron
concentrations and mass fractions of EC were observed in
air masses from the Indian subcontinent (Figure 1)
(Ramanathan et al., 2001a and b; Quinn et al., 2002). As a
result, the lowest SSA were observed in these same air
masses.  Solar radiation flux measurements from space and
the surface during INDOEX revealed that the haze-induced
reduction in surface solar radiation was three times larger
than the reflected solar radiation at the top of the atmos-
phere for clear skies (Satheesh and Ramanathan, 2000).
The large negative surface forcing resulted from the
absorption by EC in the Indian haze. The hydrological
IGACtivities  27
Figure 2  - Aerosol optical properties including light scattering coefficient, light absorption coefficient, aerosol optical depth, and
single scattering albedo for the different regions.  Percentile information is the same as in Figure 1. 
IGACtivities  28
impacts of this reduction in solar radiation to the surface
may be significant but currently are not well understood.
Conversely, solar heating of the boundary layer by EC can
lead to the evaporation of some clouds which may result in
more solar radiation reaching the surface and a subsequent
warming of the surface (Ackerman et al., 2000).  All
aspects of EC in the atmosphere including (but not limited
to) emission rate, size distribution, mixing state, cloud pro-
cessing, radiative effects, lifetime, and deposition rate need
more study to understand its complex impact on climate.
4.  The NE U.S. plume is comparable to the Indian and
Asian plumes in terms of aerosol mass, surface extinc-
tion, and aerosol optical depth. The Indian and Asian
plumes have been well documented by field campaigns and
satellite observations and the environmental implications
of the “Asian Brown Cloud” have been widely publicized
in a recently released UNEP report. A comparison of sev-
eral aerosol extensive properties from the regional experi-
ments listed in Table 1 shows that the eastern U.S. plume
can be as intense as those downwind of India and Asia
(Hegg et al., 1997; Quinn and Bates, 2003).  
Figure 1 shows that submicron aerosol mass and nss
SO4= aerosol concentrations observed in the eastern U.S.
plume during TARFOX and NEAQS were comparable to
or greater than those observed in the Indian and Asian
plumes during INDOEX and ACE Asia. The organic car-
bon (OC) concentrations observed during both TARFOX
and NEAQS were higher than those of INDOEX and ACE
Asia. In addition, for both surface-measured extinction and
aerosol optical depth, the eastern U.S. haze can be as
intense as the haze downwind of Asia and the Indian sub-
continent (Figure 2).  All of these factors, plus the likeli-
hood of intercontinental transport of the U.S. plume, indi-
cate the importance of determining its climate and health
impacts. 
5.  Asian dust is relatively non-absorbing. Prior to ACE
Asia, Asian dust was expected to be relatively absorbing
due to its mixing with soot aerosol during transport over
downwind industrial and urban regions (Huebert et al.,
2003). Figure 2 shows regional single scattering albedos
(SSA) based on absorption measurements from a particle
soot absorption photometer and an integrating nephelome-
ter. All values have been adjusted to ambient RH using
appropriate f(RH) values (e.g., Carrico et al., 2003). The
mean SSA observed during the ACE Asia Polluted with
Dust air masses was 0.94 ± 0.03. A similar mean value of
0.95 ± 0.02 was observed in relatively unpolluted dust lay-
ers in the free troposphere (Anderson et al., 2003). Based
on these data, soot associated with the dust does not appear
to have had a large effect on the SSA of the dust – pollu-
tion mixture.  
Successes and Areas That Need Improvement
For all of the intensive field experiments discussed here,
an over-riding goal has been the collection of data sets
needed for reducing uncertainties in estimates of aerosol
radiative forcing. Measured aerosol chemical, microphysi-
cal, and optical properties are like pieces of a puzzle that
must fit together to form an accurate picture of the radia-
tive forcing by the aerosol for a particular region. The col-
lection of an over-determined data set where important
aerosol parameters are measured and modeled by multiple
independent methods allows for a check on the internal
consistency of the data, the identification and quantifica-
tion of sources of uncertainty, and an assessment of how
well the puzzle pieces fit together. Without this approach
and the constraints that it offers, it is difficult to determine
how well the regional aerosol systems are understood.
As expected, the success of such closure experiments
depends on the complexity of the aerosol being considered.
Successful closure, defined as agreement within experi-
mental uncertainties, was reported for mass, extinction,
Table 1 - Recent field experiments focused on determining the impact of aerosol plumes on regional atmospheric chemistry and
climate.
Experiment 
Region 
Dates 
Reference
ACE 1 
Southern Ocean south of Australia 
Nov. – Dec. 1995 
Bates et al., 1998
TARFOX
U.S. eastern seaboard (37˚ to 39˚N)
July 1996
Russell et al., 1999
ACE 2
Sub-tropical northeast Atlantic
June – July 1997
Raes et al., 2000
INDOEX
Indian Ocean
Jan. – Mar. 1999
Ramanathan et al., 2001a
ACE Asia
Western Pacific Ocean 
Spring 2001
Huebert et al., 2003
NEAQS
U.S. eastern seaboard (33˚ to 45˚N)
July – Aug. 2002
Quinn and Bates, 2003
IGACtivities  29
and cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) concentration for
ACE 1 (Quinn and Coffman, 1998; Covert et al., 1998).
These successes lend confidence in our ability to measure
and model the relatively simple marine aerosol of ACE 1.
Successful mass and extinction closure also was reported
for ACE 2 (Putaud et al., 2000; Neusüb et al., 2000; Collins
et al., 2000; Schmid et al., 2000) although the increased
complexity of this aerosol relative to that measured in ACE
1 brought several measurement and sampling issues to
light. For example, the particle shapes and complex refrac-
tive index of Saharan dust were not well- accounted for by
satellite retrieval algorithms. Also, changes in particle size
and scattering due to changes in RH were not consistently
characterized by measurements and models (Russell and
Heintzenberg, 2000).  
Local (within one platform) mass and extinction closure
was achieved for INDOEX in both marine and polluted air
masses (Quinn et al., 2002). CCN closure was not
achieved, however, as modeled concentrations systemati-
cally overpredicted measured values (Cantrell et al. 2001)
presumably due to a poor parameterization of the uptake of
water by some or all of the organic material. The INDOEX
multi-platform Harmony exercise concluded that closure
between in situ measurements of chemical, microphysical,
and optical properties across platforms to better than about
20% will acquire significant improvements in techniques,
calibration procedures, and comparison efforts (Clarke et
al., 2002).
Perhaps the most difficult aerosol encountered to date in
terms of achieving mass and extinction closure is the
marine - pollution – dust aerosol mixture measured during
ACE Asia. A recently held ACE Asia Harmony workshop
as well as papers in press and published have pointed out
several aspects of this aerosol system that challenge the
capabilities of our state-of-the-art measurement and mod-
eling techniques (e.g., Wang et al., 2002). Difficulties
include fundamental measurement questions such as 1)
how do particle sizing instruments respond to non-spheri-
cal dust particles and 2) can our particle absorption pho-
tometers accurately measure absorption in the presence of
a large amount of scattering aerosol? Modeling questions
include 1) how do we parameterize the many observed
forms of soot and soot-dust aggregates and what is their
effect on aerosol optics, 2) how can we best estimate the
dust density and complex refractive index from the meas-
urements we have, 3) how do we most accurately parame-
terize the non-sphericity of the dust and dust-pollution par-
ticles in order to calculate their extinction, and 4) how well
can we estimate the hygroscopic growth and related scat-
tering response of this complex aerosol mixture? To para-
phrase Huebert et al. (2003), ACE Asia’s success may be
judged by the Pandora’s Box of measurement and model-
ing questions that it opened. It most certainly points to the
need for instrument development, characterization, and
comparisons as well as model development prior to the
next field experiment that looks at such complex aerosol.
Summary
In situ measurements are critical for providing informa-
tion required about aerosol properties for accurate esti-
mates of aerosol radiative forcing. Our understanding of
regional aerosols, ranging from remote marine to complex
pollution-dust mixtures, and the in situ measurement tech-
niques we have for characterizing them have improved
tremendously over the past decade. Along with these
advances in understanding and technology has come an
appreciation for the complexity of that questions that need
to be answered to reduce uncertainties in estimates of
aerosol radiative forcing. Re-visiting these regions, contin-
uing the approach of collecting over-determined data sets,
and emphasizing instrument and model comparisons in the
lab and in the field will get us closer to answering these
questions over the course of the next decade.
References
Ackerman, A.S., O.B. Toon, D.E. Stevens, A.J. Heymsfield, V. Ramanathan,
and E.J. Welton, Reduction of tropical cloudiness by soot, Science, 288, 1042
– 1047, 2000.
Anderson, T.L., S.J. Masonis, D.S. Covert, N.C. Ahlquist, S.G. Howell, A.D.
Clarke, and C.S. McNaughton, Variability of aerosol optical properties
derived from in situ aircraft measurements during ACE Asia, J. Geophys.
Res., submitted, 2003.
Bates, T.S., B.J. Huebert, J.L. Gras, F.B. Griffiths, and P.A. Durkee,
International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) Project’s first aerosol
characterization experiment (ACE 1): Overview, J. Geophys. Res., 103,
16,297 – 16,318, 1998.
Bates, T.S., V.N. Kapustin, P.K. Quinn, D.S. Covert, D.J. Coffman, C.Mari,
P.A. Durkee, W. DeBruyn, and E. Saltzman, Processes controlling the distri-
bution of aerosol particles in the marine boundary layer during ACE-1, J.
Geophys. Res., 103, 16,369 - 16,383, 1998.
Cantrell, W. et al., Closure between aerosol particles and cloud condensation
nuclei at Kaashidhoo Climate Observatory, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 28,711 –
28,718, 2001.
Carrico, C.M., P. Kus, M. Rood, P. K. Quinn, and T. S. Bates., Mixtures of
pollution, dust, seasalt and volcanic aerosol during ACE-Asia: Aerosol radia-
tive properties as a function of relative humidity, J. Geophys. Res., Submitted,
2003.
Clarke, A.D., J.L. Varner, F. Eisele, R.L. Mauldin, D. Tanner, and M. Litchy,
Particle production in the remote marine atmosphere: Cloud outflow and sub-
sidence during ACE 1, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 16,397 – 16,409, 1998.
Clarke, A.D. et al., INDOEX aerosol:  A comparison and summary of chemi-
cal, microphysical, and optical properties observed from land, ship, and air-
craft, J. Geophys. Res., 107, No. D19, 8033, doi: 10.1029/2001JD000572,
2002.
Collins, D.R., H.H. Jonsson, J.H. Seinfeld, R.C. Flagan, S. Gasso, D.A. Hegg,
P.B. Russell, B. Schmid, J.M. Livingston, E. Ostrom, K.J. Noone, L.M.
Russell, and J.P. Putuad, In situ aerosol-size distributions and clear column
radiative closure during ACE-2, Tellus, 52B, 498 - 525, 2000.
Collins, W. D. et al., Simulating aerosols using a chemical transport model
with assimilation of satellite aerosol retrievals: Methodology for INDOEX, J.
Geophys. Res., 106, 7313-7336, 2001.
Covert, D.S., J.L. Gras, A. Wiedensohler, and F. Stratmann, Comparison of
directly measured CCN with CCN modeled from the number-size distribution
in the marine boundary layer during ACE 1 at Cape Grim, Tasmania, J.
Geophys. Res., 103, 16,597 – 16,608, 1998.
Draxler, R.R., Hybrid Single-Particle Lagrangian Integrated Trajectories (HY-
SPLIT):  Version 3.0.  User’s Guide and Model Description, Tech. Rep. ERL
ARL-195, NOAA, Silver Springs, Md., 1992.
Please return by mail to:
Sarah Masonis/IGAC  NOAA/PMEL
7600 Sand Point Way NE
Seattle, WA 98115 
e-mail: igac@noaa.gov
Please help us keep our mailing list up to date:
_______  Please note my new address
_______  Please also send IGACtivities to my colleague
Name: _________________________________    Organization_________________________________
Street address:  ________________________________________________________________________
City:  ___________________  State:  _______________  Zip:  _____________  Country:  ___________
Telephone:  _________________________________  Fax:  _________________  E-Mail: ___________
IGACtivities  30
Hegg, D.A., J. Livingston, P.V. Hobbs, T. Novakov, and P. Russell, Chemical
apportionment of aerosol column optical depth off the mid-Atlantic coast of
the United States., J. Geophys. Res., 102, 25,293-25,303, 1997.
Huebert, B.J., T. Bates, P.B. Russell, G. Shi, Y.J. Kim, K. Kawamura, G.
Carmichael, and T. Nakajima, An overview of ACE-Asai: Strategies for
quantifying the relationships between Asian aerosols and their climatic
impacts, J. Geophys. Res., submitted, 2003.
Husar, R. B.,  J. M. Prospero, and L. L.  Stowe, Characterization of tropos-
pheric aerosols over the oceans with the NOAA advanced very high resolu-
tion radiometer optical thickness operational product, J. Geophys. Res., 102,
16,889-16,909, 1997.
Langner, J. and H. Rodhe, A global three-dimensional model of the tropos-
pheric sulphur cycle, J. Atmos. Chem., 13, 255-263, 1991.
Murphy, D.M., J.R. Anderson, P.K. Quinn, L.M. McInnes, F.J. Brechtel,
S.M. Kreidenweis, A.M. Middlebrook, M. Posfai, D.S. Thomson, and P.R.
Buseck, Sea salt particles and aerosol radiative properties in the Southern
Ocean marine boundary layer, Nature, 392, 62 - 65, 1998.
Neusüb, C., D. Weise, W. Birmili, H. Wex, A. Wiedensohler, and D.S.
Covert, Size-segregated chemical, gravimetric, and number distribution-
derived mass closure of the aerosol in Sagres, Portugal during ACE-2,
Tellus, 52B, 169 - 184, 2000.
Novakov, T., D. A. Hegg, and P. V. Hobbs, Airborne measurements of car-
bonaceous aerosols on the east coast of the United States, J. Geophys. Res.,
102, 30,023-30,030, 1997.
Putaud, J.P, R. van Dingenen, M. Mangoni, A Virkkula, F. Raes, H. Maring,
J.M. Prospero, E. Swietlicki, O.H. Berg, R. Hillamo, and T. Makela,
Chemical mass closure and assessment of the origin of the submicron
aerosol in the marine boundary layer and the free troposphere at Tenerife
during ACE-2, Tellus, 52B, 141 – 168, 2000.
Quinn, P.K. and T.S. Bates, North American, Asian, and Indian haze: Similar
regional impacts on climate?, Geophys. Res. Lett., in press, 2003.
Quinn, P.K. and D.J. Coffman, Local closure during ACE 1:  Aerosol mass
concentration and scattering and backscattering coefficients, J. Geophys.
Res., 103, 16,575 - 16,596, 1998.
Quinn, P.K. and D.J. Coffman, Comment on “Contribution of different
aerosol species to the global aerosol extinction optical thickness:  Estimates
from model results” by Tegen et al. [1997], J. Geophys. Res., 104, 4241 –
4248, 1999.
Quinn, P.K., D.J. Coffman, V.N. Kapustin, T.S. Bates and D.S. Covert,
Aerosol optical properties in the marine boundary layer during ACE 1 and
the underlying chemical and physical aerosol properties, J. Geophys. Res.,
103, 16,547 - 16,563, 1998.
Quinn, P.K.,  T.S. Bates, T.L. Miller, D.J. Coffman, J.E. Johnson, J.  M. Harris,
J.A. Ogren, G. Forbes, T.L. Anderson, D.S. Covert, and M.J. Rood, Surface
Submicron Aerosol Chemical Composition:  What Fraction is Not Sulfate? J.
Geophys. Res., 105, 6785 – 6806, 2000. 
Quinn, P. K., D.J. Coffman, T.S. Bates, T.L. Miller, J.E. Johnson, E.J. Welton,
C. Neusüb, M. Miller, and P.J. Sheridan, Aerosol optical properties during
INDOEX 1999:  Means, variabilities, and controlling factors, J. Geophys.
Res., 107(D18), 10.1029/2000JD000037, 2002.
Raes, F., T. Bates, F. McGovern, and M. van Liedekerke: The 2nd aerosol
characterization experiment (ACE 2): general overview and main results,
Tellus 52B, 111 – 125, 2000.
Ramanathan et al., Indian Ocean Experiment:  An integrated analysis of the
climate forcing and effects of the great Indo-Asian haze, J. Geophys. Res.,
106, 28,371 – 28,398, 2001a.
Ramanathan, V., P. J. Crutzen, J. T.  Kiehl, and D. Rosenfeld, Aerosols, cli-
mate, and the hydrological cycle,  Science,  294, 2119-2124, 2001b.
Rasch, P. J., W. D. Collins, and B. E. Eaton., Understanding the Indian Ocean
Experiment (INDOEX) aerosol distributions with an aerosol assimilation, J.
Geophys. Res.,  106, 7337-7355, 2001.
Remer, L. A., Y. J. Kaufman,  and B. N. Holben, Interannual variation of
ambient aerosol characteristics on the east coast of the United States,  J.
Geophys. Res., 104, 2223-2231, 1999.
Russell, P.B., P.V. Hobbs, and L. L. Stowe, Aerosol properties and radiative
effects in the United States east coast haze plume: An overview of the
Tropospheric Aerosol Radiative Forcing Observational Experiment (TAR-
FOX), J. Geophys. Res., 104, 2213 – 3333, 1999.
Russell, P.B. and J. Heintzenberg, An overview of the ACE-2 clear sky col-
umn closure experiment (CLEARCOLUMN), Tellus, 52B, 463 - 483, 2000.
Satheesh, S.K. and V. Ramanathan, Large differences in the tropical aerosol
forcing at the top of the atmosphere and Earth’s surface, Nature, 405, 60 – 63,
2000.
Schmid, B. et al., Clear-sky closure studies of lower tropospheric aerosol and
water vapor during ACE-2 using airborne sunphotometer, airborne in situ,
space-borne, and ground-based measurements, Tellus, 52B, 568 - 593, 2000.
Turpin, B.J. and H. Lim, Species contributions to PM2.5 mass concentrations:
Revisiting common assumptions for estimating organic mass, Aerosol Sci.
Technol.,  35, 602-610, 2001.
Wang, J. et al., Clear-column radiative closure during ACE-Asia: Comparison
of multiwavelength extinction derived from particle size and composition
with results from sun photometer, J. Geophys. Res., 107, No. D23, 4688,
doi:10.1029/2002JD002465, 2002.
IGACtivities  31
The 8th Scientific Conference of the International 
Global Atmospheric Chemistry Project (IGAC) 
To be held in September 4-9 2004 in Christchurch, New Zealand
Check the IGAC web site for details.
2nd International Workshop on Mineral Dust 
The Workshop will be held 10-12 September 2003 in Paris, France. Four
years after the first meeting in Boulder, the goal of the Workshop is to
evaluate the progress in our knowledge on dust processes and effects,
determine the remaining knowledge gaps, and make recommendations for
future work. The Workshop will include invited presentations, posters
and open discussion.
Deadline for abstract submission for posters is June 20. Further
information on abstract submission and registration is available at
http://www.lisa.univ-paris12.fr/DUST2003
Announcements
t ivitiesNewsletter
Editor: Peter Czepiel
Layout and Proofreading: Virginia Moore
IGAC logo: Linda Kubrick
Published by The IGAC Core Project Office
NOAA/PMEL7600 Sand Point Way NE
Seattle, WA 98115  USA
Tel: (+1-206) 543-6674, Fax: (+1-206) 543-0308
E-mail: igac@noaa.gov, web: www.igac.noaa.gov
IGAC was initiated by the Commission on Atmospheric Chemistry and Global Pollution (CACGP) and is a
Core Project of the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP). The IGAC Core Project Office is
currently supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF), National Aeronautics and Space
Administration, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration of the United States of America
through NSF Grant No. ATM 99-08980. Any opinions, findings and conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this newsletter are those of the individual author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the NSF or other agencies.
Printed on Recycled Paper
Please Recycle after Use!
NON-PROFIT ORG:
U.S. POSTAGE
PAID
Durham, NH 03824
Permit No. 2
Newsletter
Morse Hall
University of New Hampshire
39 College Road, Durham, NH
03824-3575  USA
tivities
