NEWS 
Federal Communications Commission 
445 12th Street, S.W. 
Washington, D. C.  20554 
 
This is an unofficial announcement of Commission action.  Release of the full text of a Commission order constitutes official action. 
See MCI v. FCC. 515 F 2d 385 (D.C. Circ 1974). 
 
News Media Information 202 / 418-0500
 
Internet: http://www.fcc.gov
TTY: 1-888-835-5322
 
 
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: 
NEWS MEDIA CONTACT: 
September 26, 2006 
Mark Wigfield:  202-418-0253 
Email:  mark.wigfield@fcc.gov 
 
 
FCC ADOPTS PILOT PROGRAM UNDER RURAL HEALTH CARE MECHANISM  
 
Pilot will Enhance Access Health Care Providers’Access to Advanced Telecommunications and 
Information Services  
 
   Washington, D.C. – Today, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) adopted an Order 
that establishes a pilot program to help public and non-profit health care providers build state and 
region-wide broadband networks dedicated to the provision of health care services, and connect 
those networks to Internet2, a dedicated nationwide backbone.  The construction of such 
networks will bring the benefits of innovative telehealth, and particularly, telemedicine services 
to those areas of the country where the need for those benefits is most acute.   
 
Broadband communications is enabling health care providers to vastly improve access to 
quality medical services.  This is particularly true in underserved areas of the country that lack 
access to the breadth of medical expertise and advanced medical technologies available in other 
areas.   Among other things, telehealth applications, including telemedicine, allow patients to 
access critically needed medical specialists in a variety of practices, including cardiology, 
pediatrics, and radiology, without leaving their homes or communities.  Use of these 
technologies can reduce hospital stays and the costs of medical care, as well as facilitate 
transmission of emergency medical records among doctors and health care facilities. 
 
 
            Despite the Commission’s efforts to make it more viable and reflect technological 
changes, the existing Rural Health Care funding mechanism remains underutilized.  The pilot 
program adopted today will work within the parameters of the existing program to explore ways 
in which the Rural Health Care funding mechanism can best be used to further the goal of 
Congress and our rules to enhance public and non-profit health care providers’ access to 
advanced telecommunications and information services.   Moreover, the pilot program will 
provide the Commission useful information as to the feasibility of revising the Commission’s 
current rural health care rules in a manner that best achieves the objectives set forth by Congress.   
 
The pilot program is designed to encourage health care providers to join together to 
aggregate their needs and develop a strategy for creating statewide and/or regional networks that 
will connect numerous health care providers, including rural health care providers, through a 
dedicated, broadband network.  The pilot program will fund up to 85% of the costs incurred to 
deploy state or regional broadband networks dedicated to health care.  The pilot program will 
also fund up to 85% of the costs of connecting the regional and/or statewide to Internet2, a 
dedicated nationwide backbone that connects a number of government research institutions, as 
well as academic, public, and private health care institutions that are repositories of medical 
expertise and information. 
 
 
    The funding amount will be capped at an amount not to exceed the difference between the 
amount of monies committed under the existing program for the current year and $100 million 
(25% of the annual $400 million cap on rural health care spending).  Interested parties should 
submit their applications to the Commission 30 days after Office of Management and Budget 
approval of the information collection requirements in the Order. 
 
Action by the Commission, September 26, 2006, by Order, (FCC 06-144).   
Chairman Martin, Commissioners Copps, Adelstein, Tate, and McDowell.  Separate statements 
issued by Chairman Martin, Commissioners Copps, Adelstein, Tate, and McDowell.  
 
 
 
For additional information, contact Thomas Buckley at 202-418-0725, 
thomas.buckley@fcc.gov;  or Claudia Fox at 202-418-1527, claudia.fox@fcc.gov. 
 
-FCC- 
News about the Federal Communications Commission can also be found 
on the Commission’s web site, www.fcc.gov. 
 
 
