 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT 
DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY 
ASSESSMENT 
 
 
FEBRUARY 26, 2008 
This publication was produced for review by the United States Agency for International 
Development. It was prepared by Paul Temple, Management Systems International. 
 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC 
AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
Management Systems International 
Corporate Offices 
600 Water Street, SW 
Washington, DC 20024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contracted under GS-23F-8012, Task Order 690-M-00-06-00137-00 
 
Angola Program Support Services 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER 
The author’s views expressed in this publication do not necessarily reflect the views of the United States Agency 
for International Development or the United States Government. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
i
CONTENTS 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .........................................................................................................III 
INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................... 1 
METHODOLOGY AND CONSTRAINTS................................................................................. 2 
Conclusion 1: The views of relevant agencies of the GRA are fundamental to 
the eventual success or failure of any joint SDM – USAID social development 
activities in Cuango municipality ....................................................................................... 2 
BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................................ 2 
Conclusion 2: The Diamond Law is designed to protect the natural resource, 
but in doing so, large numbers of residents within the Cuango municipality are 
adversely affected. The restrictions placed on movement, access to land, and 
trade effectively limits the livelihood options available. .................................................... 5 
Conclusion 3: Institutional arrangements promote illegal mining and 
smuggling............................................................................................................................ 5 
CURRENT SITUATION .............................................................................................................. 5 
Conclusion 4: The abandonment of industrially non-economic concessions 
raises the risk of conflict over rights within the former concession areas. ......................... 8 
Conclusion 5: Good efforts by SDM with regard to HIV/AIDS awareness have 
not been matched by the municipal health service ........................................................... 14 
Conclusion 6: Non-mining economic activities in the region exist, but are 
limited............................................................................................................................... 15 
Conclusion 7: The recent initiative to decentralize some budget allocation for 
municipal social development is a useful step but it is doubtful whether the 
funds earmarked will, by themselves, have a significant impact upon the local 
community. ....................................................................................................................... 15 
Conclusion 8: Until other (or additional) sources of security of property and 
persons are reliably provided, legalized artisanal mining and the enhanced 
livelihoods that it might provide are unlikely................................................................... 16 
Conclusion 9: Municipal Development is a partial solution to the social and 
economic needs of Cuango............................................................................................... 18 
Conclusion 10: SDM and USAID have somewhat inconsistent views regarding 
the nature and scope of potential joint activities in Cuango. ............................................ 18 
RECOMMENDATIONS............................................................................................................. 19 
The diamond mining background..................................................................................... 19 
Continuing activities......................................................................................................... 19 
Future activities................................................................................................................. 19 
Time Scale ........................................................................................................................ 20 
Endnotes............................................................................................................................ 20 
ANNEX 1:  SCOPE OF WORK................................................................................................. 21 
ANNEX 2:  THE DIAMOND LAW........................................................................................... 22 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
ii
ANNEX 3:  MEETINGS ............................................................................................................. 38 
ANNEX 4:  WORLDWIDE ROUGH DIAMOND PRODUCTION – 2006 ........................... 40 
ANNEX 5:  MAP OF ANGOLA................................................................................................. 41 
 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
iii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The Cuango Development Diagnostic and Feasibility Assessment serves as a snapshot of the development 
of the Cuango municipality, giving an overview of conditions within the region. Diamond mining is the 
economic driver within the Cuango Valley, yet the resource brings few tangible benefits in terms of 
services and development to the majority of the residents.  Meanwhile the laws that protect the resource 
have an enormous bearing on the way of life of the residents, controlling the movement of people and 
goods and restricting trade and access to land.  
Constraints both in time and access have limited the depth of this study, which only scratches the surface. 
It is evident that the Lunda provinces hold a special position in Angola, and it is vital to ensure the 
inclusion and commitment of the Government of the Republic of Angola (GRA) prior to activity within 
the region, an issue that directly affected this study. Any future agreement to work within the municipality 
will take place against a background of illicit mining and its associated problems, as the GRA has yet to 
find any solution to the dilemma of artisanal miners, or garimpeiros1. While artisanal diamond mining is 
considered illegal, the government operates a widespread network of buying agents to ‘legalize’ their 
production.  
There are three industrial diamond mining concessions within the Cuango municipality, and the economic 
life of two of the three is considered limited. Given the restricted non-mining economic opportunities, 
formal and informal diamond mining remains the main livelihood. Yet without any framework 
established for regulating artisanal miners, the risk of conflict over land rights is real, as concessions 
become uneconomic for industrial mining and potentially become abandoned. The future security and 
stability of the municipality could be threatened. 
Projects embarked on by mining companies have increased the level of local services. Sociedade de 
Desenvolvimento Mineiro (SDM) S.A.R.L. has undertaken a number of notable projects that do have 
impact on the community around their operation site, but the potential for mine closures raises issues of 
the projects’ future sustainability. As part of any action plan, a system of handover to the local authority is 
recommended as an urgent objective. The current focus on education and income generation activities is a 
more sustainable model, and it is recommended that any future activities should retain this focus. 
Meanwhile, social and legal constraints hinder the development of alternative livelihoods, especially in 
agricultural expansion. Studies into ‘What communities identify as barriers to development’ and 
‘Agricultural Production Opportunities’ are seen as complementary to any future plans. 
Strengthening the service delivery and policy development capabilities of Cuango Municipality is 
desirable. HIV/AIDs awareness has been promoted by SDM and other mining companies, but similar 
commitment was not evidenced through the municipal health service. A USAID-SDM Municipal 
Development activity in Cuango Municipality is likely to substantially enhance municipal capacity to 
decide and address ongoing issues concerning the sustainability of SDM’s social development activities 
and other important local public services.  
However, certain aspects of the current situation seem unlikely to be addressed by a typical municipal 
development activity, including the need for the security of property and persons in the potentially 
abandoned mining concessions. There is a pressing need to identify alternative livelihood and expanded 
economic opportunities for the vast majority of municipal residents.  Solutions to these looming, very 
serious problems will require engagement with and by a wide variety of actors, specifically including 
those agencies of the GRA responsible for the diamond mining industry.
                                                     
1 Local description for an artisanal Alluvial Diamond Miner 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
1
INTRODUCTION 
The Lunda provinces of north eastern Angola have been the country’s predominant diamond producing 
areas, with established alluvial and kimberlite deposits. However, the country’s diamond wealth has not 
translated into broad-based prosperity for its citizens, and the diamond producing Lundas are home to 
some of the worst living conditions and highest levels of civil tension in the country. The Government of 
the Republic of Angola and the diamond parastatal, Empresa Nacional des Diamantes de Angola E.P. 
(ENDIAMA) have established Fundaçao Brilhante as the social arm of the public sector diamond 
operations with a mandate to undertake projects aimed at improving the well-being of the people living in 
the diamond producing areas. Conversely, the Diamond Law of 19942 continues to have a negative 
impact upon the citizens, especially those of Lunda Norte, with limitations placed on entry into the area, 
controls on trade and the movement of goods, and restrictions on access to land and its use. 
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID), in collaboration with the Ministry for 
Territorial Administration (MAT), has begun a Municipal Development Program operating in various 
areas of Angola, including the Lunda provinces. Meanwhile, SDM has undertaken a series of social 
programs around its operational base of Luzamba in Cuango Municipality, Lunda Norte.  
USAID and SDM signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on 21 June, 2007 whereby the two 
parties agreed to undertake various actions intended to build a public-private partnership to implement 
social development programs in the province of Lunda Norte. The MOU is of limited duration (four 
months) and is focused on the achievement of the following: 
(i) 
Conduct a diagnostic and feasibility assessment for development and governance initiatives in 
the Lunda Norte3;  
(ii) 
Design a workshop which will focus discussion on the results from the assessment and will set 
forth principles and ideas for future programs in the regions; 
(iii) Identify individual resources for financing and investment in social development programs; 
(iv) Provide information on corporate image, social corporate responsibility policy, environment 
protection, and financial soundness. 
Although the MOU highlights issues in the province of Lunda Norte, the focus of the assessment has been 
the Cuango Municipality, with its headquarter town of Cuango Sede, close to the operational headquarters 
of SDM at Luzamba.  
The MOU also calls for preparation of a ‘Municipal Profile’. The profile, a detailed description of various 
social, economic and geographic/physical facts about Cuango Municipality, will be prepared, in a highly 
participative process, by Development Workshop with staff and citizens of Cuango Municipality. The 
content of the profile has been agreed with the Ministry of Planning and is aimed to increase the ability of 
Municipal government to respond to numerous central government inquiries and initiatives.  
                                                     
2 National Assembly Law No 16/94 of October 7, 1994 attached Annex 2 
3 For SOW for the assessment, see Annex 1 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
2
METHODOLOGY AND CONSTRAINTS 
A two-person USAID team traveled to Angola Oct 2-20, 2007 to conduct the Cuango Development 
Assessment through preparatory and follow-up meetings in Luanda and field research in Cuango 
Municipality.  The field research was conducted by an eight person USAID-SDM team in Cuango 
Municipality October 9-15.  This report was written by the two-person USAID team in November and 
December 2007.  The principal methodologies used in the study were data review and individual 
interviews, which were to be conducted in both Luanda and Cuango Municipality.  
The team began meetings in Luanda4 during week one (October 2-8) and traveled to the SDM mine site at 
the beginning of week two (October 9-15). During the final week in Luanda (October 16-20), the team 
was unable to meet with many of the intended GRA officials. Thus the depth of the findings remains 
shallow. Notwithstanding, the team gained sufficient insight to produce an overall diagnostic - consisting 
of a review of available material and our brief field findings - to guide future activities. 
Conclusion 1: The views of relevant agencies of the GRA are fundamental to the eventual success or failure of any joint SDM – USAID social development activities in 
Cuango municipality  
At a minimum, the relevant GRA agencies include the Ministries of Mines and Geology and Territorial 
Administration, ENDIAMA, Fundaçao Brilhante, and the Interministerial Commission for the Protection 
of Diamond Resources (CIPRED).  While it may be feasible to undertake joint social development 
activities without wide consultation with these government agencies, impacts are likely to be narrowly 
confined to the target municipality, with little potential to transform dominant practices in the wider 
diamond production areas.  Therefore, we urge SDM and USAID to consult such agencies and 
incorporate their views (as appropriate) into this report.  
BACKGROUND 
In 2006 Angola was the fifth largest exporter of rough diamonds by value (seventh by volume – carats), 
formally exporting over 9 million carats at a value of over $1.1 billion5 produced from both alluvial and 
kimberlite deposits. Yet for the Angolan economy, the contribution of the diamond sector is dwarfed by 
massive oil- and gas-based revenues.  
Diamonds were first discovered within Lunda province in 1912, following similar finds across the border 
in the Belgian Congo, and a prospecting company was founded to identify diamondiferous deposits. The 
Companhia de Diamantes de Angola (DIAMANG) was established by the colonial powers in 1917 to 
begin commercial extraction. Utilizing forced labor, the company concluded an agreement in 1921 with 
the colonial administration for 50 year rights to a 395,650 square mile concession and a continuous 
supply of Angolan labor to manually remove overburden and to crush and wash diamond bearing gravels. 
Cleveland6 suggests that despite international consternation, such labor practices remained in place until 
the 1960’s. With a constant supply of cheap labor, the company was slow to invest in heavy equipment. 
However, cheap labor was no replacement for efficient labor. Unlike other mining operations of the time, 
DIAMANG did not invest in worker housing, an additional reason for reported high rates of absenteeism 
and desertion. Controlling a labor force of over 25,000 Angolans created problems for DIAMANG and its 
                                                     
4 See Annex 3 – Meetings Timetable 
5 Figures Kimberley Process web – www.kimberleyprocess.com See Annex 4 
6 Cleveland T, University of Minnesota - http://www.ces.columbia.edu/pub/papers/Cleveland.pdf 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
3
2,500 strong Portuguese workforce. The illegal trade in rations combined with the theft of supplies and 
diamonds by workers drastically impaired the efficiency of operations.  
Production peaked at 2.4 million carats in 1971 as the original concession agreement was set to expire. 
With 62 active mines, DIAMANG also had 56 teams exploring its concession area to determine sections 
of land to maintain as part of the new 19,300 square mile concession DIAMANG would be allowed to 
maintain. But the 1974 annual report recognized that with Angolan independence expected, the company 
would be unlikely to maintain its operations under the existing structure. Negotiations began in 1975 with 
the new MPLA government, but as all 2,500 European technicians left the country, it was estimated that 
about 50% of DIAMANG production was being siphoned off by the remaining work force7. The company 
had no choice but to suspend mining activities. 
While international standards have had a bearing on Angola’s diamond export trade, it was an earlier 
history of illicit diamond production that brought into force the mining law that is currently in place and 
that has a direct effect on the lives of the people of Lunda Norte. Prior efforts to control illicit mining in 
1978 led to the division of Lunda Province into northern and southern sections to restrict free movement, 
but a short period of ‘peace’ during 1991 and 1992 was marked by renewed large scale illicit artisanal 
mining activity. New mining legislation in 1991 permitted wider possession and trade in rough diamonds 
and large numbers of people of various nationalities ‘overran’ the Lunda diamond fields. The 
establishment of government buying offices in the Lundas created an official channel for illicitly mined 
diamonds. Dietrich8 states that ‘it was during this period that illicit diamond mining became an 
established pillar of Angola’s shadow economy’. In response, the GRA enacted the Diamond Law of 
October 1994, revoking the previous legislation of 1991. The 1994 law remains in force at present.  
The preface to the 1994 law identifies the existence of increased illegal digging and diamond theft and 
established that only ENDIAMA or joint ventures with ENDIAMA would hold diamond mining rights. 
Noting ‘the false impression that circulation of people and goods is totally free throughout the whole 
Angolan territory,’ the law states that the changes ‘will result in benefits to the Nation in general, and 
particularly to the population of the Lundas.’ But, with the large quantity of diamond deposits occurring 
in the Lundas, the government considered the whole territory of Lunda Norte and Lunda Sul as a 
‘reserved area’, and through the law placed severe controls on the movement of people and goods and on 
economic activities.  Restrictions put in place for artisanal mining were stringent. According to 
Partnership Africa Canada (PAC),9 no artisanal areas have been designated and no licenses issued, 
effectively outlawing all artisanal diamond working. 
In 1998 rough diamond extraction in Angola became internationally infamous as ‘conflict diamonds’ 
following a report by Global Witness. The information that UNITA (The National Union for the Total 
Independence of Angola) were trading diamonds to finance their insurgency brought the concepts of 
transparency and governance to the center of the diamond industry as a whole. Ensuing United Nations 
sanctions on the Angolan (and the Sierra Leonean) rough diamond trade brought the establishment of a 
system of certification of origin at the point of export. The system was later to become the Kimberley 
Process Certification Scheme that sets the minimum standards in diamond trading and production for 
member states.  
                                                     
7 Bureau of Mines – Mineral Yearbook 1975,  http://digicoll.library.wisc.edu/cgi-bin/EcoNatRes/EcoNatRes- 
idx?type=turn&entity=EcoNatRes.MinYB1975v3.p0112&isize=text 
8 Cilliers J, Dietrich C, ‘Angola’s War Economy: The Role of Oil and Diamonds’, Institute for Security Studies, 
Pretoria, South Africa, 2000 
9 Diamond Industry Annual Review: Republic of Angola 2007, Partnership Africa Canada, 2007 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
4
GRAPH 1: ROUGH DIAMOND EXPORT FROM ANGOLA 
$0
$200,000,000
$400,000,000
$600,000,000
$800,000,000
$1,000,000,000
$1,200,000,000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Angola Rough Diamond Exports
 - Official/Unofficial ($)
Total
Official
Unofficial
 
Source: ENDIAMA 
In the past few years, diamond production has dramatically increased due, according to Even-Zohar, to 
regaining control of the wider diamond-producing areas and the introduction of more efficient diamond 
marketing system10. Effective control of the illicit miners has been considered by the government to be a 
priority for the credibility of its compliance to the export-certification scheme. “In this regard, Angola is 
turning itself into a test-case for bringing illicit mining and buying under control, and if this can be done 
in Angola, the experience will be repeatable elsewhere in Africa”, noted Dr Mankenda Ambroise in 2002, 
when he was then National Director of Mines11. However, 5 years later the challenge remains. In his new 
role as Vice Minister of the Ministry of Geology and Mines, Dr Mankenda Ambroise informed the 
authors of the establishment of a presidential commission, CIPRED, which will devote considerable time 
to the issue of garimpeiros and their unofficial production.  
The 1994 law also closed independent diamond buying posts. Through the years, a number of centralized 
buying processes have been put in place. Currently, all rough diamond trading is undertaken through the 
ENDIAMA (Empresa Nacional des Diamantes de Angola E.P.) subsidiary, SODIAM (Diamond 
Commercialization Society of Angola). Production from ENDIAMA mines and joint ventures is traded 
directly with SODIAM in Luanda. A series of agreements licenses other foreign rough buyers such as 
ASCORP (Leviev) and LKI (Lazare Kaplan International) to bring diamonds produced within the 
informal market (licensed buyers purchasing from unlicensed miners) into the recognized export channel. 
Graph 1 highlights the rise in total production as noted by Even-Zohar but also illustrates the continued 
presence of ‘Unofficial’ (unlicensed) diamond production. In 2005 the exports of unofficial production 
accounted for more than 27% of total exports (over $1 billion). At $296 million, the unofficial trade was 
more than two thirds the total official rough diamond exports of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
What has made the Lunda regions so attractive is the high prevalence of gem diamonds. Dietrich reports 
that while diamonds from the Catoca kimberlite pipe are 35% gem, 15% near gem and 50% industrial, 
                                                     
10 Even-Zohar C., From Mine to Mistress, Mining Journal Books Ltd, Edenbridge, 2002 
11 Dr. Mankenda Ambroise, ‘An Overview on Business Opportunities in Investing in Angolan Mineral 
Development’, a paper presented at Indaba 2002, Cape Town, South Africa, February 14, 2002. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
5
returns from the Cuango valley have been analyzed as 90% gem, 7% near gem and 3% industrial. Such 
returns from Cuango valley may not be accurate today as areas become ‘worked out’. Despite the lower 
quality of kimberlite diamonds, kimberlite pipes can enable more profitable mining, but require 
substantial capital inputs for exploitation. 
Conclusion 2: The Diamond Law is designed to protect the natural resource, but in doing so, large numbers of residents within the Cuango municipality are adversely 
affected. The restrictions placed on movement, access to land, and trade effectively limits the livelihood options available.  
The mining companies offer the first livelihood alternative, with numbers employed increasing 
dramatically since the war. However these opportunities remain limited compared to the population size. 
With many skilled and security related positions filled by personnel from outside the region, some of the 
local population are drawn to the larger towns to seek low paid employment. However many seek a 
livelihood in the artisanal mining of diamonds. Without an effective framework to accommodate such 
work, individuals are forced to work outside the law. Operating in the ‘shadow economy’ creates 
problems for miners at the mercy of the security forces as they attempt to trade their unofficial production 
within a centrally controlled market.  
Conclusion 3: Institutional arrangements promote illegal mining and smuggling. 
Despite the government’s continued pronouncements that it is working to bring illicit mining into the 
official system, little progress is evident. In a recent workshop with government, concessionaires were 
requested to set aside land for artisanal miners. However the control of production and the security of 
operations would be the responsibility of the concessionaire. Such a situation burdens the concession with 
the management of the artisanal sector, hardly a sustainable situation, especially should concessions close. 
Without an operating legal framework for this part of the diamond sector, the GRA runs the risk of 
pressure from the Kimberley Process to ‘put its house in order’.  
SODIAM, as the single channel for the export of Angolan rough diamond production, empowers 
companies to purchase the production from the ‘unofficial’ sector through a series of license agreements. 
It remains an enigma that miners can openly sell to registered state buying houses the production that they 
are not legally entitled to produce.  
Many of the buying houses established are not the prime agreement holders and are therefore bound to 
sell on a commission or profit margin to the main agents. Their strategy is to increase the diamond flows 
through their establishments and protect their margin by buying below market rates. Hence it is likely that 
sponsorship or vertical integration exists between these offices and the miners to increase leverage and 
diamond flows.  
Protection of the buyers’ margins is made easier because artisanal miners are operating outside the law 
and will have to accept the price offered. Pricing is weaker when sponsorship is offered. Weak pricing in 
a monopolistic market place creates an incentive for miners to smuggle.  
CURRENT SITUATION 
Description of Municipality of Cuango 
Cuango municipality incorporates a geographic area in excess of 4,000 square kilometers in the province 
of Lunda Norte.  There are three major towns in the municipality, located along the Cuango River Valley: 
Cuango Sede, Cafunfo, and Luremo.  The town of Cuango Sede, the seat of the municipal administration, 
is estimated to have a population of approximately 24,000 persons, with Cafunfo estimated at 100,000 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
6
and Luremo at 16,800. Neighboring the SDM mining operations, in the vicinity of Cuango Sede, are two 
settlements of Balabala and Camarianga, with perhaps an additional 20,000 inhabitants.  
Luremo, the seat of Cuango Municipality’s only Comuna12 government, is located about 30 kilometers 
north of Cafunfo (80 kilometers north of Cuango Sede). There is little commercial activity in Luremo.  A 
relatively new alluvial diamond mining operation, Luminas, is located a short distance from Luremo. 
Cafunfo, a rapidly growing, economically active commercial center, is located about 50 kilometers north 
of Cuango Sede.  Its population is estimated to be approximately 100,000 persons.  Diamond buying is 
the major commercial activity of Cafunfo.  The established Bank, Banco BIC, services the diamond 
sector, providing cash for diamond buying houses and holding mining company workers’ accounts. It also 
operates a local loan portfolio of approximately US $8 million, predominantly for traders. Recently a 
second bank has opened. Though the Municipal Administration’s headquarters is in Cuango Sede, the 
only hospital in the municipality is in Cafunfo.  Cafunfo is served by a two kilometer graveled landing 
strip, receiving commercial flights from Luanda several times per week.  These flights currently total 
approximately 70 to 85 per month, carrying approximately 1500 passengers in and out of Cafunfo per 
month and approximately 125 to 140 tons of freight.  Almost all of the freight comes in to Cafunfo.  Very 
little freight goes out, yet money does. The Banco BIC repatriates to Luanda the equivalent of US $5 
million in Angolan kwanzas each month, while Cafunfo houses numerous ‘5%’ shops, the method of 
transferring money to the DRC. 
The two concessions of SDM and ITM (located immediately to the north of the SDM concession) occupy 
the Cuango River Valley between Cuango Sede and Cafunfo. With the third concession of Luminas, these 
diamond mining concessions dominate economic activities in Cuango Municipality. Their concession 
areas (3000 km2 each) occupy a vast proportion of the available land within the Cuango Municipality; 
thus, these are restricted areas, in keeping with the 1994 Act. This places restrictions on the movement of 
people, goods, and economic activity (see Annex 1 chapter 5), and the team saw checkpoints for 
restricting access to concession areas. However, public roads exist outside the concession areas and many 
residents are engaged in subsistence agriculture, with an unknown percentage of males engaged in small 
scale, illicit diamond mining.  
Description of Municipal Administration of Cuango 
The Municipal Administration is headed by an Administrator.  Until recently, the Governor of Lunda 
Norte province appointed the Administrator, but a decree enacted in early 2007 provides that future 
Municipal Administrators will be appointed by the Minister of Territorial Administration.  The 
Administrator of Cuango Municipality, Paolo Passos, is charged with responsibility for a broad range of 
local public services, including health services, public education, public sanitation, potable water, urban 
and rural planning, policing, street and road maintenance, and the general regulation of private sector and 
citizen activities.   
Despite the diamond wealth of the area, Municipal public services have been very limited due to the 
absence of discretionary funds and a lack of qualified staff.  Gradual solutions to both of these major 
constraints are envisioned by the central government.  Cuango is one of the “pilot” municipalities that 
have been granted budgetary authority and will receive transfers of central government revenues: 
$300,000 for the last quarter of 2007 and $5,000,000 for all of 2008.  Minimum qualifications for 
municipal staff have been established in law, and public sector training programs have been expanded to 
provide the necessary skills.  With most revenues - especially diamond income - collected centrally, the 
                                                     
12 Comuna – the administrative tier beneath the Municipal Administration Headquarters 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
7
current constraints on municipal capabilities will continue, and provincial governments will remain 
deeply involved in the provision of municipal services.  
Cuango Municipality’s single Comuna Administration, located in Luremo, is headed by Joao Bernardo.  
Mr. Bernardo has been Comuna Administrator for only two years.  He previously worked as a mining 
engineer.  Mr. Bernardo had a copy of law 02/07 in front of him as we spoke and he was obviously 
familiar with its contents.  He welcomes the changes brought about by the law and projected a sense of 
competence and confidence in his responses to questions.  He recognizes that the ongoing 
deconcentration of government in Angola raises new challenges for Comuna and Municipal 
administrations, but he feels confident he will be supported by training and resources offered by the 
central government. 
Approximately 6 Comuna staff members were present at the beginning of the interview with Mr. 
Bernardo.  His staff consists of an Aide to the Administrator, two office chiefs (Chefes do Gabinete), a 
police commander, and three heads of “technical sections.”  The three technical sections are Community 
Services, Inspection and Regulation, and Social Services.  Community Services includes provision of 
cemeteries and markets.  Inspection and Regulation (Fiscalizacao) includes planning, licensing, and other 
regulatory services.  Social Services include most of the local public services that one might expect: 
Education, Health, Women, Youth, Urbanism, Mail, Commerce, and others. 
Both Municipal and Comuna Administrations give the appearance of being assigned more responsibilities 
than they can, in fact, implement.  That is, the vehicles, facilities, work forces, and machinery that one 
would expect to be involved in effective service production were not easily available.  However, there 
was a sense among the supervisors that they were expected to enhance the provision of services.  These 
supervisors understood many of the difficulties that they faced and were pursuing solutions to some of the 
problems encountered.  The team got the impression that there was a disciplined, top-down effort to 
improve local services.   
Sociedade de Desenvolvimento Mineiro (SDM) S.A.R.L. 
Established in 1995, SDM is an equal partnership between ENDIAMA and Odebrecht Mining Services 
Inc. (OMSI), the mining subsidiary of the Brazilian Construtora Norberto Odebrecht S.A. The company 
has operated an alluvial diamond mining concession in the Cuango River basin of Lunda Norte province 
since 1997. SDM and ENDIAMA also currently share board responsibility. While SDM provide the 
Chairman, also serving as General Manager, and the Operations Director, ENDIAMA fill the roles of 
Finance and Geology. 
SDM took over the former Odebrecht operations established in Luzamba that were abandoned in 1992 
due to increased hostilities. The cost to redevelop the mine was reported at $130 million13. During the 
initial period of SDM establishment, operations were disturbed by the continuing war, with all supplies 
being flown in from Luanda. Through a Government of the Republic of Angola decree, the original 
concession of approximately 80,000 km2 was reduced to the present 3000 km2 in the year 200014.  
The 2004 company report to shareholders warned that the economically viable mine reserves would be 
exhausted by 2006. Although the mine continues to operate, the longevity of the mining operation around 
Luzamba is in question. Production is again increasing, but grade is diminishing, and although costs are 
being reduced, there will likely come a point of closure prior to any operational readiness in potential 
additional sites located at Muanga and Cacuilo.  
                                                     
13 Diamond Industry Annual Review: Republic of Angola, Partnership Africa Canada, July 2004 
14 Decree No 7-B/00 of February 11, 2000 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
8
 
The womens cooperative demonstrates their produce.  
GRAPH 2: 
SDM GROSS SALES AND NET PROFITABILITY (2000 – 2005) 
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
US $ Millions
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
SDM Sales v Profitability 
Sales
Profit
 
Source: SDM Annual Reports 
Conclusion 4: The abandonment of industrially non-economic concessions raises the risk of conflict over rights within the former concession areas.  
Profound concerns exist over the imminent cessation of industrial mining within the municipality. 
Potentially two of the three diamond mining companies within the municipality could withdraw from 
their concessions within a short time frame. Although many skilled staff have been imported into the 
Cuango Municipality from other areas and will likely return upon the cessation of mining activities, a 
high proportion of mine workers are locally employed, and would lose their livelihood upon closure.  
However, with diamonds still remaining on the terraces of the concessions, the potential for conflict 
would be substantial.  One possible scenario would involve conflict between indigenous persons and 
Congolese (and other) immigrants for artisanal mining rights, as more people are drawn into the area by 
mining opportunities. Other conflicts are also likely.  Proactive efforts to anticipate and address potential 
problems including the establishment of a small scale/artisanal licensing mechanism would be highly 
beneficial. Although a local view exists that the licensing of artisanal miners will bring chaos, there 
remains no other system than the current dependency upon concession security to handle this problem. 
SDM Social Support Activities 
With a change in personnel and following a profitable year, the company embarked on a series of social 
activities that began in 2004. The key activities have focused on Education and Health.  Schools were 
built and supplied with power and materials. Safe water was supplied to schools and nearby communities. 
Diet was reinforced by the production of soya milk and its daily distribution to local school children. 
Vaccination of local children and voluntary 
HIV/AIDS testing are undertaken by the company 
clinic, while kits including bed nets are distributed 
to combat malaria.  
Of late there is a noticeable move toward offering 
small-scale assistance in skills and income 
generation. Tools were offered to local farmers, 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
9
nets to fishermen, and support to a local woman’s cooperative producing and marketing clothing and 
decorative linens. Education programs include adult literacy classes and information technology (IT) for 
schools; for example, computers supplied were linked to the company’s IT facilities.  
In the limited discussions the team had with beneficiaries, all welcomed these initiatives. Although some 
have been less successful, the major investment in education through the building of schools and the 
supply of safe water and soya milk has had a measured impact on the percentage of children attending 
school. Yet many of the projects, especially health and the supply of safe water and soya milk, are solely 
dependent on the continued presence of the company. 
SDM Health Centre15 
At SDM-Luzamba, the health center normally has one medical doctor attending patients. As of October 
2007 the clinic offered services predominantly to workers and some immediate family. Two doctors could 
be working at the same time, but this is not the norm.  The center has five nurses of middle level training, 
two nurses of lower level training, three lab technicians, 1 X-ray technician, and 3 cleaning staffs. The 
center is equipped with two examining rooms and eight beds.  Up to eight patients can be admitted to the 
health post for overnight stays.  The health post has one ambulance.   
The doctor sees patients Monday through Friday from 7:30 am to 12:00 pm.  On Saturday and Sunday, 
the doctor sees patients on an emergency basis. According to the doctor, pregnant women are encouraged 
to give birth at the health center.  When a caesarean birth is needed, women are flown to Luanda or 
transported to Cafunfo by SDM. The laboratory is described as being fully equipped by national standards 
and better than the provincial lab in Dundo, the provincial capital.  There is never a lack of supplies.  
HIV/AIDS 
The SDM-Luzamba HIV/AIDS program has received guidance from the Odebrecht HIV/AIDS program, 
and the health center X-ray technician is responsible for the program.  A private room has been dedicated 
to counseling within the health center.  A lab tech and nurse have also been trained and given partial 
responsibility for counseling and testing.  Pregnant women arriving at the health center and patients who 
show signs of HIV infection are urged to take an HIV test.  All HIV testing at the facility is free.  In 
theory even people not associated with SDM can arrive at the Luzamba compound and see the doctor for 
a free HIV test; however, this rarely or never occurs.  According to the doctor, most people who seek 
testing on their own are younger employees of SDM.  Few employees living in the local community seek 
testing.  It appears that the community does not actively seek HIV testing from SDM.  The Odebrecht 
HIV/AIDS program has trained community HIV/AIDS educators in the Cuango Sede area.  Participants 
included sobas and youth, all of whom received counseling and testing.  
Vaccination 
SDM provides routine vaccination to children according to the recommendations of the Ministry of 
Health.  The company has provided assistance in the form of personnel, transport, and lunches to the 
national vaccine program (PAV) during national immunization days.  Personnel have helped with 
advertising the campaign and vaccine delivery.     
Hemorrhagic disease 
                                                     
15 The authors wish to recognize the contribution of Mr John Janeski in providing valuable background and research 
into Healthcare issues 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
10
The doctor reports that the center is equipped and prepared for a highly contagious hemorrhagic disease 
case.  SDM, local private clinics and the local health authorities have coordinated efforts to prepare for a 
hemorrhagic case.  Trainings have been given to communities to help identify a potential case and what 
action to take.  Sobas and youths have been provided with some information, including, for example, how 
to identify a case of Marburg disease.  According to the doctor, the community has been instructed to 
notify the municipality (police, administration, etc.).  SDM should then be notified and the SDM doctor 
will visit the patient taking bio-security measures.  If the case is confirmed as highly contagious, SDM 
will assist the local health authorities in moving the patient to the Cuango Sede health center.  
Comparisons in Education 
Despite the brevity of the survey, some comparative data is available for Luremo and Cuango Sede. With 
similar school populations, Luremo reported just over 40% attended school (3746 out of 8700), while in 
Cuango Sede, attendance was over 50% (4864 out of 9055). Reasons given for this difference were 
increased facilities and the supply of milk to children in Cuango Sede. Meanwhile, comparisons of 
facilities between Luremo, Cuango Sede, and Cafunfo showed a marked disparity. Schools in Cuango 
Sede and Luremo were more modern and better maintained than those in Cafunfo. Although limited 
educational data is available, a large private secondary school has recently been built in Cafunfo, 
reportedly to fill the gap in the availability of quality education delivery.   
In Luremo, there is no secondary school. Presently, students completing primary school in Luremo go to 
the city of Cafunfo or other cities for secondary level studies. The primary school of Luremo is supplied 
with water by a tanker from local diamond mining company Luminas.  Of the 948 students enrolled in the 
primary school, 28% (266) are girls.  A total of 3,746 students are enrolled in the district.  Approximately 
5000 more primary school aged children are not enrolled.  
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
11
 
 
Cafunfo Secondary School 
Luremo classroom 
 
In addition to the primary school in the city, the district has 20 school posts.  Thirteen of these posts are 
located in church buildings.  The remaining posts are government school buildings. Twenty-two teachers 
are employed by the central school.  Each of the school posts has 2 teachers, yet only four (8%) of the 50 
teachers employed by the district are women. There are presently 13.35 teachers per 1000 students in the 
district.  If all eligible children living in the district (approximately 8,746) were enrolled in school, there 
would be 5.9 teachers per 1000 students.  
Especially noticeable in Luremo was the population divide that supports national demographics. An 
extremely high percentage of the rural population is of school age, and once youths complete local 
education, they move away either to find employment or to follow further education.  
Comparisons in Health 
Government facilities in the municipality of Cuango providing health services as of October 2007 include 
one health center in the city of Cuango, one health post each in the towns of Luremo (4 beds) and 
Balabala (one bed), and one hospital in the city of Cafunfo.  
The Cafunfo hospital has 120 beds and unofficially serves as the municipal hospital and municipal public 
health department.  The hospital consists of the following: maternity ward, pediatrics, internal medicine, 
physical therapy, X-ray, laboratory, public health, vaccine program, emergency room, morgue (not 
functioning), ambulatory care, infectious disease (i.e. TB), human resources, accounting,  laundry, and 
kitchen (not functioning).   
Presently, the municipality of Cuango does not have an incumbent Director of Health.  The Director of 
the Cafunfo Hospital maintains the responsibilities of the Director of Health.  There is one hospital 
administrator under the director.  Four Vietnamese doctors contracted by the Government of Angola 
formerly worked in the hospital.  Of these, one gynecologist and one surgeon remain.  One pediatrician 
and one orthopedist have left the hospital due to a failure to renew contracts by the GRA.  In addition to 
the physicians, there is one physical therapist with higher level education. The next highest level 
personnel includes three nurses, one pharmacist, and two lab technicians with middle level training. Fifty-
four technicians with basic nursing qualifications are distributed amongst the hospital areas. Other 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
12
hospital personnel include 3 secretaries, 22 cleaning staffs, 3 laundry staffs, 4 cooks, 1 “copera” (cares for 
the dead, but is not a mortician).  The hospital has one ambulance. 
Cafunfo has 68 private health posts outside the public system.  Some of the 79 registered private 
pharmacies pertain within these health posts. Some health posts have laboratories.  Each health post is 
independent and self contained, according to the hospital administrator.   
Emergency medical cases that can not be treated by the SDM Clinic, Cuango Sede Health Center, and 
Luremo Health Post are sent to the Cafunfo Hospital.  The hospital also receives emergency cases from 
the municipalities of Xanuteba, Capenda-Camulemba, and Caumbula.  For example, patients needing 
surgery that cannot be performed at other facilities or municipalities seek services at the Cafunfo 
Hospital. 
Medicines 
The government inspects pharmacies regularly to monitor date, origin, and storage of medicine.  
Pharmacies not registered with the municipality and those with improper storage (poor or no 
refrigeration) have been closed by authorities.  The origin of medicine is not considered when evaluating 
quality.  The pharmacy located a few meters from the hospital had one type of malaria medication 
available for sale the date of which was not expired.  This medicine (Amodiquina) originated from India, 
as indicated by the package.  Three tablets sufficient for malaria treatment, according to the pharmacy, 
were 50 kwanza (less than one US dollar). 
Epidemiologic Surveillance 
Data is collected from the health posts, Cuango Sede health center, three diamond mining companies, 
private health centers, and the “caritas” mission health post weekly.  This data is compiled in Cafunfo and 
sent to Dundo, the provincial headquarters.  Data is compiled by the public health department in Dundo 
and passed on to Luanda weekly.  
Priorities 
According to the administrator, the most pressing needs of the hospital and city include vehicles, doctors 
and nurses to work outside of the city, and support for the care of patients coming in from other 
municipalities.   
The lab manager, João Antonio José, reports that the lab is in constant need of reagents for lab tests.  
There are some gaps in the ordering mechanism between the hospital, Dundo, and Luanda.  The lab has 
also received two visits from Luanda by lab technician trainers.  The visits are viewed as worthless as no 
reagents were available to work with and the trips lasted only one week.  Both the lab manager and the 
administrator described a disconnect between the reality of the needs of the hospital and the support they 
are receiving from the national level.  
Blood transfusions have been suspended for four days as a result of a stock-out of HIV tests.  Patients 
who need blood transfusions are mostly children with anemia, malaria, and other conditions.  
NGO Activity 
Cafunfo experienced an eight month outbreak of cholera in 2006.  Doctors without Borders (Medecins 
sans Frontiers - MSF) provided aid to the hospital during this period to address the needs of the 
community associated with increased burden of disease during the outbreak.  The Government of Angola 
provided some training and support following the departure of MSF.  An NGO is currently supplying 
Cholera treatment related supplies.  In 2006 UNICEF held two measles campaigns in the municipality.  In 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
13
addition to the delivery of vaccine, other health products including mosquito nets were distributed to 9000 
children under five years old.  Five thousand mosquito nets were distributed to pregnant women and 
children under the age of five in 2007. A new national river blindness program provided treatment and 
prevention to some communities in the municipality in 2006.  There are no plans to repeat this annual 
campaign in 2007 in the municipality.  Red Cross is working in the area implementing a land mine 
program.  No other NGOs have been working in health in coordination with the hospital.   
Public Health 
The director of public health of municipal level activities is located in the Cafunfo Hospital.  All vaccine 
campaigns, malaria initiatives, epidemiologic surveillance, and infectious disease control in the 
community are run from this office.  Each area has a director.  Five community mobilizers are on hand to 
carry out any public health activity within the community.  Examples of activities include mobilizing 
sobas and youth.  The public health department only has one vehicle that is currently not operating.      
HIV/AIDS 
Little has been done in the area of HIV/AIDS prevention, counseling, and treatment.  The only HIV 
testing performed has been for blood transfusions.  Approximately 200-300 tests have been performed 
since testing commenced two to three years ago.  No HIV/AIDS counseling and testing has been 
performed ever.  No adequate physical space has been identified for counseling and prevention efforts.  
The Municipality of Cuango has been included in the strategy of the National HIV/AIDS Institute, and it 
appears that the Cafunfo Hospital is the focal point for the implementation of the strategy at the municipal 
level.  Representatives of the hospital have participated in two training meetings in March 2007.  One was 
held in Luanda, the other in Dundo.  These meetings served as the first exposure of the Cafunfo Hospital 
to the National Strategy.  Supplies and testing kits have been supplied to the hospital by the Institute.  
No HIV/AIDS activity (testing, prevention, and treatment) are taking place in the hospital or public health 
infrastructure in the Municipality of Cuango despite the availability of resources. This is due to the lack of 
a medical director, and the hospital has been directed to hold off on implementing any activity until one 
has been installed.  Not only has the HIV/AIDS program implementation been stalled, but the routine 
practice of HIV testing for blood transfusions (the only current HIV/AIDS related activity) is not 
available due to a stock-out of HIV tests.  As mentioned above, blood transfusions had been suspended 
for four days including the day of the interview as a result.  The pharmacy located a few meters from the 
hospital offered the Population Services International/GoA “Sensual” condom for sale at a cost of 100 
kwanza (US $1.30) for three condoms.  One may be able to receive an HIV test at a private pharmacy for 
approximately US $50.      
Vaccination 
The national government vaccine program (PAV) provides vaccine and supervision via the provincial 
capital, Dundo.  The Public Health Department of Cafunfo is serving as the PAV base for the 
Municipality of Cuango.  According to the administrator, the GRA has been providing vaccine to the 
region since 1978.  NGOs and UNICEF had provided assistance during times of conflict.       
Prior to 1992, the GRA provided routine vaccination services in the area, but in 1992 the government 
vaccination program was disrupted by conflict. The Director of Public Health reports observing a UNITA 
vaccine campaign in 1992 in Luremo.  The campaign may have included all available childhood vaccines.  
In 1993 and 1994, there may have been no delivery of vaccine due to conflict.  In 1995 an effort was 
made by UNICEF and UNAV to provide vaccine in the region.  The government resumed routine 
vaccination in 1996.  Polio national immunization days are coordinated for the municipality from Cafunfo 
through the public health department.  It is likely that the population of Cafunfo is only receiving routine 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
14
immunization against vaccine-preventable diseases at the hospital.  Much of the population is probably 
not covered by basic vaccines.      
Hemorrhagic disease 
At the time of the assessment, an Ebola outbreak had been reported 21 km north of Lunda Norte in the 
DRC.  The province of Uige, Angola experienced a devastating outbreak of Marburg as a result of little or 
no preparation for a hemorrhagic disease case.  The hospital administration reports that MSF provided 
some bio-security training to health staff during the Cholera outbreak.  Documentation of the MSF 
training is not available, and no specific preparation has been made to protect against a hemorrhagic 
disease outbreak.       
In Luremo, the health post employs three full time nurses all trained in Dundo, Lunda Norte.  Two of the 
nurses are trained in general practice, the third in first aid.  A doctor employed by the local diamond 
mining company, Luminas, sees patients at the health post every Wednesday from 9-12 pm.   
In addition to the Luremo health post, the communa has two other health posts located in the villages of 
Maussuco and Cachinga.  These health posts are not currently operating.  The Luremo health post consists 
of one building with two examining rooms of one bed each, one observation room with two beds, a 
storage/cold chain room, and a reception area. Untreated water is supplied to the health post tank by a 
tanker truck from the company.  The health post has an electricity generator, the fuel of which is also 
supplied by the company.  
Essential medicines are supplied only by a Ministry of Health “kit” every two months.  The director 
reports that the “kit” is not sufficient and often runs out before it is routinely replaced.   
HIV/AIDS 
The local mining company Luminas has been providing HIV/AIDS testing to employees for three 
months, although the number of tests performed was not given. Luminas is part of the ENDIAMA 
HIV/AIDS committee linked to the National HIV/AIDS Strategy and utilizes material provided by the 
government HIV/AIDS initiative.  It appears that this program is very new at Luminas, and no HIV/AIDS 
activity is being implemented at the health post or at the community level.   
Conclusion 5: Good efforts by SDM with regard to HIV/AIDS awareness have not been matched by the municipal health service 
As part of the Odebrecht group, SDM has made conscious efforts to promote HIV/AIDS awareness in 
support of the national program. Odebrecht banners are predominant around the mine office area and in 
Cuango Sede. A similar situation was found at the Luminas site. Posters from the consortium, including 
ENDIAMA, were found in most public places visited. However, a similar level of commitment to curb 
the spread of HIV/AIDS was not evidenced through the municipal health service. Thus while workers and 
communities around the companies are exposed to considerable HIV/AIDS awareness, it is doubtful if 
anything near this level exists within the public health sector.   
Agriculture 
During the research, limited agricultural development was witnessed. In Luremo a local store owner was 
engaging a small scale agricultural cooperative producing bananas and pineapples and raising cattle, but 
in general, most people engaged in the subsistence planting of cassava (manioca). A local milling 
machine was available to the community for simple processing.  
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
15
 
Milling in Luremo 
The lack of major agricultural development can be attributed 
to a number of factors, both products of diamond resource 
management and current social trends. We were informed 
that during the colonial era, DIAMANG, the former 
diamond paratstatal, did not permit agriculture in diamond 
producing areas. Instead, huge farms were developed in 
other regions to feed the population within the mining zones 
and keep their shovels out of the soil. Secondly, current laws 
would require consent of concession owners to develop land 
in restricted areas. While concession owners are responsible 
to compensate farmers for crops destroyed through their 
operations, evidence suggests that with the lack of 
agricultural development such compensation is seldom 
required.  
Conclusion 6: Non-mining economic activities in the region exist, but are limited.    
The Diamond law protects large areas of land, thus restricting agricultural development. It also limits 
freedom of movement of goods and supplies. Large population concentrations such as Cafunfo create a 
local market for goods and services including food production. The spread of mobile phone coverage to 
the area has stimulated local economic activity in the provision of phone related materials and also public 
phone booths. The presence of the mining companies also drives some local agricultural production, but 
most activity witnessed is at a subsistence level reflecting the limited market opportunities. The lack of 
livelihood opportunities also fuels the migration of youths from rural areas to urban centers as they seek 
employment, thus depriving rural areas of the labor needed for agricultural expansion. 
Fundaçao Brilhante  
Established in 2004 as the social arm of ENDIAMA, Fundaçao Brilhante is supposed to implement 
cultural and social community development projects. However while posters present at the mine sites 
depict the foundation as ‘the social face of ENDIAMA’, an information video attests to the construction 
of schools, clinics and other social programs, including the supply of milk to schools. It is evident that the 
programs in and around Cuango Sede are the same programs provided by SDM. As ENDIAMA is a 
shareholder in the mining concessions, it is not surprising that its social arm will also claim some merit 
from such programs. 
What is unclear is the presence of any independent role for the foundation. Concessionaires claim that 
limited activity has taken place, while the Fundaçao Brilhante Director of Projects admits to limited 
funds for implementation of projects. Future plans of the foundation include the development of a large 
rice farm in Lunda Norte where funds generated are expected to be used for the sustainability of the 
foundation.  
Conclusion 7: The recent initiative to decentralize some budget allocation for municipal social development is a useful step but it is doubtful whether the funds earmarked 
will, by themselves, have a significant impact upon the local community. 
While municipal staff portrayed confidence in their ability to deliver services, significant shortages in 
resources may undermine such delivery. External technical assistance, in addition to the training and 
assistance provided by other levels of the Government of Angola, is desirable. 
Projects undertaken by companies have increased the municipal services capabilities in terms of 
education and health, but these initiatives will eventually become the responsibility of the local 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
16
administration - adding an additional financial burden - or they will disappear. Despite the apparent 
diamond wealth of the region, there is no allocation of funds from the proceeds returned for development 
purposes, and no intervention from Fundaçao Brilhante was witnessed in the municipality. It is vital that 
central government becomes involved in maintaining the efforts mining companies have undertaken. 
Without central support it is unlikely that the Municipal Authority will in future be able to maintain the 
current level of services, let alone increase their service delivery. 
The Role of Security 
The nature of the diamond industry necessitates a strong security element to protect diamonds and 
property. Within SDM, property can be determined as staff, equipment, and the concession reserves. 
There are five tiers of security evident at SDM. Within the local municipality, the National Police force is 
evident, while a barracks for the FAA (Angolan Armed Forces) is located at the main gate to the mine. 
Within the mine, three further security forces exist. The Corpo Especial de Fiscalizaçao e Segurança de 
Diamantes (CSD) maintains vigilance over diamond mining and processing operations on behalf of the 
government. The company then retains the privately owned security company Alpha 5,16 whose role is to 
maintain the integrity of the concession borders and maintain checkpoints on roads leading into the 
concession itself. SDM then maintains its own internal security force made up of staff from areas to the 
south of Angola who are housed within the camp, having no contact with the local community. There are 
special flights every two weeks that rotate security personnel. This system is contrary to the contractor 
Alpha 5, whose staff lives within the local community and is seldom rotated. 
The responsibility for mining property security is, as detailed in the law, placed firmly in the hands of the 
company. Illicit miners active within company working areas are constantly apprehended by SDM’s own 
security. Often equipped with modern equipment – pumps, diving gear, boats and dredging materials – 
apprehended miners have their equipment seized and they are then transported back to the local 
community. A seven-day sample showed an average of 42 persons arrested daily.  Over 40% were non 
Angolans, predominantly from DRC. The number of buying offices in Cuango municipality, especially 
Cafunfo, is testimony that, despite the level of apprehensions, many illegal miners do succeed. National 
‘unofficial’ production statistics also implies a degree of economic success in illegal mining activities.   
Conclusion 8: Until other (or additional) sources of security of property and persons are reliably provided, legalized artisanal mining and the enhanced livelihoods that it 
might provide are unlikely.   
Consistent, profitable alluvial diamond mining, both industrial and artisanal, requires effective, affordable 
security of property and persons.  Well-capitalized industrial diamond mining concessionaires are able to 
produce (or contract) adequate security services.  Under current Angolan law, concessionaires are 
required to identify areas within their respective concessions that are unsuitable for industrial-scale 
mining and to open such areas to artisanal mining.  However, concessionaires do not do so, because the 
law also requires them to be responsible for maintaining order within the areas opened to artisanal 
production.   
Experimentation with potential institutional arrangements for secure artisanal mining activities by the 
relevant agencies of the government (including municipal authorities in alluvial diamond production 
areas), current concessionaires, and donors is a high priority activity with substantial payoffs.  Such 
efforts might usefully involve cooperatives of artisanal miners, envisioned in current law. 
                                                     
16 Endiama is a 30% shareholder of Alpha 5 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
17
Human Rights and Civil Society 
Although the mining law of 1994 entrusted security responsibilities to mining concessionaires, national 
security operations have attempted to reduce the level of illicit ‘garimpeiro’ operations, especially 
targeting illegal immigrants. In 2004 ‘Operation Brilhante’ enforced the repatriation of a reported 150,000 
to 300,00017 illegal immigrants from mining areas, with many incidents of alleged human rights 
violations. The majority of those repatriated were Congolese; therefore, the border with DRC north of 
Luremo remains highly secured to prevent their return. Yet considerable numbers of Congolese remain or 
have returned, attested to by the apprehension figures of SDM and the authors’ interviews with Congolese 
in Cafunfo. 
Indeed, controls inside concession areas are sometimes lax. The town of Muxinda18 lies in a southern area 
of the SDM concession, just outside the boundaries of Cuango Municipality. Officials from SDM 
informed the authors that in the past five years the town has grown to a population of 100,000 from a 
small hamlet, driven by alluvial diamond finds. This area is deemed as not economically viable for the 
company’s highly industrialized mining activities. Thus the presence of a large number of illegal miners 
within concessions is tolerated.  
During the team’s initial meetings in Luanda, four organizations highlighted their work or potential work 
in the field of Human Rights within the Lundas, including training of trainers within the police and the 
establishment of networks of human rights monitors. Although our assessment of the Cuango 
Municipality was short, limited evidence of any organized civil society was found, and apart from the rare 
meeting of an assessment mission by the International Committee of the Red Cross, no evidence of 
organized NGO activity was found. No incidents of human rights abuses were witnessed, and one 
interviewee suggested that since the change of the head of the local Police, incidents and tension had 
decreased.  
Yet perhaps the key to development within the Cuango municipality lies within public perceptions. 
Dr. Lillian Wong in her recent address19 described a deep rooted suspicion and even mistrust of motives 
within Angolan society, stemming from a more austere era, a view shared by the Council on Foreign 
Relations20. In attempting to understand the level of community participation within the development and 
implementation of projects, the team asked community members if anyone represented their views to the 
company. Following negative answers, the team asked how such a body could be established. Concern 
was expressed as to how anyone representing the community would address the issue of a request that 
could not be fulfilled. When SDM personnel were asked if some form of representation with the 
community could be established, the team was given a description of the character the company would 
select.  
The above characteristics imply an environment where participation and freedom of expression are not 
common.  This view was shared by some of the Luanda based NGOs; reasons that they believe have 
limited the creation of a vibrant civil society and also presenting a major barrier to future development 
within the region. 
                                                     
17 A study of 4 media reports all gave varying figures – no official number was found 
18 Human rights issues within Cuango municipality and Muxinda are highlighted by Rafael Marques in his account 
Lundas – The Stones of Death 2005  
19 Address to the British Angola Forum, London July 9, 2007 
20 Toward An Angola Strategy: Prioritizing US – Angola Relations: Council on Foreign Relations, 2007   
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
18
Conclusion 9: Municipal Development is a partial solution to the social and economic needs of Cuango. 
Strengthening the service delivery and policy development capabilities of Cuango Municipality is 
desirable because it would increase the likelihood that SDM’s social development activities can be 
sustained.  The municipal government might elect to take over some of SDM’s current social 
development activities and it is, given the feeble state of local civil society, the logical forum within 
which the future of these activities ought to be addressed.  A USAID-SDM Municipal Development 
activity in Cuango Municipality is likely to substantially enhance municipal capacity to decide and 
address ongoing issues concerning the sustainability of SDM’s social development activities and to 
enhance municipal capacity to decide and deliver other important local public services.   
However, municipal development is a partial solution.  Certain aspects of the current situation seem 
unlikely to be addressed by a typical municipal development activity.  This includes the need for security 
of property and persons in the potentially soon to be abandoned mining concessions and the need to 
identify alternative livelihoods and expand economic opportunities for the vast majority of municipal 
residents. Solutions to these looming, very serious problems will require engagement with and by a wide 
variety of actors, including industry participants and those agencies of the Government of Angola 
responsible for the diamond mining industry. 
USAID and Global Development Alliances  
The Global Development Alliance (GDA) represents a commitment by USAID to change how it provides 
resources to development programs.  In the 1970s, 70 percent of resource flows from the United States to 
the developing world were from official development assistance and 30 percent were private.  Today, 85 
percent of resource flows from the United States to the developing world are private and 15 percent are 
public.  The involvement of foundations, corporations, and individuals has allowed USAID to strengthen 
the overall effectiveness of programs through the inclusion of new and increasingly important actors.  
In Angola, a series of partnerships with international corporations have been established that have the 
potential to multiply the effectiveness and reach of USAID programs.  Such partnerships include the 
creation of a private sector alliance against HIV/AIDS with Odebrecht and a partnership with Lazare 
Kaplan International that has extended assistance to the Municipal Development Program in Lunda Norte. 
Conclusion 10: SDM and USAID have somewhat inconsistent views regarding the nature and scope of potential joint activities in Cuango.  
The authors of this study have the impression that USAID/Angola and SDM corporate management have 
not fully explored the range of alternative scopes of activity that a joint project might take.  SDM tends to 
see joint activities as limited to continuation or expansion of their ongoing social development activities, 
with explicit focus on ensuring sustainability of these activities as close-out looms. While USAID 
recognizes SDM’s interest in sustaining current social development activities, it is prepared to consider a 
much broader project.  In particular, USAID is interested in improvements to governance in Cuango 
Municipality and, perhaps, throughout the diamond “sector.”  USAID may also be interested in 
supporting improved livelihood strategies for municipal residents.  If joint activities are eventually 
agreed, particular attention will be required to a detailed agreement of the scope of activities. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
19
RECOMMENDATIONS 
THE DIAMOND MINING BACKGROUND 
For any USAID-SDM agreement, the inclusion of the wide discussion on diamond mining in the 
unofficial sector in the Cuango municipality is necessary.  The overall lack of alternative employment 
further drives the unofficial diamond sector. Such action is not only in keeping with the Terms of 
Reference, but also to ensure that both parties to any potential agreement are fully aware of the effect of 
the industry on the community. It is the key driver of the local economy and of the social makeup of the 
area.  
The argument to create some structure to artisanal mining remains, not only from a governance 
perspective but also to increase benefits to local, currently illegal, miners. As the GRA is a 50% 
shareholder of SDM, it is recommended that the discussion forum be widened to engage government in 
the evaluation of what is practical and acceptable within Lunda Norte. Such discussions may also 
mandate Fundaçao Brilhante to undertake a recognized program in Cuango Municipality. 
CONTINUING ACTIVITIES 
SDM has undertaken a number of activities that may be unsustainable at the point of closure of 
operations. It is recommended that discussions begin with the municipal authorities in Cuango to 
formulate handover actions. Meanwhile, as an initial activity, the provision of safe water through the 
provision of bore holes or deep wells in the communities and schools currently being provided water from 
the company is suggested. Such provision should include community water management systems to 
ensure supply is sustained.  
The effectiveness of the USAID/Odebrecht private sector alliance for promoting HIV/AIDS awareness is 
seen to be far greater than the national campaign within the Cuango Municipality. It is recommended that 
- with the support of SDM - the focus of this program be widened to include Cafunfo.   
FUTURE ACTIVITIES  
Any further programs, either independent or joint, should consider an approach to sustainable 
development through the inclusion of Government, Business, and Communities. Income generation 
activities undertaken by the company (although small) are a preferred model for future activities. 
Meanwhile income generation through improved agriculture or fishing is seen to be dependent upon the 
availability of and access to local markets. The economy of Cafunfo can be used as a driver for products 
and services. An early analysis of the economic opportunities present in Cafunfo is recommended. 
Meanwhile in support of the intended wider Municipal profile of Cuango, the authors believe future plans 
would be enhanced by further studies into:  
• 
Identification of community needs 
• 
What communities identify as barriers to development   
• 
Agricultural Production Opportunities Study 
The above could be covered through an in-depth livelihoods analysis of the municipality. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
20
The weakness of civil society within the region is a concern, and attempts to engage available local 
organizations in studies and dialogue should be considered. 
TIME SCALE 
Initial water supply and study recommendations will by nature be short term exercises, potentially within 
a one year time frame. It is envisaged that any future agreement will have Medium and Long Term 
objectives – objectives that may well exceed the life of SDM’s mining activities in Cuango municipality. 
SDM is active in the prospecting of other mining areas. It is recommended that the parent company 
Odebrecht also be engaged as party to any agreement that could continue on a longer-term basis within 
newly developed mining areas. 
ENDNOTES 
The authors wish to acknowledge the support and hospitality of the management and staff of SDM both in 
Luanda and Luzamba, USAID, and those members of the Government of the Republic of Angola whose 
comments have helped to shape this report.  
We are also grateful to the numerous contributors who through formal or informal meetings in Luanda 
and around the Cuango Municipality gave a greater understanding of the current situation but for various 
reasons remain anonymous. 
 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
21
ANNEX 1:  SCOPE OF WORK 
Purpose of Assessment 
This diagnostic and feasibility assessment forms a foundation for both parties to examine the potential for 
joint activities toward development within the municipality. It must enable USAID and SDM to 
realistically assess the prospects for and path to a longer-term partnership capable of contributing to rapid 
improvement of social development activities in Cuango Municipality.  This assessment should identify 
specific activities to improve economic development, citizen welfare and subnational governance in 
Cuango Municipality over medium- (3 years or less) and long-term (greater than 5 years) time frame and 
suggest terms and mechanisms of partnership in order to increase prospects for success.   
Scope of Work 
The Cuango Development Assessment is intended to realize the following:  
• 
Gather, synthesize and report information on the legal and institutional frameworks regulating the 
Angolan diamond industry and related operational practices as they pertain to the citizens and 
transient workers resident in Cuango municipality.  
• 
Collect, analyze and report on information drawn from a wide cross-section of the local 
community pertaining to the attitudes, feelings, opinions, aspirations, knowledge of rights and 
responsibilities, and practices associated with the dynamics of mining in Cuango region. 
• 
Assess the corporate social responsibility projects undertaken by SDM in Cuango municipality.  
• 
The assessment will examine:  
• 
How well the legal and institutional arrangements as well as the economic incentives established 
by the government are serving their intended purposes. These measures would include licensing, 
revenue collection, and other regulatory systems applicable to miners and dealers operating in the 
informal sector.   
• 
To what degree and the manner in which anti-smuggling and other law enforcement measures 
with respect to diamonds are working.  
• 
Residents’ and public and private authorities’ perceptions of the effectiveness and 
appropriateness of the law enforcement and security measures in place to combat illegal 
smuggling. 
• 
Land use rights and the potential for agriculture and other non-mining economic endeavours. 
• 
What communities identify as major barriers for their community development.    
• 
Current local government service delivery capability and the potential for augmenting locally 
generated revenues for social development purposes. 
• 
Effectiveness of community development programs sponsored by the private sector with a special 
emphasis on SDM’s corporate responsibility efforts.  
• 
Existing efforts to curb the spread of HIV/AIDS within the formal and informal sector 
workforces.     
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
22
ANNEX 2:  THE DIAMOND LAW 
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY 
LAW Nº 16/94 
OF 7 OCTOBER 1994 
A diagnosis of the present position of the diamond mining industry in Angola, has implied a detailed 
analysis of the applicable legislation in force and its influence on the operation of the establishment, on 
the activities of mining companies and on the social-economic situation of the population of the Lundas 
and that of the country in general. Such a diagnosis showed the existence of an extremely accelerated 
process of increase of illegal digging and diamond theft within concession areas, which has resulted in an 
uncontrolled dilapidation of the richest deposits, the social and economic deterioration of the population, 
the inevitable leaking of extraordinary foreign currency amounts out of the country, great difficulties for 
the concession holding companies, all this resulting in the flagrant violation of the Constitutional Law and 
of the legislation approved by the authorities, with the consequent discredit of the State and breach of 
authority of the institutions. 
One of the fundamental reasons for the situation now prevailing in the diamond operation areas results 
from the application of Law 30/91, which liberalized diamond possession and trading, creating the idea 
that any citizen may take possession of a resource which, in constitutional terms, belongs to the State and 
must be exploited in the benefit of the whole Nation. Such liberalization, besides having extremely 
negative consequences for the Angolan economy, created the false impression that circulation of people 
and goods is totally free throughout the whole Angolan territory and does not tolerate restrictions and 
conditionings, which goes against the Constitutional Law, besides having created a situation which, to say 
the least, is out of control in respect of prevention and repression of illegal diamond traffic, as penal rules 
regarding this matter are, at present, no longer being applied. 
Therefore, the need to radically alter the current situation becomes obvious, creating new legal basis 
which make it possible to protect a national resource which, due to its importance, requires a technically 
and politically careful treatment, as a State protected and controlled diamond activity, in a sensible 
manner, will result in benefits to the Nation in general, and particularly to the population of the Lundas.  
It has, therefore, been decided that, first of all, the State must have at its disposal a body, which must be a 
company, Empresa Nacional de Diamantes, to carry out its policies of diamond mining and trading, and 
to which, or to any mixed companies of which it is part, exclusive mining rights in respect of diamonds 
must be granted. On the other hand, if such an exclusive status is to be granted to ENDIAMA, this 
company will be reduced to the role of operator in very unfavourable competition with foreign investors. 
However, such an exclusive regime does not imply that, for each project, ENDIAMA does not have to 
apply for the concession of the respective mining rights, and these applications will be appreciated by the 
Government, case by case, taking the State's interests into account. 
Therefore, and looking forward to Angola becoming once again a major diamond producer, ENDIAMA 
must be maintained and made stronger, not only to play the role of competing with investing companies, 
but to represent the minimum necessary but essential Government's intervention and company 
participation agent, in the complex and delicate technical-commercial diamond activities.  
Secondly, it has been decided that a rationalization of diamond mining and trading is not compatible with 
legalizing diamond possession and sale, even when acquired outside the mining concession areas, as Law 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
23
Nº 30/91 unleashed an opposite operation: that of illegal digging and theft of diamonds within those 
areas. 
Thirdly, and with the purpose of avoiding the shock of a radical change in the prevailing situation, this 
Law introduces the main innovation of admitting artisanal mining of diamond deposits selected according 
to their special characteristics, following logical rules and in a controlled way. This type of mining will 
fall upon those deposits which are minable on an industrial scale and will only be allowed within areas 
surrounding present or future demarcated areas for industrial mining (protection areas). The present Law 
also created the so-called "reserved areas", which are areas with deposits where future projects will be 
carried out, and the whole of the territory of the Lunda Norte and Lunda Sul Provinces are henceforward 
considered as a "reserved area", due to the great number of deposits occurring there. 
Naturally, this Law deals with the question of investments in diamond operations, in view of their specific 
nature, and creates new rules regulating the circulation of people and goods in diamond mining areas and 
in reserved areas, not only in the Lundas but also in any part of the Angolan territory, permitting 
industrial mining by national or foreign companies, as long as they possess all necessary conditions to do 
so. 
Finally, this Law defines the bodies in charge of surveillance, security and control of the above mentioned 
areas, allowing for the operation of private security companies, as well as re- expressing all matters 
relating to prevention and repression of illegal traffic of diamonds. In these terms, under paragraph m) of 
article 89 of the Constitutional Law and using the powers bestowed on me by paragraph s) of article 66 of 
that same Law, the National Assembly approves and I sign and send for publication the following: 
 
DIAMOND LAW 
CHAPTER I 
SCOPE AND CONCESSION OF MINING RIGHTS 
Article 1 
(Scope) 
This law is applicable to operations of prospecting, research, reconnaissance, mining, treatment and 
trading of rough diamonds within the territory of the Republic of Angola. 
Article 2 
(Concession of mining rights) 
1. The mining rights for prospecting, research, reconnaissance, mining, treatment and trading of rough 
diamonds within the whole of the Angolan territory, including the continental shelf and the exclusive 
economic zone, will be exclusively granted to ENDIAMA, UEE or to mixed companies of which it is 
part, in terms of Law Nº 1/92. 
2. The above mentioned rights may be pursued directly by ENDIAMA, UEE or by mixed companies of 
which it is part, in terms of Law Nº1/92, and will be granted, case by case, by means of concession 
contracts to be approved by the Cabinet Council, in terms of that same law. 
3. For the case of ENDIAMA, UEE's own projects, the Cabinet Council will approve the respective 
project and no contract will be entered into. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
24
4. For the case of investment projects for the formation of mixed companies with the participation of 
ENDIAMA, UEE, the contract will be negotiated between ENDIAMA, UEE and the other partners in the 
company to be formed. 
5. ENDIAMA may also pursue the rights it is granted through associations in partnership or by means of 
other contracts to be negotiated with Angolan or foreign companies, which may take any of the patterns 
internationally used in mining operations. 
6. The participation of Angolan companies must be encouraged, as long as they possess the required 
technical and financial conditions. 
7. The contract granting mining rights must include specific rules for the fiscal, foreign exchange and 
customs regimes, without prejudice to fiscal and foreign exchange obligations due to legislation in force. 
8. ENDIAMA's associated or contracted partners may only subcontract other companies in terms of Nº 5 
of Article 6 and Nº 6 of Article 11 of Law Nº 1/92. 
9. Rendering of services or supply to diamond projects by ENDIAMA's associated or contracted partners 
is not allowed, except with the express permission of the Cabinet Council. 
10. The interdiction mentioned in the previous paragraph does not include companies in which 
ENDIAMA's associates or partners have shares. 
11. In order to pursue the mining rights to be granted, ENDIAMA, whenever it finds it convenient to do 
so, may open a tender for contract or association with other entities. 
 
CHAPTER II 
FOREIGN INVESTMENTS IN THE DIAMOND AREA 
Article 3 
(Legislation on foreign investments) 
Law Nº 13/88, in its substantive part, is applicable to foreign investments due to this law. 
Article 4 
(Investment procedures) 
The procedure in respect of foreign investment is governed by the following rules: 
a) As a rule, in contracts concerning diamond operations, a form of contract in two stages must be 
adopted, when there is room for geological-mining investigation stage. 
b) For the geological-mining investigation stage, the potential investor must submit to ENDIAMA a 
statement of intent, defining the area and work schedule, with successive stages referred to in Law Nº 
1/92. 
c) For the mining stage, the investor must submit a technical-economic feasibility study which, once 
approved, will become an integral part of the contract granting the concession of mining rights. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
25
d) When the project concerns diamond deposits with calculated reserves and other data allowing the 
immediate preparation of a technical-economic feasibility study, ENDIAMA will, preferably, organise a 
public or limited tender. 
e) ENDIAMA will be sole negotiating speaker, and must always consult the Ministry of Geology and 
Mines, the Ministry of Finance, the Angolan National Bank and the Government Authority of the 
Province in which the investment is to be made. 
f) Once the contract has been negotiated, and if a mixed company is formed, ENDIAMA will send the 
respective Statutes to the Ministry of Geology and Mines for a written opinion, which must be given 
within a period of thirty days. 
g) The Ministry of Geology and Mines, after agreement with ENDIAMA and if the written opinion 
implies alterations to the project, will send the same to the Cabinet Council. 
h) After approval of the Cabinet Council regarding the concession of mining rights, they will be sent to 
the Ministry of Geology and Mines, who will send copies to ENDIAMA, to the Ministry of Finance, to 
the Angolan National Bank and to the Authority of the Province concerned. 
CHAPTER III 
ARTISANAL PRODUCTION 
Article 5 
(Artisanal mining) 
1. ENDIAMA may authorise demarcation of areas for the artisanal mining of diamond occurrences which 
cannot be economically mined through the normal operations of the concession holder. 
2. Artisanal mining will be done using exclusively artisanal means and methods, that is, without the 
intervention of mechanical means and mining technology. 
Article 6 
(Areas for artisanal mining) 
1. Artisanal mining may only be authorised within protection areas, as defined in Article 15 of this Law. 
2. In case of Article 15, Nº 1, paragraph a), demarcation for the purposes of artisanal mining will be 
proposed to ENDIAMA by the respective concession holder. 
3. In case of Article 15, Nº 1, paragraph b), it is ENDIAMA's duty to proceed directly with demarcation 
on its own initiative, whenever the prospective licence holder will not apply for the mining rights 
concession title. 
Article 7 
(Licensing for artisanal mining) 
1. Licences for artisanal mining, in previously demarcated areas, may only be granted to Angolan citizens 
residing for more than five years in the communes around the areas allotted for artisanal mining. 
2. The above mentioned residence must be certified by the traditional authorities of the respective area. In 
case of doubt, an appeal will be made to the communal administrator. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
26
3. Licences for artisanal mining may only be applied for by citizens over 18 years of age, and for that 
effect they must submit their Identity Card or other official document proving their identity. 
4. The application for artisanal mining may be made in writing or verbally to the concession holder or to 
ENDIAMA, in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of the previous article. 
5. The licence will be granted by the Ministry of Geology and Mines, on an individual basis, and the 
formation of companies, associations or cooperatives for the purpose of artisanal mining is not permitted. 
6. The Ministry of Geology and Mines may delegate to ENDIAMA the power to grant licences for 
artisanal mining. 
7. Once the application has been granted and the area for artisanal mining has been demarcated, copy of 
the file will be sent to the communal and municipal authorities, and to the Provincial Government. 
 
CHAPTER IV 
DIAMOND TRADING 
Article 8 
(Diamond trading) 
1. Trading of diamonds must take into account their specificity and highly specialised valuation and the 
particular characteristics of the international market and, as far as possible, get the best value for this 
national resource. 
2. Trading of diamonds is exclusively carried out by ENDIAMA or by a company to be formed expressly 
for the specific object of trading, safeguarding the legitimate interests of producers. 
3. Without prejudice to anything which may be contractually provided in this respect between the 
diamond producing companies to which concessions have been granted and the trading company, the 
latter will be entitled to a commission, to cover operation costs, which may not exceed 2.5% of the value 
of the exported diamonds. 
4. ENDIAMA contractors sharing in the results of the diamond production are entitled to negotiate and 
participate in the preparation of diamond trading contracts or agreements which are made with 
ENDIAMA. 
Article 9 
(Granting of export licences) 
Exports will be the object of licensing by the relevant authority of the Ministry of Trade, and the Ministry 
of Geology and Mines will be informed thereof. 
Article 10 
(Valuation) 
1. Before export, ENDIAMA will sort and valuate the diamonds received from producers. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
27
2. While ENDIAMA does not have appropriate offices to carry out the final valuation in Angolan 
territory, a provisional valuation will be carried out, and the final valuation will take place in the 
purchaser's office, with the intervention of an internationally recognised valuator, who will be engaged 
both for the provisional valuation, and to participate and certify the final valuation. 
3. The producer has the right of using a valuator of his own choice at all stages of valuation proceedings. 
Article 11 
(Trading of accessory minerals) 
Trading of accessory minerals occurring in the mining deposits is free, except for gold, where the whole 
production must be sold in terms of the legislation in force. 
Article 12 
(Valuation and trading of artisanal production) 
1. Diamonds, as well as accessory minerals extracted in artisanal mining areas, must be sold compulsorily 
to the concession holder in the case referred to in Article 6, Nº 2, and to ENDIAMA or to the mixed 
company specialized in diamond purchasing of which ENDIAMA is a partner, in the case of Article 6, Nº 
3. 
2. Before the diamonds mentioned in the previous paragraph are sold, a local valuation will be carried out, 
to determine the buying price. 
3. When this valuation is carried out by the concession holder as mentioned in Article 6, Nº 2, 
ENDIAMA valuators will always take part in the proceedings. 
4. The value of each purchased parcel of diamonds will be paid immediately after valuation. 
 
CHAPTER V 
CONTROL OF PEOPLE AND GOODS WITHIN DIAMOND AREAS 
Article 13 
(Limits to circulation of people and goods) 
1. Access to, circulation of people and goods, residence and exercise of economic activities may be 
controlled, limited or prohibited within the mining production areas or those reserved, established within 
areas with diamond occurrences in terms of the provisions of the following articles. 
2. For the purposes of this Law, production areas are divided into RESTRICTED AREAS and 
PROTECTION AREAS. 
3. Areas demarcated for artisanal mining purposes are also protection areas. 
Article 14 
(Restricted areas) 
1. RESTRICTED AREAS are mining areas demarcated under Law 1/92. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
28
2. RESTRICTED AREAS must be marked "in loco" by plainly visible and legible landmarks and 
signboards, facing outwards and located at the vertices of the geometrical shapes which define them, as 
well as at the crossing points of roads and public paths, containing the words "Restricted area. Access 
forbidden” and bearing the name of the concession holder. 
3. It is the duty of the concession holder to build, at its own cost and according to the route proposed by 
the relevant authorities, thoroughfares alternative to the roads and public paths which pass through a 
restricted area. 
4. The concession holder may, in his own interest and without need for permission, build a continuous 
boundary for the whole or part of restricted areas and the deposits, mines or plants within them. 
Article 15 
(Protection areas) 
1. PROTECTION AREAS are: 
a) those areas corresponding to strips of land surrounding restricted areas within a distance to be 
established, up to 5 Km from the external boundaries of the mining demarcation lines; 
b) those areas corresponding to diamond concessions found under a prospecting licence, adding a 
surrounding area within a distance to be established, up to 5 Km from the external boundaries of protected 
deposits or mines, during the period from discovery of the occurrences to the concession of mining rights. 
2. Protection areas must be marked with plainly visible and legible signboards, placed at the crossing 
points of roads and public paths, containing the words "Diamond protection area. Loitering forbidden" 
and bearing the name of the concession holder. 
3. The protection areas mentioned in Nº 1, paragraph b) must be maintained, with the same or with other 
boundaries, in cases where protected diamond occurrences are also areas demarcated for artisanal mining. 
4. Protection areas are established by the Ministry of Geology and Mines, upon request of the concession 
holder and have the purpose of preventing subtraction, extraction and illegal diamond traffic. 
Article 16 
(Reserved areas) 
1. RESERVED AREAS are parts of the territory which, although they have not yet been the object of any 
granting of titles for mining rights, are demarcated with a view to future development of diamond 
operations. 
2. It is for the Cabinet Council to establish reserved areas at ENDIAMA's request, whenever there is 
knowledge or well founded foreknowledge of diamond occurrences in any part of the Angolan territory. 
3. The whole territory of the Provinces of Lunda Norte and Lunda Sul which is not covered by restricted 
areas, protection areas and artisanal production areas is, as from now, considered to be a RESERVED 
AREA. 
4. Reserved areas must be marked "in loco" with plainly visible and legible landmarks and signboards, 
located at the vertices of the geometrical shapes which define them, as well as at the crossing points of 
roads and public paths, containing the words "Reserved area. Limited circulation, permanence and 
economic activity". 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
29
5. The provisions of the previous paragraph are not applicable to the reserved area defined in number 3 of 
this article. 
Article 17 
(Access to diamond areas) 
1. Access to restricted areas is forbidden, except for personnel connected with diamond production 
operations. 
2. However, such access is allowed for people and entities travelling to restricted areas on official 
business, for State authorities and for other entities or people invited or specially authorized by the 
concession holder. 
Article 18 
(Circulation of people) 
1. Circulation of people within restricted areas is regulated by the respective concession holder. 
2. Circulation within protection areas can only take place using public roads and paths, and people 
circulating there must carry: 
a) Identity Card, or another document proving their identity. 
b) Permit issued by the services to which they belong, by the administration authority of their area of 
residence or by the concession holder. 
3. The Provincial Governor, at ENDIAMA's request, may establish other restrictions to the movement of 
people within protection areas, whenever the need for security of mining operations so demands. 
Article 19 
(Circulation of goods) 
1. No goods may enter or leave a restricted area without permission of the concession holder. 
2. The circulation of goods through protection areas is allowed, but they must be accompanied by a 
dispatch bill clearly identifying, discriminating and showing the quantities of such goods, or by a 
credential issued by the concession holder. 
Article 20 
(Economic activities) 
1. All kinds of economic activities foreign to diamond mining, of whatever nature, be it industrial, 
commercial, agricultural or others are forbidden in restricted areas and in protection areas. 
2. It falls to concession holders to indemnify the owners of commercial and industrial institutions and 
agricultural or animal husbandry farms or of any other installations existing at the time of creation of 
restricted areas and protection areas, for damages caused to them by the prohibition mentioned in the 
previous paragraph. 
3. Expropriation for public utility both in favour of the State or of the concession holder is permitted in 
restricted areas and in protection areas. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
30
Article 21 
(Residence) 
1 Residence in restricted areas and in protection areas is forbidden, except for people linked with mining 
operations. 
2. The population residing in restricted areas or in protection areas at the time they are established must 
be regrouped outside such areas, as near to them as possible, and in such cases, the concession holder 
must guarantee: 
a) building of suitable accommodation, never inferior to the one the displaced people had before; 
b) building of social and community infrastructures, namely schools, community centres, churches, water 
supplies and others, in at least the same conditions as those existing in the displaced settlements. 
3. The provisions of a) and b) of the previous paragraph are not applicable to buildings located in 
restricted areas and in protection areas which are expropriated for public utility. 
4. It falls to the Provincial Governor to approve the regrouping proposed by the concession holder. 
5. The Provincial Governor may condition the project to the submission of economic assistance and social 
promotion supported by the concession holder. 
Article 22 
(Restrictions in artisanal mining areas) 
1. Access, circulation and permanence in areas marked for artisanal mining are only permitted to licence 
holders, and any economic activity not connected with diamond mining is strictly forbidden. 
Article 23 
(Restrictions in reserved areas) 
Restrictions to access, circulation of people and goods, and residence, as well as any economic activities 
in reserved areas, will be established by special legislation. 
Article 24 
(Control of people and goods) 
1. The vigilance and control of people and goods in restricted areas and in protection areas, as well as the 
security if its respective deposits and diamond mining operations, fall to concession holders, either by 
using their own resources and personnel recruited by themselves, through a self-defence system, or by 
contracting specialized security companies, in the terms permitted by law. 
2. The vigilance and control of people and goods in areas marked for artisanal production fall to 
concession holders, or to ENDIAMA or to the mixed company which replace it, in terms of the provisions 
of article 15. 
3. The vigilance and control of people and goods in reserved areas fall to the National Police, however the 
Cabinet Council may authorize, in terms of the law, specialized security companies to support the Police 
and cooperate in their vigilance and control operations or, in special cases, eventually, substitute them. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
31
4. The powers of vigilance and control of people and goods given to the entities mentioned in Nºs 1 and 2 
of this article do not prejudice the general powers given by law to the National Police. 
5. The Mining Police and the Industrial Security and Vigilance Force are hereby abolished, and the 
Ministry of Home Affairs and ENDIAMA must, within a period of 120 days, propose what to do with 
their respective contingents. 
CHAPTER VI 
ILLEGAL DIAMOND TRAFFIC 
Article 25 
(Prevention and repression of illegal traffic. Powers) 
1. The prevention and repression of illegal diamond traffic fall, in the whole of the Angolan territory, to 
the usual State criminal prevention and repression authorities, in terms of procedural penal legislation. 
2. The provisions of the previous paragraph do not prejudice the duties which, in matters of vigilance, 
security and control of people and goods, fall to concession holders, and to private companies specialized 
in security within restricted areas, protection areas, reserved areas and areas demarcated for artisanal 
mining, in terms of this law. 
Article 26 
(Duties of concessionaires and security companies) 
1. When performing their duties due to the law concerning vigilance, security and control of people and 
goods, concession holders and security companies must: 
a) keep under constant surveillance the areas under their control and check the movement of people and 
goods; 
b) prevent the residence, transit, exercising of any economic activities and access of people and goods to 
the areas forbidden by law; 
c) prevent all unauthorized prospecting, research, reconnaissance and mining of diamonds; 
d) guarantee the protection of deposits and occurrences, opposing all unauthorized diamond prospecting 
and mining operations; 
e) guarantee the security of plants, goods, services and people engaged in diamond operations. 
2. When performing their duties, the entities and persons in charge of controlling people and goods may: 
a) identify and carry out routine searches of its own workers and people in general entering or leaving 
restricted areas or circulating or finding themselves in any other areas under their control, as well as 
objects and goods they may be carrying or which are under their responsibility; 
b) require the showing of access permits and passes, credentials or way-bills for merchandise and goods; 
c) preventively detain "flagrante delicto" the culprits of the crimes due to this Law; 
d) confiscate the product or object of violation, the instruments used in such violation and, generally, all 
material proof susceptible of being lost or destroyed or concealed; 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
32
e) resort to the use of force when it becomes absolutely necessary to carry out their duties effectively. 
3. For the purposes of the provisions of paragraph d) above, means of transport, arms and materials or 
camping gear found in possession of the violators are instruments of crime. 
4. The goods apprehended and people detained must be handed over to the Public Prosecutor or to the 
office of the National Police closed to the place of detention or confiscation, in terms of and within the 
period of time due to article 9 of Law Nº 18-A/92, of 17th July. 
5. It falls to concession holders to issue internal regulations on the subject of vigilance, security and 
control in restricted areas applicable to their workers and to people authorized by law or invited to enter 
such areas. 
Article 27 
(Cooperation) 
The staff of concession holders or specialized security companies in charge of controlling people and 
goods in diamond areas, when preventing and combating illegal diamond traffic or any other illegal 
activities due to this Law, must act in close cooperation with the police, criminal instruction and judicial 
authorities, and in keeping with the most scrupulous respect for legitimate people's rights and the 
provisions of legislation in force. 
Article 28 
(Investigation and instruction) 
The security agents mentioned in the previous article may not, under any circumstances whatsoever, carry 
out investigation and criminal instruction activities, except for those established in this Law. 
Article 29 
(Unauthorized entry into a restricted area) 
1. The access to and permanence of people in restricted areas, outside the cases permitted by  law, are 
punished with prison and fine up to two years. 
2. In case of negligence, the prison sentence is up to six months and fine up to one year. 
Article 30 
(Circulation and permanence in protection areas) 
1. Circulation and permanence of people in protection areas, except under the conditions provided in 
Article 18, are punished with prison up to one year and fine up to one year. 
2. In case of negligence, the prison sentence is up to three months or fine up to six months. 
Article 31 
(Circulation of goods) 
1. Circulation of goods, except under the conditions provided in Article 19, is punished with prison up to 
one year. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
33
2. In case of negligence, the prison sentence is up to three months or fine up to six months. 
Article 32 
(Restrictions in reserved areas) 
1. Anyone who does not respect the rules imposing restrictions to residence, circulation and economic 
activities in reserved areas is punished with prison up to one year and fine up to one year. 
2. In case of negligence, the prison sentence is up to three months and fine up to six months. 
Article 33 
(Illegal entering into artisanal mining areas) 
1. Anyone entering an area marked for artisanal diamond mining without permission will be punished 
with prison up to six months or fine up to one year. 
2. If the violator is a foreigner, or if, although being an Angolan citizen, he has no permanent residence in 
that area, the sentence is prison and fine up to two years. 
3. In case of negligence, the prison sentence is up to three months or fine up to six months. 
Article 34 
(Conditions of punishment) 
Perpetrators of the crimes described in articles 29 to 33 will only be punished if they are caught "flagrant 
delicto". 
Article 35 
(Illegal prospecting) 
Diamond prospecting, research and reconnaissance without a prospecting licence is punishable with 8 to 
12 year imprisonment. 
Article 36 
(Illegal mining and extraction) 
Diamond mining, as well as simple extraction without a title granting mining rights, will be punished as a 
crime of theft and with 8 to 12 years imprisonment except if, in case of extraction, a more severe sentence 
is not applicable, due to the value of the diamonds extracted. 
Article 37 
(Theft of diamonds) 
Theft of rough diamonds is punishable with 8 to 12 years imprisonment, if a more severe sentence is not 
applicable due to the value of the stolen diamonds and the circumstances under which the crime was 
committed. 
Article 38 
(Illegal possession of diamonds) 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
34
Possession or mere keeping of rough diamonds, except in legally authorized circumstances, is punishable 
with 8 to 12 years imprisonment. 
Article 39 
(Illegal diamond traffic) 
1. Buying and selling, donation in payment or any other form of transmission, as well as withdrawal from 
Angolan territory of rough diamonds, except in legally authorized circumstances, is considered to be 
illegal diamond traffic. 
2. Illegal diamond traffic is punishable with 8 to 12 years imprisonment. 
Article 40 
(Illegal introduction of diamonds into Angolan territory) 
Unauthorized introduction of rough diamonds into Angolan territory is punishable with 2 to 8 years 
imprisonment. 
Article 41 
(Traffic of non-valuable stones) 
Traffic of non-valuable stones as if they were diamonds is punishable with 2 to 8 years imprisonment. 
Article 42 
(Preparatory action, complicity and reception) 
In the crimes described in Articles 35 to 40: 
a) Preparatory action is punishable with the corresponding imprisonment and fine; 
b) Accomplices are punishable with the sentences applicable to the respective perpetrators, with 
attenuation; 
c) Concealment is punishable with 2 to 8 years imprisonment. 
Article 43 
(Accessory fine) 
1. In case of condemnation for any of the crimes due to Articles 35, 36, 37 and 39, the sentence may be 
increased by a fine of not less than NKZ 5,000,000.00 and never higher than one third of the value of the 
diamonds object of the crime. 
2. If the crime is perpetrated by representatives, proxies or company employees or other artificial persons 
on their behalf, they will be solidarily responsible for payment of the fine. 
Article 44 
(Security measures) 
1. In case of condemnation, perpetrators of fraudulent crimes due to this Law who are foreigners may be 
expelled from Angolan territory after they have served their sentence. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
35
2. If the perpetrators of those same crimes practice a profession or economic activity subject to licensing, 
or are managers or directors of a legally formed company, they may be precluded from 
practising their profession, activity, management or directorship for a period of one to five years. 
3. The provisions of paragraph 5 of Article 70 of the Penal Code, with the required adaptations, are 
applicable to the above mentioned interdiction. 
Article 45 
(Goods lost in favour of the State) 
In fraudulent crimes provided in Articles 17 and 19, both goods circulating in conditions other than those 
established in Article 19, as well as the vehicles in which such goods and the crime perpetrators are 
transported, must be declared as lost in favour of the State, except when both of them belong to people 
who have taken no part in the crime and who acted in good faith. 
Article 46 
(Confiscated diamonds) 
1. Confiscated diamonds must be submitted for examination and valuation by experts duly accredited by 
the Ministry of Geology and Mines, and then delivered to ENDIAMA UEE, who will act as faithful 
keeper. 
2. Confiscated diamonds are finally delivered to: 
a) The holder of prospecting licences or mining titles, when it has been clearly determined that they were 
extracted or stolen from areas covered by such licences or titles. 
b) The State, in the remaining cases. 
3. People who, through denunciation or in any other form, assist in the confiscation of diamonds, are 
entitled to a premium equivalent to 25% of their respective value. 
Article 47 
(Special attenuating circumstances and exemption from penalty) 
1. In case of confession useful to the discovery of the crime and its perpetrators, the court may 
exceptionally substitute any fixed imprisonment penalty by simple imprisonment or fine or exempt the 
defendant from the penalty. 
2. The Court may also reduce any imprisonment penalty down to the minimum of one year or substitute it 
by correctional imprisonment of never less than one year whenever circumstances are proven which 
justify an extraordinary attenuation of the penalty, and the damage or the danger of damage are of reduced 
or insignificant value. 
Article 48 
(Territorial scope of this Law) 
This Law is applicable to all the crimes mentioned in it committed in any part of the Angolan territory by 
either Angolan or foreign citizens. 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
36
CHAPTER VII 
FINAL AND TEMPORARY PROVISIONS 
Article 49 
(Closing of buying offices) 
1. Diamond buying offices authorized in terms of Law Nº 30/91, of 27th December and Decree Nº 20/92, 
of 15th May, will be immediately closed, without prejudice to the rights recognized to the respective 
companies by Article 5 of the last document mentioned above. 
2. For the purposes of the previous paragraph, the owners of diamond buying offices must declare to the 
Ministry of Geology and Mines, within a period of five days, all diamonds purchased up to the date of 
enforcement of this Law and which are still in their possession. 
Article 50 
(Provisional demarcation) 
For the areas where ENDIAMA has geological-mining operations in course and which have not yet been 
the object of a mining concession title, ENDIAMA will apply to the Ministry of Geology and Mines for 
provisional demarcation of restricted areas and respective protection areas. 
Article 51 
(Special remuneration regimes) 
The Cabinet Council may establish special regimes of remuneration for the National Police, the 
magistrates, justice officials and other workers of the remaining criminal prevention and  repression 
offices, placed in Lunda Norte and Lunda Sul, and extend them to other areas of the country, whenever 
the need to prevent and repress illegal diamond traffic so requires. 
Article 52 
(Revoking of legislation) 
Laws Nºs 7/85 of 3rd August, and 30/91 of 27th December, Decrees Nºs 79/71 of 27th December, 1/89 of 
7th January, 50/89 of 4th September, 20/92 of 15th May, and any other legal provisions which contradict 
this Law are hereby revoked. 
Article 53 
(Effective date) 
This Law becomes effective ninety days after its publication. 
Examined and approved by the National Assembly 
To be published. 
Luanda ................................. 
The Chairman of the National Assembly, Fernando José de França Dias Van- Dunem 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
37
The President of the Republic, José Eduardo dos Santos. 
 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
38
ANNEX 3:  MEETINGS 
Angola Meetings List 
Date 
No 
Person 
Role 
Organisation 
Oct 3 
1 
Susan Brems 
Mission Director 
USAID 
 
2 
Mervyn Farroe 
Program Officer 
USAID 
 
3 
Romulo Peixoto 
D&G Specialist 
USAID 
 
4 
Ranca Tuba 
Team Leader D&G 
USAID 
 
5 
Vic Duarte 
General Development Officer
USAID 
 
6 
Mitchell Ferguson 
Political Econ Councillor 
US Embassy 
 
7 
Mark Schall 
Economic Secretary 
US Embassy 
 
8 
Dr. Mauricio Neves 
Director General 
SDM 
Oct 4 
9 
Ingle 
Human Rights Officer 
Friedrich Ebert Stiftung  
 
10 
Dimitry Voegler 
Political Officer 
Dutch Embassy 
 
11 
Vegard Bye 
Chief of Office 
UNHRO 
 
12 
Joao Neves 
Consultant 
JMJ 
 
13 
Fern Teodoro 
Director 
World Learning 
Oct 5 
14 
George Sherrell IV 
Managing Director 
KWORUM (LKI) 
 
15 
Elias Isaac 
Programme Manager 
Open Society 
 
16 
Mustaque Ahmed 
COP MDP 
CARE 
 
17 
Robert Jan Bulten  
Country Director 
CARE 
 
18 
Allan Cain 
Director 
Development Workshop 
Oct 9 
19 
Teresa Muniz 
Head Human Resources 
SDM 
 
20 
Robert Jones 
Operations Director 
SDM 
 
21 
Leila Salomao 
Consultant 
SDM 
 
22 
John S. Janeski 
Doctorate/Consultant 
SDM 
 
23 
Pedro Luveso 
Teacher/IT  
SDM 
 
24 
Commandant Pei 
Chief of Police 
Cuango Municipality 
 
25 
Paulo Passos 
Administrator 
Cuango Municipality 
 
26 
Joao Katanga 
Administrative Assistant 
Cuango Municipality 
 
27 
Mona Caia 
Regiedor (Head Soba) 
Cuango Municipality 
Oct 10 28 
Jean Bernardo 
Administrator 
Luremo 
 
29 
Acacio Goncalves 
Manager LAM 
Luremo 
 
30 
Nascimento  
Community Liaison 
Luremo 
 
31 
Laurenso 
The School Kid 
Luremo 
 
32 
Sen Marcos 
Communa Head of 
Education 
Luremo 
 
33 
Damiao Mucoso 
Communa Head of 
Luremo 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
39
Date 
No 
Person 
Role 
Organisation 
Secretariat 
 
34 
Manual Costa 
Head Human Resources 
Luminas Luremo 
Oct 11 35 
Sr. Domingos 
Interin Head of Municipal 
Hospital 
Cafunfo 
 
36 
Jacques  
ASCORP Rep  
Cafunfo 
 
37 
Viriato Melo 
Airport Manager - ENANA 
Cafunfo 
 
38 
Donna Maria 
Shop Owner 
 
 
39 
Albino Jose Capinagola
Delegate –Guicango 
Commercial 
 
 
40 
Manuel Muleno 
Manager 
Banco BIC 
 
41 
Caxita 
Ass Promocau Deve Social 
Cafunfo 
 
42 
Jean Pierre 
Fisher of Rivers - Congolese 
Cafunfo 
Oct 12 43 
Jim 
Head of Security  
SDM 
 
44 
Robert Jones 
Operations Director 
SDM 
 
46 
Richard Barnes 
Geologist 
SDM 
Oct 17 47 
Dr Mankenda Ambriose
Vice Minister 
Minsitry of Geology and 
Mines 
Oct 19 48 
Francisco Fernandez 
DCM 
US Embassy 
 
49 
J Francisco Ganga 
Director of Planning 
Fundaçao Brilhante 
 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
40
ANNEX 4:  WORLDWIDE ROUGH DIAMOND PRODUCTION – 2006 
 
Rough Diamond Production Statistics - 2006 
 
 
 
 
Country 
Carats 
Value 
Average 
Value 
 
 
 
per carat 
Angola 
9,175,060.73
$1,132,514,825.77 
$123.43
Australia 
29,940,451.30
$559,573,074.71 
$18.69
Botswana 
34,293,401.00
$3,207,570,684.00 
$93.53
Brazil 
94,010.00
$6,279,020.00 
$66.79
Canada 
13,206,357.00
$1,397,443,872.32 
$105.82
Central African Republic 
419,528.35
$59,066,866.49 
$140.79
China - People's Republic  
74,080.20
$1,240,000.00 
$16.74
Congo, Democratic Republic of 
28,990,241.43
$431,931,171.00 
$14.90
Ghana 
972,647.88
$30,910,703.33 
$31.78
Guinea 
473,862.25
$39,884,880.00 
$84.17
Guyana 
350,518.00
$44,387,773.00 
$126.63
India  
10,278.95
$1,763,359.00 
$171.55
Indonesia 
51,603.06
$10,643,234.50 
$206.25
Lesotho 
112,408.46
$83,545,876.40 
$743.23
Namibia 
2,402,477.34
$900,977,934.05 
$375.02
Russian Federation 
38,360,810.00
$2,574,280,850.00 
$67.11
Sierra Leone 
603,566.07
$125,304,842.46 
$207.61
South Africa 
14,934,706.23
$1,361,816,225.26 
$91.18
Tanzania 
272,161.41
$25,553,133.25 
$93.89
Togo 
28,176.00
$3,221,570.00 
$114.34
Venezuela 
16,980.73
$1,181,020.04 
$69.55
Zimbabwe 
1,046,025.45
$33,853,837.81 
$32.36
 
 
 
 
TOTAL 
175,829,351.84
$12,032,944,753.39 
$68.44
 
 
CUANGO DEVELOPMENT DIAGNOSTIC AND FEASIBILITY ASSESSMENT 
41
ANNEX 5:  MAP OF ANGOLA 
 
