 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
United States Government Accountability Office
GAO 
Testimony 
Before the Committee on Armed Services 
U.S. Senate
SECURING, STABILIZING, 
AND REBUILDING IRAQ 
Iraqi Government Has Not 
Met Most Legislative, 
Security, and Economic 
Benchmarks 
Statement of David M. Walker  
Comptroller General of the United States 
 
 
 
For Release on Delivery 
Expected at 9:00 a.m. EDT 
Friday, September 7, 2007 
  
 
GAO-07-1230T 
 
 
 
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee: 
I am pleased to appear today to discuss our report
1 on whether or not the 
government of Iraq has met 18 benchmarks contained in the U.S. Troop 
Readiness, Veterans’ Care, Katrina Recovery, and Iraq Accountability 
Appropriations Act of 2007
2 (the Act). The Act requires GAO to report on 
the status of the achievement of these benchmarks. Consistent with GAO’s 
core values and our desire to be fair and balanced, we also considered and 
used a “partially met” rating for some benchmarks. In comparison, the Act 
requires the administration to report on whether satisfactory progress is 
being made toward meeting the benchmarks. The benchmarks cover Iraqi 
government actions needed to advance reconciliation within Iraqi society, 
improve the security of the Iraqi population, provide essential services to 
the population, and promote economic well-being. 
To complete this work, we reviewed U.S. agency and Iraqi documents and 
interviewed officials from the Departments of Defense, State, and the 
Treasury; the Multi-National Force-Iraq (MNF-I) and its subordinate 
commands; the Defense Intelligence Agency; the Central Intelligence 
Agency; the National Intelligence Council; and the United Nations. These 
officials included Ryan Crocker, the U.S. Ambassador to Iraq, and General 
David H. Petraeus, Commander of the Multi-National Force-Iraq. We made 
multiple visits to Iraq during 2006 and 2007, most recently from July 22 to 
August 1, 2007. Our analyses were enhanced by approximately 100 Iraq-
related reports and testimonies that we have completed since May 2003. 
We conducted our review in accordance with generally accepted 
government auditing standards. 
 
In summary, we found 
Summary 
The benchmarks were derived from commitments first articulated by the 
Iraqi government in June 2006. 
The Iraqi government met 3, partially met 4, and did not meet 11 of its 18 
benchmarks. Overall, key legislation has not been passed, violence 
remains high, and it is unclear whether the Iraqi government will spend 
                                                                                                                                    
1GAO, Iraqi Government Has Not Met Most Legislative, Security, and Economic 
Benchmarks (GAO-07-1195) (Washington, D.C.: Sept. 4, 2007). 
2Section 1314 of P.L. 110-28.  
Page 1 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
$10 billion in reconstruction funds. These results do not diminish the 
courageous efforts of coalition forces and progress that has been made in 
several areas, including Anbar Province. 
The Iraqi government met one of eight legislative benchmarks: the rights 
of minority political parties in Iraq’s legislature are protected. The 
government has not enacted legislation on de-Ba’athification, oil revenue 
sharing, provincial elections, amnesty, and militia disarmament. 
It is unclear whether sectarian violence in Iraq has decreased—a key 
security benchmark—since it is difficult to measure whether the 
perpetrators’ intents were sectarian in nature, and other measures of 
population security show differing trends. 
As the Congress considers the way forward in Iraq, it should balance the 
achievement of the 18 Iraqi benchmarks with military progress and with 
homeland security goals, foreign policy goals, and other goals of the 
United States. 
 
Page 2 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
The benchmarks contained in the Act were derived from commitments 
articulated by the Iraqi government beginning in June 2006 and affirmed in 
subsequent statements by Prime Minister Maliki in September 2006 and 
January 2007 (see fig. 1). Iraq’s commitments to these benchmarks were 
most recently stated in the May 2007 International Compact for Iraq. 
Origins of the 
Benchmarks 
 
 
Page 3 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Origin of Iraqi Benchmarks 
Source: GAO analysis of Department of State, Department of Defense, and Iraqi government data.
1. Forming a Constitutional Review Committee and then completing 
the constitutional review.
2. Enacting and implementing legislation on de-Ba’athification.
3. Enacting and implementing legislation to ensure the equitable distribution 
of hydrocarbon resources of the people of Iraq without regard to the sect 
or ethnicity of recipients, and enacting and implementing legislation to 
ensure that the energy resources of Iraq benefit Sunni Arabs, Shia Arabs, 
Kurds, and other Iraqi citizens in an equitable manner.
4.  Enacting and implementing legislation on procedures to form 
semi-autonomous regions.
5. Enacting and implementing legislation establishing an Independent 
High Electoral Commission, provincial elections law, provincial council 
authorities, and a date for provincial elections.
6. Enacting and implementing legislation addressing amnesty.
7. Enacting and implementing legislation establishing a strong militia 
disarmament program to ensure that such security forces are 
accountable only to the central government and loyal to the Constitution 
of Iraq.
8. Establishing supporting political, media, economic, and services 
committees in support of the Baghdad security plan.
10. Providing Iraqi commanders with all authorities to execute this plan and 
to make tactical and operational decisions, in consultation with U.S. 
commanders, without political intervention, to include the authority to 
pursue all extremists, including Sunni insurgents and Shiite militias.
11. Ensuring that the Iraqi security forces are providing 
even-handed enforcement of the law.
12. Ensuring that, according to President Bush, Prime Minister Maliki 
said ‘‘the Baghdad security plan will not provide a safe haven for 
any outlaws, regardless of [their] sectarian or political affiliation.’’
13. Reducing the level of sectarian violence in Iraq and eliminating 
militia control of local security.
14. Establishing all of the planned joint security stations in 
neighborhoods across Baghdad.b
15. Increasing the number of Iraqi security forces’ units capable of 
operating independently.
16. Ensuring that the rights of minority political parties in the Iraqi 
legislature are protected.
17. Allocating and spending $10 billion in Iraqi revenues for reconstruction 
projects, including delivery of essential services, on an equitable basis. 
18. Ensuring that Iraq’s political authorities are not undermining or making 
false accusations against members of the Iraqi security forces.
9. Providing three trained and ready Iraqi brigades to support 
Baghdad operations.
May
Compact 
commitments 
by GOI 
May 25, 2007
BENCHMARKS Public Law 110-28
Jan. & 
Feb.
 Prime 
Minister 
Maliki’s
speeches 
Jan.
 Highlights
of the Iraq 
Strategy 
Review
Jan. 
President 
Bush’s New 
Way 
Forward  
speech 
Jan. 
Additional 
commitments 
by Prime 
Minister Maliki
Sept. 
Prime Minister 
Maliki’s 
Benchmarksa 
June 
24 Point Iraqi 
National 
Reconciliation 
Plan 
2006
2007
Page 4 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
aIraq’s Policy Committee on National Security agreed upon a set of political, security, and economic 
benchmarks and an associated timeline in September 2006. These were reaffirmed by the 
Presidency Council on October 16, 2006. 
bIn December 2006 the Multi-National Force-Iraq and government of Iraq agreed to establish the Joint 
Security Stations. 
 
As of August 30, 2007, the Iraqi government met 3, partially met 4, and did 
not meet 11 of its 18 benchmarks. Overall, key legislation has not been 
passed, violence remains high, and it is unclear whether the Iraqi 
government will spend $10 billion in reconstruction funds. 
GAO Assessment of 
the 18 Benchmarks 
Page 5 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: GAO Assessment of the 18 Benchmarks 
Number of independent units declined 
between March and July 2007.
Source: GAO analysis of UN, U.S., and Iraqi data.
Enacting and implementing legislation establishing an Independent High 
Electoral Commission, provincial elections law, provincial council authorities, 
and a date for provincial elections.
Benchmark
Funds allocated but unlikely to be fully
spent.
Committee formed but amendments not
approved by the Iraqi legislature and no
referendum scheduled.
Laws drafted.
3 of 4 components drafted; none being 
considered by parliament. 
Law enacted; implementation scheduled 
for 2008. 
Commission law enacted and
implemented; however, supporting laws
not enacted.
No law drafted.
No law drafted.
Committees established.
32 of 34 stations established.
Forces provided; some of limited 
effectiveness.
Militia infiltration of some security forces 
enables some safe havens.
Militias control some local security; 
unclear whether sectarian violence has
decreased.
Forming a Constitutional Review Committee and completing the 
constitutional review.
GAO 
assessment
Status
Enacting and implementing legislation on de-Ba’athification.
Enacting and implementing legislation to ensure the equitable distribution of 
hydrocarbon resources of the people of Iraq without regard to the sect or 
ethnicity of recipients, and enacting and implementing legislation to ensure 
that the energy resources of Iraq benefit Sunni Arabs, Shia Arabs, Kurds, 
and other Iraqi citizens in an equitable manner.
Enacting and implementing legislation addressing amnesty.
Enacting and implementing legislation establishing a strong militia 
disarmament program to ensure that such security forces are accountable 
only to the central government and loyal to the Constitution of Iraq.
Establishing supporting political, media, economic, and services 
committees in support of the Baghdad security plan.
Ensuring that Iraqi security forces are providing even-handed enforcement 
of the law.
Ensuring that, according to President Bush, Prime Minister Maliki said “the 
Baghdad security plan will not provide a safe haven for any outlaws, 
regardless of [their] sectarian or political affiliation.”
Reducing the level of sectarian violence in Iraq and eliminating militia 
control of local security. 
Establishing all of the planned joint security stations in neighborhoods 
across Baghdad.
Ensuring that the rights of minority political parties in the Iraqi legislature 
are protected.
Increasing the number of Iraqi security forces units capable of operating 
independently.
Allocating and spending $10 billion in Iraqi revenues for reconstruction 
projects, including delivery of essential services, on an equitable basis.
Ensuring that Iraq’s political authorities are not undermining or making false 
accusations against members of the Iraqi security forces.
Providing Iraqi commanders with all authorities to execute this plan and to 
make tactical and operational decisions, in consultation with U.S. 
commanders, without political intervention, to include the authority to 
pursue all extremists, including Sunni insurgents and Shiite militias.
Providing three trained and ready brigades to support Baghdad operations.
Enacting and implementing legislation on procedures to form 
semi-autonomous regions.
Not met
Met
Partially met
Unsubstantiated accusations 
continue to be made.
Legislators’ rights protected; minority 
citizens’ rights unprotected.
Political intervention continues.
Iraqi security forces engaged in 
sectarian-based abuses.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
Page 6 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
 
The Iraqi government met one of eight legislative benchmarks: the rights 
of minority political parties in Iraq’s legislature are protected. The 
government also partially met one benchmark — to enact and implement 
legislation on the formation of regions; this law was enacted in October 
2006 but will not be implemented until April 2008. Six other legislative 
benchmarks have not been met. Specifically, a review committee has not 
completed work on important revisions to Iraq’s constitution. Further, the 
government has not enacted legislation on de-Ba’athification, oil revenue 
sharing, provincial elections, amnesty, and militia disarmament. The 
administration’s report cited progress in achieving some benchmarks but 
provided little information on what step in the legislative process each 
benchmark had reached. We provide that information below. 
Most Legislative 
Benchmarks Have Yet 
to Be Enacted and 
Implemented 
Page 7 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Enactment and Implementation Status of Six Legislative Benchmarks 
Source: GAO analysis of Department of State, Department of Defense, UN and Iraqi government data.
No legislation drafted
Framework 
Revenue sharing
Ministry of Oil Restructuring
Iraq National Oil Company
Electoral commission
Provincial authoritiesc
Provincial election law
Provincial election dated
Elections
Amnesty
Disarmament and demobilization
De-Ba’athificationa
Hydrocarbon laws
Drafting
laws
Enacting
Implementing
Laws drafted and reviewed
Draft referred to Council of  
 
Representatives/Committee
Draft placed on calendar by 
Speaker’s Office
First reading completed
Draft amended by Committee; placed 
on calendar by Speaker’s Office
Second reading completed
Draft amended by Committee; placed 
on calendar by Speaker’s Office
Third reading completed; vote taken
Ratification procedures
Law published in Gazette
Guidance issued by Prime Minister
Orders written by Cabinet 
Minister/other
Directives drafted by Director 
General/other
Formation of regions
b
Notes: 
aThe Iraqi legislature is considering several competing drafts. 
bThe Iraqi Constitution exempts the law on formation of regions from following the Presidency 
Council’s ratification process that is set out in Article 138 of the Constitution. 
cThe draft deals with broader federal versus provincial powers, according to the United Nations. 
dAccording to State, the Iraqi government may not need a law to set the election date, though to date 
this is unclear. 
 
Page 8 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
Two of nine security benchmarks have been met. Specifically, Iraq’s 
government has established various committees in support of the Baghdad 
security plan and established almost all of the planned Joint Security 
Stations in Baghdad. The government has partially met the benchmarks of 
providing three trained and ready brigades for Baghdad operations and 
eliminating safe havens for outlawed groups. Five other benchmarks have 
not been met. The government has not eliminated militia control of local 
security, eliminated political intervention in military operations, ensured 
even-handed enforcement of the law, increased army units capable of 
independent operations, and ensured that political authorities made no 
false accusations against security forces. It is unclear whether sectarian 
violence in Iraq has decreased—a key security benchmark—since it is 
difficult to measure perpetrators’ intents, and various other measures of 
population security from different sources show differing trends. As 
displayed in figure 4, average daily attacks against civilians have remained 
unchanged from February to July 2007. 
Mixed Results in 
Achieving Security 
Benchmarks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Average Number of Daily, Enemy-Initiated Attacks against the Coalition, Iraqi Security Forces, and Civilians (May 
2003-July 2007) 
 
Public Law 110-28 requires GAO to report to Congress by September 1, 
2007,
3 on whether or not the government of Iraq has met 18 benchmarks 
contained in the Act, and the status of the achievement of these 
benchmarks. The Act requires the administration to report in July and 
September 2007 on whether satisfactory progress is being made toward 
meeting the benchmarks. As stated previously, we considered and used a 
“partially met” rating in several circumstances. Figure 5 compares the two 
assessments. 
Comparison of GAO 
and Executive Branch 
Assessments 
                                                                                                                                    
3GAO provided this report to Congress on September 4, 2007, the first business day 
following September 1, 2007. 
Page 10 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Comparison of GAO Assessment with Administration’s July 2007 Initial Benchmark Assessment Report 
aAccording to the U.S. State Department, conditions are not present for these benchmarks. 
 
 
Page 11 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
As of August 30, 2007, the Iraqi government met 3, partially met 4, and had 
not met 11 of 18 legislative, security, and economic benchmarks. The Iraqi 
government has not fulfilled commitments it first made in June 2006 to 
advance legislative, security, and economic measures that would promote 
national reconciliation among Iraq’s warring factions. Of particular 
concern is the lack of progress on de-Ba’athification legislation that could 
promote greater Sunni participation in the national government and 
comprehensive hydrocarbon legislation that would distribute Iraq’s vast 
oil wealth. In late August, Iraq’s senior Shi’a, Sunni Arab and Kurdish 
political leaders signed a Unity Accord signaling efforts to foster greater 
national reconciliation. The Accord covered draft legislation on de-
Ba’thification reform and provincial powers laws, as well as setting up a 
mechanism to release some Sunni detainees being held without charges. 
However, the polarization of Iraq’s major sects and ethnic groups and 
fighting among Sh’ia factions further diminishes the stability of Iraq’s 
governing coalition and its potential to enact legislation needed for 
sectarian reconciliation. 
Reconciliation was also premised on a reduction in violence. While the 
Baghdad security plan was intended to reduce sectarian violence, it is 
unclear whether violence has been reduced. Measuring such violence may 
be difficult since the perpetrators’ intents are not clearly known. Other 
measures, such as the number of enemy-initiated attacks, show that 
violence has remained high through July 2007. 
As the Congress considers the way forward in Iraq, it should balance the 
achievement of the 18 Iraqi benchmarks with military progress and 
homeland security, foreign policy, and other goals of the United States. 
Future administration reports on the benchmarks would be more useful to 
the Congress if they clearly depicted the status of each legislative 
benchmark, provided additional quantitative and qualitative information 
on violence from all relevant U.S. agencies, and specified the performance 
and loyalties of Iraqi security forces supporting coalition operations. 
 
In preparing future reports to Congress and to help increase transparency 
on progress made toward achieving the benchmarks, we recommend that: 
Conclusions 
Recommendations 
1. The Secretary of State provide information to the President that clearly 
specifies the status in drafting, enacting, and implementing Iraqi 
legislation; 
Page 12 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
2. The Secretary of Defense and the heads of other appropriate agencies 
provide information to the President on trends in sectarian violence 
with appropriate caveats, as well as broader quantitative and 
qualitative measures of security; and 
3. The Secretary of Defense and the heads of other appropriate agencies 
provide additional information on the operational readiness of Iraqi 
security forces supporting the Baghdad security plan, particularly 
information on their loyalty and willingness to help secure Baghdad. 
We provided drafts of the report accompanying this testimony to the 
relevant U.S. agencies for review and comment, which we incorporated as 
appropriate. We received written comments from the Departments of State 
and Defense and technical comments from the Central Intelligence Agency 
and National Intelligence Council, which are included in the report. State 
and DOD concurred with our recommendations but disagreed with our 
assessment of certain benchmarks. Although we analyzed classified data, 
including the August 2007 National Intelligence Estimate for Iraq, the 
testimony and report only contain unclassified information, as of August 
30, 2007. We issued a classified report to supplement the information 
discussed in our report.
4 
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, this concludes my prepared 
statement. I would be happy to answer any questions that you may have. 
 
If you or your staffs have any questions about this testimony, please 
contact me at (202) 512-5500 or Mr. Joseph A. Christoff, Director, 
International Affairs and Trade, at (202) 512-8979. Key contributors to this 
testimony include Stephen Lord, David Bruno, Howard Cott, Timothy 
Fairbanks, Mattias Fenton, Whitney Havens, Dorian Herring, Bruce 
Kutnick, Judith McCloskey, Tetsuo Miyabara, and Kathleen Monahan. 
Contact and Staff 
Acknowledgements 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                    
4GAO-07-1223C. 
Page 13 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
 
 
 
In addition, Ashley Alley, Monica Brym, Lessie Burke-Johnson, Joe 
Carney, Miriam Carroll, Debbie Chung, Thomas Costa, Lynn Cothern, 
Aniruddha Dasgupta, Martin de Alteriis, Etana Finkler, Muriel Forster, 
Patrick Hickey, Michael Jenkins, Sona Kalapura, Jeremy Latimer, Mary 
Moutsos, Sidney Schwartz, Jena Sinkfield, Audrey Solis, Cynthia Taylor, 
and Christina Werth provided technical assistance. 
Page 14 
GAO-07-1230T   
 
(320539) 
 
 
 
This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the 
United States. The published product may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety 
without further permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain 
copyrighted images or other material, permission from the copyright holder may be 
necessary if you wish to reproduce this material separately. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GAO’s Mission 
The Government Accountability Office, the audit, evaluation and 
investigative arm of Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its 
constitutional responsibilities and to help improve the performance and 
accountability of the federal government for the American people. GAO 
examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and policies; 
and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help 
Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s 
commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of 
accountability, integrity, and reliability. 
The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost 
is through GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov). Each weekday, GAO posts 
newly released reports, testimony, and correspondence on its Web site. To 
have GAO e-mail you a list of newly posted products every afternoon, go 
to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to Updates.” 
The first copy of each printed report is free. Additional copies are $2 each. 
A check or money order should be made out to the Superintendent of 
Documents. GAO also accepts VISA and Mastercard. Orders for 100 or 
more copies mailed to a single address are discounted 25 percent. Orders 
should be sent to: 
U.S. Government Accountability Office 
441 G Street NW, Room LM 
Washington, D.C. 20548 
To order by Phone:  Voice:  
(202) 512-6000  
TDD:  
(202) 512-2537 
Fax:  
(202) 512-6061 
Contact: 
Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm 
E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov 
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470 
Gloria Jarmon, Managing Director, JarmonG@gao.gov (202) 512-4400 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7125 
Washington, D.C. 20548 
Susan Becker, Acting Manager, Becker@gao.gov (202) 512-4800 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149  
Washington, D.C. 20548 
Obtaining Copies of 
GAO Reports and 
Testimony 
Order by Mail or Phone 
To Report Fraud, 
Waste, and Abuse in 
Federal Programs 
Congressional 
Relations 
Public Affairs 
 PRINTED ON
RECYCLED PAPER
