TREASURY INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR TAX ADMINISTRATION 
 
Phone Number   |  202-927-7037 
Email Address   |  inquiries@tigta.treas.gov 
Web Site           |  http://www.tigta.gov 
 
 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has 
Established Controls, but Improvements  
Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
 
 
December 21, 2007 
 
Reference Number:  2008-10-052 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report has cleared the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration disclosure review process 
and information determined to be restricted from public release has been redacted from this document. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY 
WASHINGTON, D.C.  20220 
TREASURY INSPECTOR GENERAL 
FOR TAX ADMINISTRATION 
 
 
 
December 21, 2007 
 
 
MEMORANDUM FOR COMMISSIONER, TAX EXEMPT AND GOVERNMENT ENTITIES 
DIVISION  
 
 
FROM: 
Michael R. Phillips 
 Deputy Inspector General for Audit 
 
SUBJECT: 
 Final Audit Report – The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established 
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
(Audit # 200610020) 
 
This report presents the results of our review of examination closing actions by the Tax Exempt 
Bonds (TEB) office.  The overall objectives of this review were to determine whether closing 
actions for tax-exempt bond examinations opened-in-error appropriately complied with Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) guidelines and whether security and controls over closing actions for 
field examination cases were effective.  This audit was requested by the Director, Government 
Entities, to determine whether actions to close tax-exempt bond examinations using the opened-
in-error disposal code were appropriate.  This audit was conducted as part of the Treasury 
Inspector General for Tax Administration Office of Audit Fiscal Year 2007 Annual Audit Plan. 
Impact on the Taxpayer 
Controls over examination closures are needed to provide assurance that capital raised from 
issuing tax-exempt bonds will be appropriately used for public works projects, and examinations 
are conducted with integrity and fairness.  However, we identified control weaknesses that could 
allow employees to improperly close examinations without managers being aware of the actions.  
In addition, because of a lack of documentation, we could not determine if the high-risk opened-
in-error disposal code was used correctly or if it was the appropriate action to take on the 
examination case.   
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
2
Synopsis 
The TEB office established some significant controls for closing examinations established on the 
inventory system and ensured the ability to close cases from the inventory system was limited to 
authorized TEB employees.  For example, examiners attest that conclusions are technically 
correct and procedurally accurate by preparing an examination closing record and then 
assembling the case file according to specific guidelines.  The case files, including the 
examination closing record, are then reviewed by supervisors.  The TEB office also performs 
limited-scope examinations on refund claims and limits the capability to close cases from the 
inventory system to just the inventory coordinators.   
While the TEB office established several controls, there are still two key areas without controls.  
Specifically, examinations that are determined to be opened-in-error can be closed without 
documentation of managerial approval, and key procedures that should be completed by different 
individuals are being performed by the same employee.  Both of these control weaknesses could 
allow employees to improperly close examinations without managerial approval.   
For example, one of the higher risk disposal codes for closing an examination is reserved for 
examinations that were established on the inventory system in error.  Due to the high risk, 
IRS procedures require both the supervisor and the Manager, Field Operations, to sign a form 
approving the closing action.  These forms are required to be retained for 1 year.  We determined 
the TEB office did not comply with the requirements to document and retain approval forms for 
any of the 521 examinations that were closed from the inventory system using the 
opened-in-error disposal code between Fiscal Years 2002 and 2006.  Since approval forms were 
not used or retained, we could not determine if the high-risk opened-in-error disposal code was 
used correctly or if it was the appropriate action to take on the examination case. 
In addition, once an examination is complete, the TEB office is required to send closing letters to 
bond issuers detailing the results of examinations.  It is critical that evidence of adequate 
separation of duties exists between the processes of working the case, approving the closing 
letter, and mailing the closing letter to the bond issuer and other related stakeholders.  Under the 
existing process, supervisors are provided with the full capability to perform all of these tasks 
with no requirement to maintain documentation of approvals in the examination case files. 
Recommendations 
We recommended the Director, TEB, ensure the inventory coordinator does not close 
examinations that were opened-in-error until the form approving the closing action is received.  
In addition, we recommended the Director, TEB, develop and implement controls to ensure the 
appropriate managerial approvals are obtained and documented for closing letters and refund 
claims. 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
3
Response   
IRS management agreed with our recommendations.  The TEB office plans to update its 
procedures and ensure controls are followed for approving examinations opened-in-error.  In 
addition, the TEB office plans to ensure appropriate managerial approvals are obtained and 
documented for closing letters and refund claims.  Management’s complete response to the draft 
report is included as Appendix IV.   
Copies of this report are also being sent to the IRS managers affected by the report 
recommendations.  Please contact me at (202) 622-6510 if you have questions or  
Nancy A. Nakamura, Assistant Inspector General for Audit (Headquarters Operations and 
Exempt Organizations Programs), at (202) 622-8500. 
 
 
 
 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Background..........................................................................................................Page   1 
Results of Review ...............................................................................................Page   2 
While Several Controls Have Been Established, Controls for Closing  
Examination Cases Should Be Strengthened to Ensure Actions Are  
Appropriate and Properly Authorized...........................................................Page   2 
Recommendations 1 and 2:................................................Page 7 
Appendices 
Appendix I – Detailed Objectives, Scope, and Methodology.......................Page   9 
Appendix II – Major Contributors to This Report........................................Page 11 
Appendix III – Report Distribution List .......................................................Page 12 
Appendix IV – Management’s Response to the Draft Report......................Page 13 
 
 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
 
IRS 
Internal Revenue Service 
TEB 
Tax Exempt Bonds 
 
 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  1 
 
Background 
 
The Office of Tax Exempt Bonds (TEB) was established as part of the Internal Revenue 
Service’s (IRS) Tax Exempt and Government Entities Division in Fiscal Year 1999 to administer 
the Federal tax laws applicable to tax-exempt municipal bonds.  Municipal bonds provide  
tax-exempt financing for Governmental and other qualified purposes including the construction 
of airports, hospitals, schools, and road improvements, as well as facilities and equipment used in 
providing police, fire, and rescue services. 
The TEB office is responsible for examining bonds after they are issued to ensure the bonds are 
being used for tax-exempt purposes and are complying with Federal tax laws.1  The TEB office 
also performs limited-scope examinations of refund claims. 
Most tax-exempt bond returns selected for examination are controlled on the TEB office’s 
inventory control system.2  Upon closing a case, the inventory coordinator assigns a disposal 
code which briefly describes the results of the examination or the reason the case was not 
examined. 
One of the higher risk disposal codes is reserved for cases that were established on the inventory 
system in error.  This code indicates that the examination should have never been started, so the 
inventory control is closed.  For example, examinations are considered to be opened-in-error if 
the wrong tax year or incorrect taxpayer information was entered on the inventory system. 
The Director, Government Entities, requested that we determine if actions to close tax-exempt 
bond examinations using the opened-in-error disposal code were appropriate.  This review was 
performed at the TEB National Headquarters in Washington, D.C., and the TEB Field Group 
office in Englewood, Colorado, during the period March through July 2007.  We conducted this 
performance audit in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.  Those 
standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to 
provide a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions based on our audit objectives.  We 
believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and conclusions 
based on our audit objectives.  Detailed information on our audit objectives, scope, and 
methodology is presented in Appendix I.  Major contributors to the report are listed in  
Appendix II. 
                                                 
1 Internal Revenue Code Section (§) 103(a) (2002) is the primary statutory provision that excludes interest on 
municipal bonds from Federal income tax. 
2 The inventory system used by the Tax Exempt and Government Entities Division to control examination returns, 
input assessments/adjustments to the taxpayer’s account, and provide management information reports is known as 
the Audit Information Management System.  This system tracks the location, age, and status of cases. 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  2 
 
Results of Review 
 
While Several Controls Have Been Established, Controls for Closing 
Examination Cases Should Be Strengthened to Ensure Actions Are 
Appropriate and Properly Authorized 
The TEB office established some significant controls for closing examinations established on the 
inventory system and ensured the ability to close cases from the inventory system was limited to 
authorized TEB employees.  Specifically, these controls include: 
• Attesting that conclusions are technically correct and procedurally accurate by completing an 
examination closing record.  Examiners then assemble the case files in accordance with 
specific guidelines. 
• Requiring supervisors to timely review the assembled case file, including the examination 
closing record and the special handling notice, prior to closing and determining whether the 
case is technically and procedurally accurate.  Supervisors also ensure closing letters and any 
related documents are mailed to taxpayers, assess the quality of examinations, record the 
results on quality review checklists, and ensure the inventory system is updated to reflect that 
the case has been transmitted to the Manager, Field Operations. 
• Performing limited-scope examinations on refund claims.  Like standard examinations, the 
claims are controlled on an inventory system, but the examinations are typically limited to 
approving the validity of the claims.  If the claim is determined to be appropriate, a refund 
voucher is submitted to a TEB specialist for validation that the claim should be paid.  Upon 
approval, the refund voucher is forwarded to the Ogden Submission Processing Center for 
payment of the refund, and the examination is closed on the inventory system.   
• Limiting the capability to close a case from the inventory system to inventory coordinators.  
The inventory coordinators reconcile the inventory system monthly by comparing closed 
records to a manual spreadsheet of cases submitted for closure to ensure the closing action 
was properly recorded.  At the end of the quarter, the inventory coordinator researches the 
updated Master File3 information for each of the closed cases to determine where the case 
should be filed for retention. 
• Reviewing samples of closed examination cases.  Selected cases are quality reviewed 
quarterly by the Manager, Compliance and Program Management; Manager, Field 
                                                 
3 The Master File is the IRS database that stores various types of taxpayer account information.  This database 
includes individual, business, and employee plans and exempt organizations data. 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  3 
Operations; and the Director, TEB.  In addition, mandatory reviews of cases are performed 
by the Manager, Compliance and Program Management, when cases are referred to the 
IRS Appeals function or when examiners request technical advice from IRS Counsel 
regarding the procedural accuracy of potential closing agreements. 
While the TEB office established several controls, there are still two key areas without controls.  
If TEB office management does not establish effective controls over these areas, there is a risk 
that improprieties could occur and go unnoticed by TEB office management.  Specifically, 
examinations that are determined to be opened-in-error can be closed without documentation of 
managerial approval, and key procedures that should be completed by different individuals are 
being performed by the same employee.  Both of these control weaknesses could allow 
employees to improperly close examinations without managerial approval. 
Approvals to close examination cases that are opened-in-error were not 
documented and retained  
Due to the high-risk nature of tax-exempt bond examination cases that are closed as 
opened-in-error, IRS procedures require both the supervisor and the Manager, Field Operations, 
to sign a form approving the closing action.  These forms are required to be retained for 1 year 
after the inventory coordinator inputs the closing action into the inventory system. 
We determined the TEB office did not comply with the requirements to document and retain 
approval forms for any of the 521 examinations that were closed from the inventory system 
using the opened-in-error disposal code between Fiscal 
Years 2002 and 2006.  Since approval forms were not 
used or retained, we could not determine if the high-risk 
opened-in-error disposal code was used correctly or if it 
was the appropriate action to take on the examination 
case.  While it is possible that all closings were 
appropriate, the lack of control over high-risk closures 
provides the opportunity for improprieties to occur and go undetected.  For example, 
IRS examiners could close an examination with an opened-in-error disposal code in exchange for 
personal compensation since no records exist to show the closing action was approved by a 
supervisor and the Manager, Field Operations. 
Between Fiscal Years 2002 and 2006, 2,025 examinations were closed.  During the same period, 
an additional 521 examination cases were closed using the opened-in-error disposal code.  
Figure 1 shows the total volume of closed examination cases by fiscal year. 
Lack of control over high-risk 
closures provides the 
opportunity for improprieties to 
occur and go undetected.   
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  4 
Figure 1:  Closed Examination Cases by Fiscal Year 
Fiscal Year 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 
Total 
Examinations 
Opened-in-Error 
235 
256 
8 
19 
3 
521 
All Other 
Examination 
Closures 
366  
 
351  
 
377 
 
466 
 
465  
 
2,025 
 
 Source:  TEB office inventory system data for Fiscal Years 2002 through 2006.4 
Due to the high volume of opened-in-error disposal codes in Fiscal Years 2002 and 2003, we 
performed additional research to determine whether the disposal code was being used correctly.  
TEB office officials informed us that, in Fiscal Years 2002 and 2003, the TEB office began the 
process of converting the TEB account data from the old system to the IRS Master File.  During 
the conversion process, examination cases had to be closed on the inventory system and 
established on the Master File.  To accomplish this, TEB office management decided to use the 
opened-in-error disposal code, which was an incorrect use of the code because some of the 
inventory records were actual examinations that just needed to be moved to the Master File.  As 
a result, the opened-in-error disposal code was used much more frequently during the process of 
converting records to the Master File in Fiscal Years 2002 and 2003 than in subsequent years. 
We reviewed Master File data to determine if examinations were conducted on accounts after 
being converted to the Master File.  We determined that 297 (60 percent) of 491 cases showed 
an examination was conducted or is currently being conducted.  We reviewed 37 (13 percent) of 
the 287 closed cases5 and confirmed examinations were conducted.  This is consistent with 
TEB office management’s explanation of how the opened-in-error disposal code was used to 
establish accounts on the Master File, with examinations being completed afterwards.  For the 
remaining 194 cases, we could not identify any examination activity because the case either did 
not exist on the Master File or the case existed but did not show any examination activity after 
the opened-in-error disposal code was input. 
Controls for closing examinations and issuing refunds do not provide reasonable 
assurance actions are properly approved by TEB office management 
Once examinations are complete, the TEB office sends closing letters to bond issuers detailing 
the results.  In 2001, the former Director, TEB, issued a delegation order that authorized 
supervisors to sign the name of the Director, TEB, and the Manager, Field Operations, to closing 
                                                 
4 We did not verify the completeness of this information because we did not have a basis for comparison. 
5 Of the 297 cases that showed an examination was conducted or is currently being conducted, 287 cases involved a 
closed examination and 10 involved an open examination.   
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  5 
letters upon the completion of an examination resulting in an additional tax or in “no change” to 
tax.  To carry out this action, supervisors were provided signature stamps to manually stamp the 
Director, TEB, or the Manager, Field Operations, signatures to closing letters.  Examinations 
involving a claim for refund only require the signature of a refund claim specialist on the closing 
letter. 6 
The TEB office uses the following procedures to issue closing letters and refunds:    
• If it is determined during an examination the bonds do not qualify for tax-exempt status, the 
examiners attempt to resolve the matter by entering into a closing agreement with the bond 
issuers.  In other cases, the examiner may initiate a series of adverse closing letters.7  The 
closing letters are sent to the bond issuers.  These closing letters generally are prepared by 
the examiner and forwarded to a supervisor for review.  After the supervisor concurs, the 
letters are emailed to the Manager, Field Operations, for review and concurrence.8  Upon 
receiving approval, supervisors use the signature stamp to sign the letters for the Manager, 
Field Operations.  The supervisors then mail the closing letters to the bond issuers and other 
related stakeholders. 
• If it is determined during an examination that the bonds complied with Federal tax laws 
applicable to tax-exempt bonds, a “no change” closing letter9 is prepared by the examiner and 
forwarded to a supervisor for review and concurrence.  Upon review, supervisors use the 
signature stamp to sign the “no change” closing letter on behalf of the Manager, Field 
Operations, without having to obtain the Manager, Field Operations’ concurrence. 
• If it is determined during a refund claim examination that the bond issuer is due a refund, the 
examination case file is reviewed by a refund claim specialist who assesses whether the claim 
is accurate.  Upon concurrence, the specialist signs the closing letter and authorizes payment 
of a refund.  
In considering these TEB office procedures, we identified two control weaknesses.  Specifically, 
controls that ensure concurrence is obtained from the Manager, Field Operations, and/or the 
Director, TEB, need to be strengthened to better assure closing letters proposing additional tax or 
“no change” to tax are appropriately approved.  Under the current process, the Manager, Field 
                                                 
6 Claims for refunds more than $1 million require mandatory reviews by the Manager, Field Operations, and 
Manager, Compliance and Program Management.   
7 If a closing agreement cannot be initially negotiated, the TEB office may issue a Preliminary Adverse Letter and a 
Proposed Adverse Determination Letter to the bond issuer that includes details of the noncompliance.  The bond 
issuer may choose to appeal the case, enter into a closing agreement, or not respond.  If the bond issuer does not 
respond, a Final Determination of Tax Liability is issued, which forfeits the bond issuer’s rights for an appeal and 
generally results in taxation of the bondholders. 
8 The draft Adverse Determination Letters are forwarded by supervisors to the Manager, Field Operations, via email 
because the supervisors are not in the same location as the Manager, Field Operations. 
9 A ”no change” letter is issued when the TEB office closes the examination with no change to the position that 
interest received by the bondholders is excludible from gross income under § 103 of the Internal Revenue Code. 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  6 
Operations, and the Director, TEB, either send an email to the appropriate supervisor or verbally 
communicate by telephone approval to use signature stamps.  This procedure enables supervisors 
to sign and then mail the closing letters.  Government Accountability Office Standards for 
Internal Control in the Federal Government state “key duties and responsibilities need to be 
divided or segregated among different people to reduce the risk of error or fraud.”10   However, 
without documentation of authorizations, there is no assurance that closing actions are approved 
by management and the process is more susceptible to inappropriate actions. 
We reviewed 51 (10 percent) of 523 examination case files that were closed between 
October 1, 2005, and December 31, 2006, with a closing agreement proposing either an 
additional tax assessment or “no change” to tax.  Additional tax assessments were proposed for 
27 (53 percent) of the 51 examination case files reviewed, yet no evidence was found to indicate 
the Director, TEB, and/or the Manager, Field Operations, approved the related closing letters.  
As mentioned previously, no review was required by the Director, TEB, and/or the Manager, 
Field Operations, for the remaining 24 cases that involved “no change” to tax so we could not 
determine if these were appropriate closing actions. 
The second control weakness we identified is key procedures are being performed by the same 
employee.  It is critical that evidence of adequate separation of duties exists between the 
processes of working the case, approving the closing letter, and mailing the closing letter to the 
bond issuer and other related stakeholders.  Under the existing process, supervisors are provided 
with the full capability to perform all of these tasks with no requirement to maintain 
documentation of approvals in the examination case files.  
This process is especially important for cases involving refund claims.  All examination case 
files for refund claims are reviewed to determine whether the claim is accurate.  Claims 
determined to be accurate are forwarded to a refund claim specialist for quality review.  For 
claims less than $1 million, the refund claim specialist has the capability to prepare a refund 
voucher, approve payment, and sign the closing letter,11 without being reviewed by the Manager, 
Compliance and Program Management.  We did not identify any cases in which the refund claim 
specialist actually prepared the refund voucher or in which any improprieties had occurred; 
however, our review of 8 (11 percent) of 74 refund claims identified 1 refund claim totaling 
approximately $20,000 in which the refund claim specialist quality reviewed the refund claim, 
approved the refund payment, and signed the closing letter without any evidence of managerial 
review.  
These control weaknesses are magnified when considering the dollars involved in examination 
cases.  In Fiscal Year 2004, TEB examination cases had noncompliance assessments averaging 
approximately $19,000 per case but penalties for promoter misconduct averaged approximately 
                                                 
10 GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1, dated November 1999. 
11 Employees authorized to approve refund requests must be listed on an official signature list.   
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  7 
$660,000 per case.12  Based on the large amount of money involved and our concerns that 
TEB employees are performing multiple functions that should be separated among two or more 
people, there is substantial risk improprieties could go undetected (e.g., employees could, 
without managerial knowledge, accept payments for not making appropriate tax assessments or 
issue refunds when they are not justified).  Developing processes that separate working the cases, 
approving the closing letters, and mailing the closing letters would substantially reduce the risk 
of improprieties.  In addition, quality review processes should ensure each of these actions is 
appropriately documented in the examination case files.  Strengthening controls over 
examination closures will provide better assurance that capital raised from issuing tax-exempt 
bonds will be appropriately used for public works projects, and examinations are conducted with 
integrity and fairness. 
Recommendations 
The Director, TEB should: 
Recommendation 1:  Ensure controls are followed that require the inventory coordinator to 
close examinations that were opened-in-error only after receiving a form approving the closing 
action.  Copies of the forms should be maintained by the inventory coordinator or closing 
function according to existing guidelines. 
Management’s Response:  IRS management agreed with the recommendation.  
During Fiscal Year 2008, the TEB office plans to update its Internal Revenue Manual 
procedures for examination processes.  In doing so, the TEB office plans to ensure 
controls are followed that require the inventory coordinator to close opened-in-error 
examinations only after receiving a form approving the closing action.  Copies of the 
forms will be maintained by the inventory coordinator or closing function according to 
existing guidelines, or electronically on the new Tax Exempt and Government Entities 
Division Reporting and Electronic Examination System.   
Recommendation 2:  Develop and implement controls to ensure the appropriate managerial 
approvals are obtained and documented for closing letters and refund claims. 
Management’s Response:  IRS management agreed with the recommendation.  
During Fiscal Year 2008, the TEB office plans to update its Internal Revenue Manual 
procedures for examination processes.  In doing so, the TEB office plans to ensure the 
                                                 
12 Statistical Portrayal of the Tax Exempt Bonds Office’s Enforcement Activities From Fiscal Year 2002 Through 
Fiscal Year 2004 (Reference Number 2005-10-186, dated September 2005). 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  8 
appropriate managerial approvals are obtained and documented for closing letters and 
refund claims. 
Management’s response also included another new control:  the Tax Exempt and 
Government Entities Division plans to implement a proposed quality review process that 
will require universal review of all closed TEB office examinations.   
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  9 
Appendix I 
 
Detailed Objectives, Scope, and Methodology 
 
The overall objectives of this audit were to determine whether closing actions for tax-exempt 
bond examinations opened-in-error appropriately complied with IRS guidelines and whether 
security and controls over closing actions for field examination cases were effective.  To 
accomplish our objectives, we: 
I. 
Determined whether TEB office management established effective processes for closing 
examinations that were opened-in-error.  We (1) conducted research on the IRS Master 
File1 for all 491 examinations that were closed as “opened-in-error” between Fiscal 
Years 2002 and 2003 to determine whether an examination was subsequently conducted, 
(2) reviewed a judgmental sample of 37 (13 percent) of 287 modules that were located on 
the Master File as being examined and determined whether the disposition of the case 
was properly approved by TEB office management, and (3) interviewed TEB office 
personnel to determine whether forms used to request and approve the decisions to close 
cases as opened-in-error were maintained for all 491 examinations.  We used judgmental 
sampling because we did not plan to project our results. 
II.  
Determined whether TEB office management implemented effective security processes 
for examination cases established on their inventory system by limiting the capability to 
close a case from the inventory system to inventory coordinators. 
III.   
Determined whether TEB office management established effective processes for ensuring 
case closing and deletion actions on the inventory system were accurate and appropriately 
authorized.  We (1) interviewed TEB office personnel to determine the process for 
reviewing and approving examination cases prior to closure, the post-review process for 
closed cases, and the process to ensure cases were properly closed from the inventory 
system and forwarded to the Ogden Submission Processing Center for filing; 
(2) reviewed a judgmental sample of 51 (10 percent) of 523 examination case files that 
were closed with a closing agreement or as “no change” on the TEB inventory system 
between October 1, 2005, and December 31, 2006, to determine the closing action taken 
and whether the action was appropriately approved; (3) reviewed a judgmental sample of 
8 (11 percent) of 74 refund claim examinations that were closed from the inventory 
system between October 1, 2005, and December 31, 2006, to determine whether the 
claim was appropriately approved; and (4) analyzed all 30 cases that were 
opened-in-error between October 1, 2003, and September 30, 2006, and determined 
                                                 
1 The IRS database that stores various types of taxpayer account information.  This database includes individual, 
business, and employee plans and exempt organizations data. 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  10 
whether any information existed to indicate the opened-in-error disposal action was 
properly approved by TEB office management.  We used judgmental sampling because 
we did not plan to project our sample results. 
Internal controls methodology 
Internal controls relate to management’s plans, methods, and procedures used to meet its 
mission, goals, and objectives.  Internal controls include the processes and procedures for 
planning, organizing, directing, and controlling program operations.  They include the systems 
for measuring, reporting, and monitoring program performance.  We determined the following 
internal controls were relevant to our audit objectives:  the TEB office’s policies, procedures, and 
practices for closing examinations that were established for its inventory system.  We assessed 
these controls by interviewing relevant TEB office personnel and managers and by analyzing 
applicable processes and procedures. 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  11 
Appendix II 
 
Major Contributors to This Report 
 
Nancy A. Nakamura, Assistant Inspector General for Audit (Headquarters Operations and 
Exempt Organizations Programs)  
Troy D. Paterson, Director  
Gerald T. Hawkins, Acting Director 
James V. Westcott, Audit Manager 
Allen L. Brooks, Lead Auditor 
Margaret A. Anketell, Senior Auditor 
Stephanie K. Foster, Senior Auditor 
Yolanda D. Brown, Auditor 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  12 
Appendix III 
 
Report Distribution List 
 
Acting Commissioner  C 
Office of the Commissioner – Attn:  Acting Chief of Staff  C 
Deputy Commissioner for Services and Enforcement  SE 
Deputy Commissioner, Tax Exempt and Government Entities Division  SE:T 
Director, Tax Exempt Bonds, Tax Exempt and Government Entities Division  SE:T:GE:TEB 
Chief Counsel  CC 
National Taxpayer Advocate  TA 
Director, Office of Legislative Affairs  CL:LA 
Director, Office of Program Evaluation and Risk Analysis  RAS:O  
Office of Internal Control  OS:CFO:CPIC:IC 
Audit Liaison:   
Director, Communications and Liaison, Tax Exempt and Government Entities  
Division  SE:T:CL 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  13 
Appendix IV 
 
Management’s Response to the Draft Report 
 
 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  14 
 
The Tax Exempt Bonds Office Has Established  
Controls, but Improvements Are Needed to Prevent Improprieties 
 
Page  15 
 
