a
GAO
United States General Accounting Office
Report to Congressional Requesters
June 2002
INTERNATIONAL 
TRADE
Critical Issues Remain 
in Deterring Conflict 
Diamond Trade
GAO-02-678
Why GAO Did This Study
Conflict diamonds are used by
rebel movements to finance their
military activities, including
attempts to undermine or
overthrow legitimate
governments. These conflicts
have created severe
humanitarian crises in a number
of African countries (see map
below). An international effort
called the Kimberley Process, in
which the United States
participates, aims to develop a
diamond certification scheme to
deter the flow of conflict
diamonds. GAO was asked to
assess the challenges associated
with deterring trade in conflict
diamonds.
      June 2002
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
Critical Issues Remain in Deterring Conflict
Diamond Trade
This is a test for developing Highlights for a GAO report. The full report, including GAO's objectives, scope, methodology, and analysis is available
at www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-02-678. For additional information about the report, contact Loren Yager at 202-512-4128. To provide comments on
this test Highlights, contact Keith Fultz (202-512-3200) or e-mail HighlightsTest@gao.gov.
Highlights of GAO-02-678, a report to Congressional Requesters.
What GAO Recommends
GAO recommends that the
Secretary of State, in consultation
with relevant government
agencies, work with Kimberley
Process participants toward
incorporating better controls in
the certification scheme,
including a reasonable control
environment, risk assessment,
internal controls, information
sharing, and monitoring.
State commented that GAO
focused on accountability
measures rather than on the
political achievements gained.
State recognized the need for
improvements, but did not see
these as possible before launching
the certification scheme.
United States General Accounting Office
What GAO Found
The nature of diamonds and the international diamond industry’s
operations create opportunities for illicit trade, including trade in conflict
diamonds. Diamonds are a high-value commodity easily concealed and
transported, are mined in remote areas worldwide, and are virtually
untraceable to their original sources. These factors allow diamonds to be
used in lieu of currency in arms deals, money laundering, and other
crime. Further, there is limited information publicly available about
diamond industry operations.
The United States cannot detect diamonds that might come from conflict
sources because the current diamond import control system does not
require certification of the country of extraction. At present, there is also
no international system to certify the source of extraction.  While the
United States bans diamonds coming from Angola, Sierra Leone, and
Liberia that are subject to U.N. and U.S. sanctions, in the absence of an
international certification system, this does not prevent conflict
diamonds shipped to an intermediary country from being mixed into
U.S.-destined shipments.
GAO’s assessment of the Kimberley Process’s proposal for an
international diamond certification scheme found it did not contain the
controls necessary to ensure that it will be effective in stemming the flow
of conflict diamonds.  We evaluated the proposal using established
criteria for assessing accountability and found that its heavy reliance on
voluntary participation and lack of attention to potential high-risk areas
suggest that participants may face major challenges in implementing an
effective scheme to deter trade in conflict diamonds.
Primary countries associated with conflict diamonds.
G  A  O
Accountability   Integrity   Reliability
Highlights
Page i
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Contents
Letter
1
Results in Brief 
2
Background 
4
Nature of Diamonds and Nontransparent Industry Operations 
Create Opportunities for Illicit Trade 
7
United States Cannot Detect Conflict Diamonds with Present Import 
Controls 
13
Kimberley Certification Scheme Lacks Key Aspects of 
Accountability 
15
Conclusion 
22
Recommendation for Executive Action 
22
Agency Comments 
22
Appendixes
Appendix I:
Scope and Methodology
25
Appendix II:
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated with Conflict 
Diamonds
28
Conflict and Diamonds in Angola 
28
Conflict and Diamonds in the Democratic Republic of the Congo 
32
Conflict and Diamonds in Liberia 
35
Conflict and Diamonds in Sierra Leone 
38
Appendix III:
Structure and Economic Importance of the International 
Diamond Industry
43
Diamond Mining 
43
Rough Diamond Trading 
45
Rough Diamond Cutting and Polishing 
48
Economic Importance of the Diamond Industry 
48
Appendix IV:
Historical Data on African Diamond Exports
51
Appendix V:
Comments from the Department of State
54
Appendix VI:
Comments from the Department of the Treasury
57
Appendix VII:
GAO Contacts and Staff Acknowledgments
59
GAO Contacts 
59
Acknowledgments 
59
Contents
Page ii
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Tables
Table 1: Differences between Mining and Estimated Rough 
Diamond Exports in Selected African Countries, 2000 
9
Table 2: Estimated Rough Diamond Exports for Selected 
Nonmining Countries, 1996, 1998, and 2000 
10
Table 3: Rough Diamond Export and Import Values for Selected 
Countries, 2000
11
Table 4: Rough Diamond Mining, 2000 
45
Table 5: Estimates of the Economic Importance of Diamond Mining 
for Selected Countries, 2000 
49
Table 6: Value of Estimated Rough Diamond Exports from Africa, 
1990-2000
52
Figures
Figure 1:
Map of Angola
30
Figure 2:
Map of the DRC
34
Figure 3:
Map of Liberia
37
Figure 4:
Map of Sierra Leone
41
Figure 5:
Countries That Mine Rough Diamonds, 2000
44
Figure 6:
Countries That Export Rough Diamonds, 2000
47
Abbreviations
DRC
Democratic Republic of the Congo
DTC
Diamond Trading Company
RUF
Revolutionary United Front
U.N.
United Nations
UNITA
The National Union for the Total Independence of Angola
Page 1
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
United States General Accounting Office
Washington, D.C. 20548
Page 1
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
A
June 14, 2002
Leter
The Honorable Frank R. Wolf
Chairman
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, State & Judiciary
Committee on Appropriations
House of Representatives
The Honorable Judd Gregg
Ranking Minority Member
Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, State & Judiciary
Committee on Appropriations
United States Senate
The Honorable Cynthia A. McKinney
Ranking Minority Member
Subcommittee on International Operations and Human Rights
Committee on International Relations
House of Representatives
The Honorable Tony P. Hall
Ranking Minority Member
Subcommittee on Technology and the House
Committee on Rules
House of Representatives
The United Nations (U.N.) General Assembly defines conflict diamonds as 
rough diamonds used by rebel movements to finance their military 
activities, including attempts to undermine or overthrow legitimate 
governments.1 These conflicts have created severe humanitarian crises in 
countries such as Sierra Leone, Angola, and Democratic Republic of the 
Congo (DRC). The United States and much of the international community 
are trying to sever the link between conflict and diamonds while ensuring 
that no harm is done to the legitimate diamond industry, which is 
economically important in many countries. The principal international 
effort to address these objectives, known as the Kimberley Process, aims to 
develop and implement an international diamond certification scheme that 
will deter conflict diamonds from entering the legitimate market. The 
Kimberley participants, including government, diamond industry, and 
1U.N. General Assembly Resolution 55/56 (Jan. 29, 2001).
Page 2
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
nongovernmental organization officials, reported back to the U.N. General 
Assembly with a proposal they believe provides a good basis for the 
envisaged scheme.2 Consistent with the Kimberley Process, the U.S. 
Congress has legislation pending that would require countries exporting 
diamonds to the United States to have a system of controls to keep conflict 
diamonds from entering their stream of commerce. 
You requested that we review the conflict diamond trade and aspects of 
U.S. and international efforts to deter this trade. In response, we 
determined (1) whether the nature of diamonds and industry operations 
are conducive to illicit trade, (2) whether U.S. government controls over 
diamond imports enable detection of conflict diamonds, and (3) the extent 
to which the Kimberley Process international diamond certification 
scheme has the necessary elements to deter trade in conflict diamonds. As 
discussed with your offices, our scope was limited by the lack of timely and 
full access to State Department documentation and, as a result, our work 
on the illicit trade and related crime was restricted. (See app. I for our 
scope and methodology.) This report expands upon and updates 
information provided in our February 2002 testimony before the U.S. 
Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Subcommittee on Oversight of 
Government Management, Restructuring and the District of Columbia.3
Results in Brief
The nature of diamonds and the operations of the international diamond 
industry create opportunities for illicit trade, including trade in conflict 
diamonds. Diamonds are mined in remote areas around the world and are 
virtually untraceable back to their original source once mixed or 
polished—factors that make monitoring diamond flows difficult. Diamonds 
are also a high-value commodity that is easily concealed and transported. 
These conditions allow diamonds to be used in lieu of currency in illicit 
arms deals, money laundering, and other crime. Lack of transparency in 
industry operations also facilitates illegal activity. Specifically, the 
movement of diamonds from mine to consumer has no set patterns, 
2The proposal was presented in the form of a Kimberley Process Working Document titled 
Essential Elements of an International Scheme of Certification for Rough Diamonds, 
With a View to Breaking the Link Between Armed Conflict and the Trade in Rough 
Diamonds (Nov. 29, 2001).   Kimberley Process participants made a few technical 
modifications to the proposal in March 2002.
3U.S. General Accounting Office, International Trade: Significant Challenges Remain in 
Deterring Trade in Conflict Diamonds, GAO-02-425T (Washington, D.C.: Feb. 13, 2002).
Page 3
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
diamonds can change hands numerous times, and industry participants 
often operate on the basis of trust, with relatively limited documentation. 
All of these practices reduce information about diamond transactions. The 
lack of industry information is exacerbated by poor data reporting at the 
country level, where import, export, and production statistics often contain 
glaring inconsistencies. 
The United States cannot detect diamonds that might come from conflict 
sources because the current diamond import control system does not 
require certification of the country of extraction. At present, there is no 
international system to certify the source of extraction. Currently, conflict 
diamonds are associated with four countries—Angola, Democratic 
Republic of the Congo, Liberia, and Sierra Leone. Rough diamond imports 
from Angola and Sierra Leone not bearing the official government 
certificate of origin as well as all rough diamonds from Liberia are banned 
from the United States.4 U.S. Customs requires that all shipments from 
Angola and Sierra Leone have a certificate of origin or other documentation 
that demonstrates to Customs authorities that the diamonds were legally 
imported with the approval of the exporting country’s government.5 
However, without an effective international system that can trace the 
original source of rough diamonds, U.S. Customs cannot ensure that 
conflict diamonds do not enter the United States through an intermediary 
country. 
The Kimberley Process proposal for an international diamond certification 
scheme does not contain the elements necessary to provide reasonable 
assurance that the scheme will be effective in deterring the flow of conflict 
diamonds. We evaluated the scheme using aspects of established criteria 
for accountability—control environment, risk assessment, control
4The U.N. Security Council has imposed international sanctions on rough diamond imports 
from Angola and Sierra Leone not bearing an official government certificate of origin as well 
as all rough diamonds from Liberia.
5There are no U.S. sanctions against diamonds traded from the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo. Executive Order 13213 dated May 22, 2001, banned all rough diamond shipments 
from Liberia. In accordance with section 202(d) of the National Emergency Act (50 U.S.C. 
1622(d)), the President extended the ban through January 15, 2003.
Page 4
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
activities, information and communications, and monitoring,6 which 
provide insights into the proposed scheme’s ability to deter trade in conflict 
diamonds. Our evaluation of the scheme showed that it incorporates some 
elements of accountability, such as requiring that Kimberley Process 
certificates designating country of origin for unmixed shipments 
accompany each shipment of rough diamond exports. However, some 
important elements are lacking, and others are listed only as optional or 
recommended. For example, the scheme primarily relies on voluntary 
participation and adherence, which is not conducive to an adequate control 
environment. Further, it is not based on a risk assessment in that some 
activities that are important to a successful scheme, such as the flow of 
diamonds from the mine or field to the first export are subject only to 
“recommended” elements. Additionally, the period after rough diamonds 
enter a foreign port to the point of sale within that country or to export to 
another country will be covered by an industry system in which 
participation is voluntary and monitoring and enforcement are self-
regulated. Although the Kimberley Process participants have achieved 
significant cooperation among industry, nongovernmental organizations, 
and governments to address trade in conflict diamonds, our work suggests 
that participants face considerable challenges in establishing a system that 
will effectively deter this trade. 
Without a realistic view of the diamond industry operations and efforts to 
address the trade in these diamonds, the international community and the 
U.S. government’s ability to deter trade in conflict diamonds will continue 
to be hampered. We make a recommendation in this report to the Secretary 
of State to work toward incorporating better controls in the Kimberley 
Process international diamond certification scheme.
Background
Currently, conflict diamonds are primarily associated with four countries: 
Sierra Leone, Liberia, Angola, and the DRC. In all four countries, the 
production and/or trade of diamonds have played a role in fueling domestic 
conflict, or, as is the case with Liberia, fueling conflict in neighboring Sierra 
Leone through the Revolutionary United Front (RUF). U.N. and U.S. 
6The U.S. government, industry, and international entities such as the World Bank accept 
these internal control standards applied to organizations.   See Standards for Internal 
Control in the Federal Government, (GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1, Nov. 12, 1999) and Internal 
Control—Integrated Framework (1985) published by the Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the Treadway Commission and used by the World Bank. 
Page 5
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
sanctions have been targeted at rough diamond exports from the RUF in 
Sierra Leone; Liberia; and the National Union for the Total Independence of 
Angola (UNITA) in Angola, but not on the rebel diamond trade in the DRC. 
Also, the governments of Sierra Leone and Angola have instituted national 
diamond certification schemes in which certificates of origin are issued 
and accompany rough diamonds from export to import into a foreign 
country. (See app. II for situations in Angola, the DRC, Liberia, and Sierra 
Leone.) 
Adjacent countries, such as Congo-Brazzaville, Guinea, Cote d’Ivoire, and 
the Gambia, have all been listed in U.N. reports as countries through which 
conflict diamonds are smuggled. People named in U.N. reports for their 
involvement in trading conflict diamonds have been citizens of the Middle 
East, Europe, and the United States. Also, media reports have focused on 
the possible use of diamonds by terrorists to fund their activities or store 
their assets. 
International Diamond 
Industry 
The diamond industry involves over 100 countries across the globe and 
contributes to the economic well being of a number of countries that mine 
or cut and polish diamonds. In Botswana, for example, diamond sales 
account for more than one-third of its gross domestic product. According 
to The Mining Journal, the supply of rough diamonds mined worldwide 
was valued at $7.86 billion in 2000.7 Once manufactured into jewelry, 
industry experts value the polished diamond content in jewelry retail sales 
at about $13.7 billion. 
The international diamond industry includes three structural components 
for rough diamonds: mining, trading and sorting, and cutting and polishing. 
This industry is composed of both large and well-organized operations as 
well as small, widely dispersed, unstructured ones. For example, due to the 
substantial capital required for deep mining, just four companies mine 76 
percent of the world supply of rough diamonds.8 Yet, across Africa, 
countless individual diggers mine widely scattered alluvial fields for 
diamonds. Similarly, while De Beers markets a large percentage of diamond 
shipments to key trading centers, U.N. data suggest that more than 100 
7See Diamond Annual Review (2000), published by The Mining Journal, Ltd. 
8These four companies are De Beers Consolidated Mines Ltd., Alrosa Ltd., Rio Tinto, and 
BHP Billiton. See Diamond Annual Review (2000), published by The Mining Journal Ltd. 
Page 6
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
countries worldwide participate in rough diamond exporting. In terms of 
cutting and polishing, markets have largely evolved to reflect labor costs, 
with 9 out of 10 rough diamonds cut and polished in India. However, mining 
countries such as Russia, South Africa, Botswana, and Namibia are trying 
to expand their cutting and polishing activities to supplement mining 
revenues. (See app. III for additional information on the structure of the 
international diamond industry and the economic importance of this 
resource.) 
Kimberley Process
In May 2000, African diamond-producing countries initiated the Kimberley 
Process in Kimberley, South Africa, to address the conflict diamond trade. 
Participants now include the European Union and about 37 countries9 
involved in the production, export, and import of rough diamonds; as well 
as representatives from the diamond industry, notably the World Diamond 
Council,10 and nongovernmental organizations. The goal is to create and 
implement an international certification scheme for rough diamonds, based 
primarily on national certification schemes and internationally agreed 
minimum standards. The scheme’s objectives are to (1) stem the flow of 
rough diamonds used by rebels to finance armed conflict aimed at 
overthrowing legitimate governments; and (2) protect the legitimate 
diamond industry, upon which some countries depend for their economic 
and social development. 
The Kimberley Process participants submitted a progress report to the U.N. 
General Assembly accompanied by a proposal, dated November 28, 2001, 
that provided a basis for the envisaged international certification scheme.11 
The officials of participating countries recommended that the U.N. General 
Assembly support implementation of the proposed scheme for rough 
diamonds and extended the Kimberley Process mandate to the end of 2002 
to allow time for resolution of remaining implementation issues. On March 
13, 2002, the General Assembly adopted Resolution 56/263, which 
encouraged Kimberley Process participants to resolve outstanding issues; 
9The U.S. Department of State leads an interagency working group that provides input and 
representation at the Kimberley Process meetings.
10The World Diamond Council is an industry association composed of the World Federation 
of Diamond Bourses and the International Diamond Manufacturers Association, which 
formed this body expressly to address conflict diamonds. 
11This document was superceded by a slightly amended document on November 29, 2001.
Page 7
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
urged finalization and implementation of the international certification 
scheme; urged member states to actively participate in the proposed 
scheme; and requested that the Kimberley Process participants issue a 
progress report no later than the end of the 2002 session. 
Subsequently, Kimberley Process participants met in March 2002 to resolve 
outstanding technical issues12 and modified the November 2001 proposal 
accordingly.13 Participants agreed that they would concentrate their efforts 
on implementing the international certification scheme at the national 
level. Those in a position to issue the Kimberley Process Certificate were 
asked to do so immediately. All others were encouraged to do so by June 1, 
2002. Participants plan to hold the next plenary meeting in Switzerland in 
November 2002 to prepare for the simultaneous launch of the full 
certification scheme by the end of the year.14 
Nature of Diamonds 
and Nontransparent 
Industry Operations 
Create Opportunities 
for Illicit Trade
The illicit diamond trade, including that in conflict diamonds, is facilitated 
by the nature of diamonds and the lack of transparency in industry 
operations. Although industry and nongovernmental organizations have 
made estimates of both the illicit and conflict diamond trades, the criminal 
nature of the activity precludes determination of the actual extent of the 
problem. Conflict diamond estimates vary from about 3 to 15 percent of the 
rough diamond trade in value terms and are often based on historical 
production capacities for rebel-held areas. Some industry experts dispute 
the larger percentage, believing it includes nonconflict related smuggling. 
12The issues included compatibility of the international certification scheme with 
international trade law obligations such as those under the World Trade Organization; the 
scope, nature, and publishing of statistics; the nature and scope of monitoring and 
implementation (referred to as participant measures); and the nature and scope of 
administrative support services required for the optimal functioning of the scheme.
13The proposal remains in the form of a Kimberley Process Working Document titled 
Essential Elements of an International Scheme of Certification for Rough Diamonds, 
With a View to Breaking the Link Between Armed Conflict and the Trade in Rough 
Diamonds, as prepared by Kimberley Process participants (March 20, 2002).
14In the interim, the South African chair of the process plans to identify a group to address 
technical issues and remaining concerns about definitions.
Page 8
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Nature of Diamonds 
Facilitates Illegal Trade
The nature of diamonds makes them attractive to criminal elements. 
Diamonds are found in remote areas of the world and can be extracted 
both through capital-intensive deep mining techniques as well as from 
alluvial sources using rudimentary technology. Individual diggers across 
west and central Africa mine alluvial fields that are widely scattered and 
difficult to monitor, a problem made worse by porous borders and 
corruption. Diamonds are easy to conceal and smuggle across borders, and 
smuggling routes for rough diamonds are well established by those who 
have done so for decades to evade taxes or move stolen diamonds. Though 
experts may be able to identify the source of an unmixed parcel of rough 
diamonds, once diamonds from various sources are mixed, they become 
virtually untraceable. Identifying the origin of alluvial diamonds is 
complicated by the fact that the river systems depositing those diamonds 
run across government- and rebel-held areas as well as national borders. 
Although rough diamonds can be marked, once they are cut and polished, 
any form of identification is erased. All of these factors, combined with 
inadequate customs and policing worldwide, make diamonds attractive to 
criminal elements who may use them to pay for arms, support insurgencies, 
and plausibly engage in terrorism. Likewise, diamonds can be used as a 
means of currency in connection with drug deals, money laundering, and 
other crimes. They may also be used as a store of wealth for those wishing 
to hide assets outside the banking sector where assets could be detected 
and seized.
Industry’s Lack of 
Transparency Also 
Facilitates Illicit Trade
The industry’s lack of transparency is exhibited in the complex and variable 
way in which diamonds flow from mine to consumer and the existence of 
significant insufficiencies and inconsistencies in industry data. The current 
trend to expand cutting and polishing activities within mining countries 
may further limit transparency in international diamond trade flows. 
The flow of diamonds from mine to consumer, referred to as the “diamond 
pipeline,” has no set patterns. Diamonds can change hands numerous times 
as shown by the fact that the value of world rough diamond exports is three 
times as large as the value of world rough diamond production. According 
to industry experts, diamonds are sold back and forth and mixed and 
remixed, making tracking a particular shipment through the pipeline and 
across borders an arduous if not impossible task. Diamonds can be traded 
in smaller markets and diverted through alternative routes either to 
disguise origin or in response to lower taxes and less burdensome 
regulations. Thus, the threat that the industry will move to another country 
Page 9
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
has also acted as a disincentive for individual governments to implement 
stricter controls.
Limited transparency in diamond flows is also reflected in insufficient and 
inconsistent data, not only for African countries but for industrial countries 
and other trading nations as well. As shown in table 1, a comparison of 
mining data with U.N. trade data suggest that the value of estimated rough 
diamond exports in 2000 (calculated from global import data) for a number 
of African countries differ significantly from the value of those countries’ 
production. For example, Liberia’s production was estimated as worth only 
about $27 million in 2000 and its estimated rough diamond exports totaled 
about $102 million.
Table 1:  Differences between Mining and Estimated Rough Diamond Exports in 
Selected African Countries, 2000 
aEstimated exports are derived using the sum of world imports from each country.
Note: None of these countries reported any rough diamond imports to the United Nations. 
Source: Mining data are from The Mining Journal, Ltd. Trade data are from the United Nations., except 
for Namibia, which did not report its diamond trade statistics to the United Nations. Trade data for 
Namibia are from the World Bank.
Table 2 shows that the United Nations reports rough diamond exports from 
a number of countries that neither had mining potential in 2000 nor 
reported any rough diamond imports. For example, estimated rough 
diamond exports from Congo-Brazzaville, the Gambia, Aruba, the 
Netherlands Antilles, and the United Arab Emirates each exceeded $10 
million in 2000. However, for most African nonmining countries, rough 
Dollars in thousands (U.S.)
Estimated
mining
value
Estimated
export
valuea
Difference between
mining and
estimated exports
Angola
$739,662
$633,265
($106,397)
Central African Republic
72,000
168,515
96,515
Democratic Republic of 
the Congo (DRC)
585,000
728,975
143,975
Guinea
103,500
163,166
59,666
Liberia
27,200
101,861
74,661
Namibia
419,120
709,000
289,880
Sierra Leone
87,500
14,114
(73,386)
Tanzania
45,965
30,294
(15,671)
Page 10
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
diamond exports have decreased in 2000. (For additional information on 
estimated rough diamond exports from African countries for 1990 through 
2000, see app. IV.)
Table 2:  Estimated Rough Diamond Exports for Selected Nonmining Countries, 
1996, 1998, and 2000 
Note: n/a means not available. None of these countries reported any rough diamond imports to the 
United Nations. Estimated exports are derived using the sum of world imports from each country.
Source: U.N. data.
For countries that report rough diamonds imports, U.N. data also reveals 
large discrepancies between export and import values in 2000. For 
example, as shown in table 3, Belgium reported exporting about $355 
million worth of rough diamonds to the United States while the United 
States reported importing only about $192 million worth of rough diamonds 
from Belgium.
Dollars in thousands (U.S.)
1996
1998
2000
African countries
     Cameroon
n/a
$5,367
$884
     Congo-Brazzaville
647,880
80,858
39,153
     Gambia
129,237
101,503
18,396
     Mali
8,573
2,043
5,476
     Togo
2,865
1,108
214
     Uganda
n/a
1,364
13
Non-African countries
     Aruba
n/a
29,932
19,717
     Cayman Islands
21,738
5,981
5,240
     Lebanon
2,102
2,428
356
     Netherlands Antilles
124,834
28,553
22,892
     Ukraine
1,371
129
641
     United Arab Emirates
3,861
9,576
177,424
Page 11
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Table 3:  Rough Diamond Export and Import Values for Selected Countries, 2000
aIn Switzerland, a large share of diamonds traded are actually internal transfers for De Beers, which 
uses the area for security and insurance reasons.
Source: U.N. data.
The data inconsistencies in tables 1 through 3 can be attributed to a wide 
variety of factors including: 
•
differences in the value exporters and importers assign to shipments;
•
differences in interpretation of commodity codes so that recorded trade 
data is internally inconsistent and inconsistent with production data;15
•
industry practices such as selling goods on consignment, physical 
inspections requiring movements of shipments across borders, or 
Dollars in thousands (U.S.)
Exporter
Export
value of
diamonds
Importer
Import
value of
diamonds
Belgium
$355,330
United States
$191,849
Canada
107,477
United Kingdom
347,191
China
56,174
Hong Kong
3,345
Hong Kong
77,611
Belgium
174,554
7,044
United States
43,491
Israel
681
Armenia
17,361
24,165
Switzerland
44
112,053
United States
21,163
Switzerlanda
5,918
Belgium
65,398
105
United Kingdom
3,137,088
United Kingdom
437,523
Switzerland
1,206,817
289,626
United States
197,381
United States
15,796
Hong Kong
1,267
15For example, according to the U.S. Department of Commerce, 2001 exports of diamonds 
that should have been classified as polished diamonds with a World Customs Organization 
Harmonized System code of 7102.39 were actually classified as unsorted rough diamonds 
with a code of 7102.10.
Page 12
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
unloading stockpiles so that trade data differ from production 
capacities;
•
false declarations by importers on where they obtained their shipment, 
leading to data indicating a country’s exports exceed its production; or
•
smuggling.
Unfortunately, diamond trade data limitations have been difficult to rectify 
given that the industry has historically avoided close scrutiny. According to 
industry experts and government officials, U.S. and international diamond 
firms do not share trade information freely and business may be conducted 
on the basis of a handshake, with limited documentation. Furthermore, 
information problems resulting from industry’s lack of transparency are 
made worse by poor data reporting from many mining and trading nations. 
Stockpiles may not be reported, country of last export is recorded instead 
of country of origin or extraction,16 and some countries do not publish 
rough statistics if the data could reveal commercially sensitive information 
about a particular company. Most importantly, comprehensive international 
data is not available in volume terms (carats), even though volume data are 
a better indicator of true trade flows.
In addition to poor data, another factor with the potential to limit 
transparency in the international diamond industry is the current trend 
toward merging mining with cutting and polishing activities at the country 
level. In response to reduced demand and declining rough diamond prices, 
a number of mining countries are encouraging domestic cutting and 
polishing. In mining countries, diamonds from other origins could be mixed 
with domestically mined diamonds, cut and polished, and exported without 
detection. 
16In particular, for countries like Congo-Brazzaville that do not report rough diamond 
imports, a country like Belgium or the United States could record rough diamond purchases 
as originating from Congo-Brazzaville when in effect they are originating from another 
country. This is because data reflects country of last export, rather than country of origin. 
Page 13
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
United States Cannot 
Detect Conflict 
Diamonds with Present 
Import Controls
Under its current import control system, the United States cannot 
determine the true origin of diamond imports nor ensure that conflict 
diamonds do not enter the country. The nature of the commodity and 
industry makes verification of origin difficult. In 1998, as a result of 
Executive Orders, the United States began to enhance controls to prevent 
conflict diamonds from entering the country from U.N.-sanctioned sources. 
Since 1998, the United States has conducted eight diamond-related 
investigations. However, as of yet, no federal prosecutions relating to 
diamond smuggling have been undertaken. Without an effective 
international system to identify the origin of rough diamonds, the United 
States cannot detect diamonds from conflict sources sent to second 
countries and then shipped to the United States. 
Diamond Imports Subject to 
General Import Controls; 
Limited Controls Added to 
Implement U.N. and U.S. 
Sanctions 
Diamond imports are subject to the same import controls used for most 
commodities. Documentation accompanying diamond shipments entering 
the United States must include a commercial invoice, country of last 
export, total weight, and value. However, the regulations do not require 
exporters to certify the country of extraction, with the exception of rough 
diamonds directly from Angola and Sierra Leone. For example, rough 
diamonds could be mined in one country and traded several times before 
reaching their final destination. The ability to determine the true source of 
origin is further impeded because U.S. import shipments can contain 
diamonds mixed together from numerous countries.
Until 1998, the United States did not consider conflict diamonds a 
commodity of focus. Since 1998, the United States put into place import 
controls to target diamonds from UNITA in Angola, RUF in Sierra Leone, 
and Liberia—all of which are also targets of U.N. sanctions. Rough 
diamonds from Liberia have been banned from the United States. U.S. 
Customs requires that all shipments from Angola and Sierra Leone have a 
national certificate of origin or other documentation that demonstrates to 
authorities that the diamonds were legally imported with the approval of 
the exporting country’s government. However, the controls cannot prevent 
diamonds from these conflict sources from being shipped to a second 
country and mixed within shipments destined for the United States. 
Customs officials stated that determining the original source of rough 
diamonds based on physical inspection is virtually impossible; thus, U.S. 
Customs officials must rely on the accuracy of the source cited in 
accompanying import documentation.
Page 14
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
The U.S. ability to detect and deter conflict diamonds is further 
complicated by inaccuracies in its diamond trade data. In fiscal year 2000, 
U.S. Census data reported that about $816 million worth of rough diamonds 
from 53 countries officially entered the United States through 21 different 
ports of entry. However, based on irregularities found during our analysis 
of the U.S. Census import and export data, the validity of this data is 
questionable. A February 2002 review of U.S. import and export data by the 
U.S. Census Bureau found that some of the irregularities were due to 
misclassification of the diamonds. They noted that this problem resulted 
from the lack of understanding by importers and exporters of the definition 
of “unsorted” diamonds. For example, in 2001, diamonds that should have 
been classified as polished diamonds with a World Customs Organization 
Harmonized System code of 7102.39 were actually classified as unsorted 
rough diamonds with a code of 7102.10. According to U.S. Census officials, 
they have notified U.S. Customs of the problem and both agencies are 
taking steps to correct these errors by educating importers and exporters 
on the correct way to classify diamonds. Census will revise its 2001 
published statistics, but will not make this process retroactive to include 
prior year’s statistics.17
Limited Number of 
Diamond Inspections and 
Seizures Yield No U.S. 
Confirmed Cases of Conflict 
Diamond Imports
Since the United States put into place import controls to target diamonds 
from UNITA in Angola, RUF in Sierra Leone, and Liberia, there have been a 
limited number of diamond inspections and seizures. Under U.S. Customs 
regulations, importers of diamonds from Sierra Leone and Angola must 
present appropriate documentation to U.S. Customs upon demand and are 
responsible for keeping certificates of origin on file for 5 years after 
importation. If any intelligence is developed indicating that certain 
importers are importing conflict diamonds, U.S. Customs can seize 
shipments or develop leads by initiating formal investigations.
According to U.S. Customs officials, as a part of its regular compliance 
inspections, 35 physical inspections of rough diamond mixed shipments 
have been performed since 1998. Of these, six cases were found to have 
minor discrepancies primarily because of incorrect documentation or
17It should also be noted that similar data inconsistencies have been found in the Canadian 
import and export statistics. See Fire in the Ice: Benefits, Protection and Regulation in the 
Canadian Diamond Industry (Jan. 2002) published by the Diamonds and Human Security 
Project.
Page 15
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
because the diamonds were misdelivered.18 However, U.S. Customs told us 
that it recently seized diamonds from two individuals based on the failure 
to present proper export certificates. Both incidents involved passengers 
arriving at the Baltimore-Washington International Airport on Air Ghana 
flights who had also traveled to Sierra Leone. 
•
On December 31, 2001, U.S. Customs inspectors at Baltimore-
Washington International Airport searched a passenger’s luggage and 
found documents that led the officers to believe the passenger might 
have been carrying diamonds. When the officers asked if he was 
carrying diamonds, the passenger removed a package from his pocket 
and the diamonds were detained for formal U.S. Customs entry. The 
entry was filed, but there was no accompanying certificate from the 
Republic of Sierra Leone and 37 diamonds were seized. The diamonds 
remain in U.S. Customs’ custody, and the importer has petitioned for 
return of the diamonds.
•
On February 4, 2002, an arriving passenger declared $12,350 in 
diamonds to U.S. Customs officers at Baltimore-Washington 
International Airport. Upon review of the certificate of origin, the U.S. 
Customs inspectors noticed several inconsistencies that led them to 
believe the certificate was fraudulent. The stones detained have been 
released to the importer. The stones were determined not to be 
diamonds; however, the fraudulent certificate has been seized. The U.S. 
Customs Office of Investigations is reviewing this incident and further 
details are unavailable.
Kimberley Certification 
Scheme Lacks Key 
Aspects of 
Accountability
The Kimberley Process proposal describing the essential elements of an 
international diamond certification scheme does not contain the controls 
necessary to provide reasonable assurance that the scheme will be 
effective in deterring the flow of conflict diamonds. Without effective 
accountability, the certification scheme may provide the appearance of 
control while still allowing conflict diamonds to enter the legitimate 
diamond trade and, as a result, continue to fuel conflict.
18According to U.S. Customs officials, these compliance inspections were suspended after 
September 11, 2001, because the agency’s primary focus has shifted to security and 
antiterrorism efforts. According to the Treasury Department, these compliance 
examinations resumed on May 1, 2002. 
Page 16
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
The Kimberley scheme primarily provides a description of what 
participants should do as well as “recommendations” and “options.” The 
March 20, 2002, document describing the scheme is divided into sections 
covering definitions, the Kimberley Process Certificate, undertakings 
concerning international trade in rough diamonds, internal controls at the 
national government and industry levels, cooperation and transparency, 
and administrative matters. Elements of internal controls are addressed 
throughout the document, including the requirement that the Kimberley 
Process certificates, designating the country of origin for unmixed parcels, 
accompany each shipment of rough diamonds and that the certificates be 
readily accessible for a period of no less than 3 years. However, the scheme 
lacks key aspects of effective controls, and some “controls” are considered 
“recommended” or “optional.” 
To assess the scheme, we looked at evaluations of other international 
certification schemes and other sources for relevant, applicable criteria. 
We believe the best criteria available are based on published standards for 
internal control that have been developed for organizations.19 The 
Kimberley Process participants recognize the importance of internal 
controls,20 and the U.S. government, industry, and international entities 
such as the World Bank have accepted these standards. While the 
Kimberley Process is not an organization and we do not expect the 
Kimberley Process scheme to completely address all aspects of 
accountability, the criteria provide useful insights into the Kimberley 
Process scheme’s ability to achieve basic objectives of accountability and 
transparency. 
The guidelines include five control elements—control environment, risk 
assessment, control activities, information and communications, and 
monitoring. A review of the Kimberley Process scheme using these five 
control elements reveals significant challenges despite the gains reached 
by bringing together industry, nongovernmental organizations, and 
governments to address this serious humanitarian issue. 
19See Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, (GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1, 
Nov. 12, 1999), and Internal Control—Integrated Framework, published by the Committee 
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
20According to the November 2001 Kimberley Ministerial statement, “an internal 
certification scheme will only be credible if all participants have established effective 
internal systems of control designed to eliminate the presence of conflict diamonds in the 
chain of producing, exporting, and importing rough diamonds within their territories…”
Page 17
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Control Environment: A control environment is one with a structure, 
discipline, and climate conducive to sound controls and conscientious 
management. The Kimberley certification scheme faces serious challenges 
in achieving these elements.   
•
The Kimberley Process scheme primarily relies on voluntary 
participation and adherence making support and implementation of the 
scheme highly dependent on varying levels of political will and industry 
commitment. The scheme lacks an international authority or mandate. 
There is no authorizing mandate in U.N. Security Council Resolutions, 
U.N. General Assembly resolutions, or treaty status at this time. The 
form the final document will take (an agreement, memorandum of 
understanding, guidance, or some other form) has not yet been 
determined. Despite efforts to recruit more members, some key 
diamond trading countries have not participated in the Kimberley 
Process. Moreover, some participants continue to disagree with the 
definitions of conflict diamonds,21 participant, and observer within the 
Kimberley Process scheme and it remains unclear what impact this 
could have on their future support and participation. 
•
While Kimberley participants identified some possible administrative 
support functions22 and made some preliminary decisions regarding 
who may carry out the functions, they have not concluded their analysis 
and have made no commitments to staffing or funding.23 At the March 
2002 Kimberley Process plenary meeting, some participants expressed 
concern that without this information it will be difficult, if not 
21Under the Kimberley scheme, conflict diamonds means rough diamonds used by rebel 
movements or their allies to finance conflict aimed at undermining legitimate governments, 
as described in relevant U.N. Security Council resolutions as they remain in effect, or in 
other similar Security Council resolutions which may be adopted in the future, and as 
understood and recognized in U.N. General Assembly Resolution 55/56, or in other similar 
General Assembly resolutions which may be adopted in future. Some participants stated 
that they could not agree in advance to what the U.N. may adopt in the future concerning 
conflict diamonds.
22According to the Kimberley Process proposal, administrative support functions could 
include serving as a channel of communications; and maintaining and making available a 
collection of laws, regulations; etc. 
23Researchers reviewing multilateral environmental agreements have noted that 
institutional arrangements have come to be seen as crucial to such agreements’ 
effectiveness, and that the lack of institutions limits the capacity to monitor states’ 
implementation of and compliance with treaty requirements or to take action when 
noncompliance is ascertained.
Page 18
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
impossible, to develop the national legislation needed to implement the 
scheme within the expected time frame.
•
Individual participants are required to set up a system of national 
internal controls and effective enforcement and penalties. It is unclear 
how and when the capabilities of different participants to do so will be 
assessed and, where needed, assistance provided. If countries fail to 
comply with the essential elements of the scheme, then they can be 
excluded from trading with participants. However, whether national 
implementation of this provision will comply with trade agreements 
such as those under the World Trade Organization has been a point of 
contention since early in the process and remains under discussion.24 
Risk Assessment: A risk assessment is a mechanism to identify, analyze, 
prioritize, and manage risks to meet objectives. The Kimberley Process 
does not include a formal risk assessment and thus participants cannot be 
assured that they have appropriately identified, prioritized, and addressed 
the risks. Three potential high-risk areas the Kimberley Process scheme 
does not adequately address include the following. 
•
Industry experts and Kimberley participants agree that unless the 
segment of the diamond pipeline from when the diamond is first 
discovered in the alluvial field or mine to the point it is first exported is 
subject to controls, conflict diamonds may enter the legitimate trade. 
The scheme does little to address this issue, offering only 
recommendations encouraging participants to license diamond miners 
and maintain effective security. 
•
Industry and others hold stockpiles of diamonds with undocumented 
sources, and the number of diamonds held in stockpiles may be 
considerable. Since the Kimberley scheme requires information on 
origin, it is unclear how these diamonds will be addressed. Apparently, 
24Under the Kimberley scheme, participants are to ensure that no shipment of rough 
diamonds is imported from or exported to a nonparticipant. However, article XI of the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), 1994, obligates countries to refrain from 
imposing quantitative restrictions or similar measures (as opposed to duties, taxes or other 
charges) on the importation of products from other countries. Two exemptions contained 
within the GATT may justify a violation of Article XI. Article XXI (b) allows a country to 
impose trade restrictions it considers necessary for the protection of its essential security 
interests. Article XX contains an exception for measures designed to protect human life or 
health.
Page 19
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
any conflict diamond could be claimed as a stockpiled diamond at the 
scheme’s initiation.
•
The period after rough diamonds enter a foreign port until their point of 
sale as rough diamonds, polished diamonds, or jewelry or until exported 
to another country will be covered by an industry system called a chain 
of warranties in which participation is voluntary and monitoring and 
enforcement are self-regulated.25 As rough diamonds are exported from 
subsequent countries or the European Union, governments will issue a 
new Kimberley certificate to accompany each shipment, yet it is unclear 
how governments can rely on the voluntary industry system to ensure 
that the shipments are free from conflict diamonds. 
Control Activities: Control activities consist of policies, procedures, 
techniques, and mechanisms that ensure that management directives are 
carried out in an effective and efficient manner to achieve control 
objectives. The Kimberley scheme’s inconsistent attention to control 
activities raises concerns, such as the following:
•
While some internal controls are delineated, others are recommended or 
considered optional without clear justification, and many controls are to 
be developed at the national level where capabilities and political will 
differ. 
•
The industry chain of warranties is based on voluntary participation and 
self-regulation. Although the scheme requires that all sales invoices of 
participating industry be inspected by independent auditors to ensure 
that the diamonds come from nonconflict sources, an audit trail is 
problematic in an industry where diamonds are sorted and mixed many 
times. 
Information and Communications: An information and communication 
mechanism is needed for recording and communicating relevant and 
25According to industry officials, the World Diamond Council will strongly recommend that 
its member organizations require their individual members to make the following statement 
on all invoices for the sale of rough diamonds, polished diamonds, and jewelry containing 
diamonds. “The diamonds herein invoiced have been purchased from legitimate sources not 
involved in funding conflict and in compliance with United Nations resolutions. The seller 
hereby guarantees that these diamonds are conflict free, based on personal knowledge 
and/or written guarantees provided by the supplier of these diamonds.” Membership in the 
World Diamond Council and its membership organizations is voluntary.
Page 20
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
reliable information to those who need it in a form and time frame that 
enable them to carry out their internal control responsibilities. Although 
the Kimberley Process has made progress in identifying information to be 
communicated among participants, concerns regarding the Kimberley 
Process scheme’s mechanism for information and communication remain.
•
The Kimberley Process participants recently made progress identifying 
statistics to be shared (production, import, and export data) and in 
setting reporting time frames. However, the statistics are to be made 
available to an “intergovernmental body” or another “appropriate 
mechanism” for compilation and then to be made available for analysis 
by “interested parties” and by the Kimberley Process participants, 
individually or collectively. Thus, participants have not yet reached 
agreement on who will compile the statistics, how this will be done, and 
at what cost, as well as specifically who will analyze the data, how they 
will analyze it, and how and when they will report their results. This is of 
particular concern to some countries and industry that wish to protect 
what they consider sensitive information and, conversely, to others 
including nongovernmental organizations that want as much 
transparency as possible.
•
Given the problems identified with international rough diamond trade 
data, it remains unclear what steps will be taken to improve and 
standardize country reporting. It is unclear whether all diamond-
producing countries currently have the capacity to provide accurate 
data and what assistance, if any, will be needed or provided. 
•
The European Union will function as one trading organization under the 
Kimberley scheme. It remains unclear how its data will be compiled, 
reconciled, and shared in a timely manner. While the predominant 
diamond industry is found in Belgium and the United Kingdom, all 15 
European Union countries have reported diamond flows to the United 
Nations.
Monitoring: A monitoring mechanism consists of continuous monitoring 
and evaluation to assess the quality of performance over time in achieving 
the objectives and ensuring that the findings of audits and other reviews 
are promptly resolved. Even acknowledging sovereignty and data 
sensitivity constraints, the Kimberley Process scheme’s monitoring 
mechanisms still lack rigor, relying primarily on voluntary participation and 
self-assessment. For example,   
Page 21
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
•
Monitoring is based on participants’ reporting of other participants’ 
transgressions to initiate a review mission. A participant can inform 
another participant through the chair if it believes the laws, regulations, 
rules, procedures, or practices of that other participant do not ensure 
the absence of conflict diamonds in the exports of that other 
participant.26 Yet, there is no initial requirement that any one participant 
review another participant’s compliance with the international 
certification scheme so as to raise the initial question about compliance 
with the chair or other participants. It appears that only the obvious 
cases will be addressed. 
•
Review missions and their size, composition, terms of reference, and 
time frame are to be conducted with the consent of the participant 
concerned. Terms are to be based on circumstances and established by 
the chair in consultation with the participants. Although sovereignty is a 
legitimate issue raised by some participants concerned about the extent 
of monitoring, the extent to which participants can use sovereignty and 
national laws to refuse terms of the review mission remains unclear. 
•
A report on the results of a review mission, as well as comments from 
the participant concerned, are to be posted to the restricted access 
section of an official certification scheme Web site no later than 3 weeks 
after completion of the mission and are to remain confidential. The 
scheme does not discuss a mechanism for ensuring that the findings of 
the review missions are promptly resolved and for disclosure of this 
information to anyone other than the participating countries.
•
The scheme states that participants should exchange information, 
including self-assessments, to arrive at best practices; yet no guidelines 
were provided for self-assessment.
•
Although the scheme states that the industry system of warranties will 
help facilitate tracing rough diamond transactions by government 
authorities, no government-monitoring plan for the system has been 
proposed. 
26Such information may be reviewed at the annual plenary meetings at which time, 
participants can, upon the chair’s recommendation, decide to implement verification 
measures such as requesting additional information and clarification from participants and 
conducting review missions when there are credible indications of significant 
noncompliance with the international certification scheme.
Page 22
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
•
The scheme has no provision for external audit of the scheme’s 
administration.
Conclusion
Given the opportunities for illicit trade posed by the nature of diamonds 
and diamond industry operations and the varying levels of will and capacity 
to address the illicit trade, the challenges to deterring conflict diamonds 
are daunting. It is important to set realistic expectations and recognize that 
the Kimberley Process international diamond certification scheme is not 
expected to stop conflict on its own. There is the hope, however, that an 
international diamond certification scheme will make trade in conflict 
diamonds more difficult, resulting in less funding for conflict. But the 
scheme cannot accomplish this without reasonable participation and 
vigilance by diamond producing and trading countries and industry and 
inclusion of sound controls that meet basic accountability and 
transparency objectives. Without an effective international system that can 
trace the original source of rough diamonds, nations cannot ensure that 
conflict diamonds do not enter their countries and without accurate 
international trade data, nations cannot readily identify and rectify 
transgressions. The scheme as currently designed was achieved through 
considerable effort and negotiation, but additional improvements are 
needed to establish adequate controls to deter the conflict diamond trade. 
Unless the challenges we identified can be reasonably addressed, the 
scheme risks the appearance of control while still allowing conflict 
diamonds to enter the legitimate diamond trade and, as a result, continue to 
fuel conflict. 
Recommendation for 
Executive Action
To help ensure that Kimberley Process participants, including the United 
States, achieve their goal to establish an international certification scheme 
for rough diamonds that will stem the flow of conflict diamonds while 
protecting the legitimate diamond industry, we recommend that the 
Secretary of State in consultation with the relevant government agencies 
work with Kimberley Process participants to develop better controls 
including a reasonable control environment, risk assessment, internal 
controls, information sharing, and monitoring. 
Agency Comments
We received written comments from the Department of State and the 
Department of the Treasury. These comments are reprinted in appendixes 
Page 23
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
V and VI. In addition to their overall comments, Treasury provided 
technical comments, which we incorporated in the report as appropriate. 
In response to GAO’s recommendation, the Department of State 
commented that GAO had given insufficient weight to the political 
commitments achieved through the Kimberley Process in developing the 
international rough diamond certification scheme. The State Department 
commented that it would be more appropriate to focus on the Kimberley 
Process scheme as a dynamic effort to reconcile competing priorities 
rather than assess the scheme against a set of accountability measures. 
While State agreed that the international rough diamond certification 
scheme would need improvement and refinement as participants gain 
experience with its practical implementation, it did not believe that 
additional controls could be realistically negotiated prior to the scheme’s 
launch. 
While we recognize the inherently political and voluntary nature of 
international agreements, we believe that in order to attain the stated goals 
of the Kimberley Process—to stem the flow of conflict diamonds while 
protecting the legitimate trade--it is necessary to go beyond the political 
commitment with a view to a realistic assessment of what has been 
achieved and what remains to be done. We acknowledge that the scheme as 
currently designed was achieved through considerable effort and 
negotiation, but additional improvements are needed to establish adequate 
controls to deter the conflict diamond trade. We do not expect the 
Kimberley Process scheme to completely address all aspects of 
accountability, but the criteria we use to assess the scheme provides useful 
insights into the scheme’s ability to achieve basic objectives of 
accountability and transparency. Despite the efforts gained through 
negotiation, without effective accountability, the certification scheme may 
provide the appearance of control while still allowing conflict diamonds to 
enter the legitimate diamond trade, and as a result, continue to fuel 
conflict. We agree with State that the international rough diamond 
certification scheme will need improvement and since the Kimberley 
Process remains a dynamic process in which any participant may propose 
modifications prior to plenary meetings, we continue to believe that the 
process can benefit by State working with Kimberley Process participants 
to improve controls.
The Department of State also expressed concern about our statement in 
the report describing a scope limitation: “Our report was limited by the lack 
of timely and full access to State Department documentation and as a result 
Page 24
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
our work on the illicit trade and related crime was restricted.” We 
acknowledge the assistance provided by State during the review. However, 
our standards require that we report any methodological limitations. 
The Department of the Treasury did not agree with our recommendation 
that the Secretary of State, in consultation with relevant government 
agencies, work with Kimberley Process participants to develop better 
controls. Treasury believes that such steps would be unlikely to increase 
enforcement and would substantially increase costs and divert 
enforcement resources. However, Treasury did not explain why improved 
controls would not add to effectiveness and how improvements would 
substantially increase costs or divert enforcement resources. 
We are sending copies of this report to the Secretary of State, the Secretary 
of the Treasury, and interested congressional committees. We also will 
make copies available to other interested parties upon request. In addition, 
the report will be available at no charge on the GAO Web site at 
http://www.gao.gov. 
If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please call me 
at (202) 512-4128. Other GAO contacts and staff acknowledgments are 
listed in appendix VII.
Loren Yager
Director, International Affairs and Trade
Page 25
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Appendix I
Appendixes
Scope and Methodology
Appendix I
To determine whether the nature and operations of the international 
diamond industry are conducive to illicit trade, we interviewed and 
reviewed documentation from cognizant representatives of the U.S. and 
foreign diamond industry, U.S. and foreign governments, the United 
Nations, Interpol, and nongovernmental organizations, as well as 
recognized industry experts. We acquired official international diamond 
production and trade data and reviewed industry journals and reports. For 
information on diamond mining, we analyzed data from the Annual Review 
of Mining published by The Mining Journal, Ltd.27 For information on the 
international rough diamond trade, we analyzed data from the United 
Nations’ Commodity Trade Statistics Database. Where possible, we 
supplemented and verified these data with information from the U.S. 
International Trade Commission, World Bank Country At a Glance Tables, 
International Monetary Fund Country Statistical Appendixes, and diamond 
company annual reports. To the extent possible we reviewed State 
Department documentation. However, our scope was limited by the lack of 
timely and full access to State Department cable traffic and thus could not 
be assured that we had reviewed all information concerning related crime 
including terrorism.
We note, however, several limitations in the existing data: diamond trade 
data can vary significantly depending upon the source, and the data are 
often incomplete. Given these data caveats, we found that the most 
comprehensive source for international data was the United Nations 
(U.N.).28 However, when we examined the U.N. data, we found that the 
majority of countries with known diamond mining did not report their 
rough diamond export flows. Therefore, given that U.N. import data were 
relatively more comprehensive, we often inferred “estimated exports” of 
rough diamonds using world import flows. 29 Moreover, the data are only as 
27According to the author, these mining data are based on official statistics from mining 
company reports, government data, and estimates of artisanal production from field 
observations.
28We used the following U.N. Harmonized System of Classification Codes (HTS) for our data 
on the rough diamond trade: 7102.10 for unsorted diamonds, 7102.21 for unworked 
industrial diamonds, and 7102.31 for unworked nonindustrial diamonds. According to the 
United Nations, its commodity trade data are compiled from information sent by the 
Customs department, the national statistical office, or the Central Bank of approximately 
110 countries annually.
29Inferring exports from import data is a common analytical technique since exporters have 
an incentive to under-declare the value of shipments to pay fewer taxes. 
Appendix I
Scope and Methodology
Page 26
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
good as what each country reports to the United Nations, as they are not 
validated by the United Nations.
To determine whether U.S. government controls over diamond imports 
enable detection of conflict diamonds, we examined U.S. Customs’ 
procedures for importing, tracking, and monitoring U.S. diamond imports; 
applicable laws, executive orders, regulations, and implementing policies 
relating to diamond imports; and data on the value of U.S. rough diamond 
imports and the number of countries exporting them to United States, 
including the ports of entry. We met with officials at the U.S. Treasury 
Office of Foreign Asset Control, U.S. Customs, the Departments of Justice 
and Commerce, and the Federal Trade Commission to obtain their views on 
the effectiveness of U.S. import controls in deterring the trade of conflict 
diamonds.
To determine the extent to which the Kimberley Process international 
diamond certification scheme has the necessary elements to deter trade in 
conflict diamonds, we obtained the most current Kimberley Process 
documentation and assessed the scheme using criteria based on standards 
of control that have been developed for organizations. To determine the 
best available criteria for assessing the scheme, we reviewed international 
agreements and certification schemes for other commodities to find those 
most applicable to the diamond situation. In doing so, we reviewed studies 
and interviewed officials of the U.S. Trade Representative, State 
Department, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, United Nations, foreign 
governments, European Commission, nongovernmental organizations, and 
others about such schemes and their effectiveness. Our review revealed 
that agreed upon standards for internal controls that have been developed 
for organizations provided the best basis for sound criteria.30 To ensure our 
understanding of the components of the Kimberley Process scheme and 
challenges to the development and implementation of the scheme, we 
interviewed and assessed documentation from Kimberley Process 
participants and others including representatives of U.S. and foreign 
governments, the diamond industry, nongovernmental organizations, and 
the United Nations. We also observed Kimberley Process negotiations in 
Brussels, Belgium; Moscow, Russia; London, United Kingdom; and Ottawa, 
Canada.
30See Standards for Internal Control in the Federal Government, (GAO/AIMD-00-21.3.1, 
Nov. 12, 1999), and Internal Control—Integrated framework (1985), published by the 
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission.
Appendix I
Scope and Methodology
Page 27
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
We conducted fieldwork in Washington, D.C., and New York; Antwerp and 
Brussels, Belgium; Moscow, Russia; London, United Kingdom; and Ottawa, 
Canada. We also met with the government, industry, and nongovernmental 
officials of other Kimberley Process participant countries at the Kimberley 
Process meetings, the United Nations, their embassies in the United States, 
and at our offices in Washington, D.C., and San Francisco. We performed 
our work from March 2001 through March 2002 in accordance with 
generally accepted government auditing standards.
Page 28
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Appendix I
Conflict diamonds are currently most closely associated with Angola, 
Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). 
Understanding both the major events over time and the diamond industry 
in these countries provides context for better understanding the conflict 
diamond issue and international as well as U.S. efforts to address this issue 
in these countries. 
Conflict and Diamonds 
in Angola
Timeline of Major Events, 
1991-2002
1991
Signing of Bicesse Accords ends long- running civil war between Popular 
Movement for the Liberation of Angola government and competing forces.
1992
President Jose Eduardo Dos Santos and the Popular Movement for the 
Liberation of Angola government win plurality in United Nations (U.N.)-
monitored elections. The National Union for the Total Independence of 
Angola (UNITA), led by Jonas Savimbi, rejects the election results and 
resumes fighting.
1993 
United Nations sanctions UNITA.
1994
Government and UNITA sign Lusaka Protocol in an effort to end fighting.
1995
United Nations authorizes peacekeeping mission. Various U.N. verification 
and peacekeeping missions have been in Angola since 1989.
1997
Angolan government and UNITA establish power sharing Government of 
National Unity and Reconciliation. United Nations approves establishment 
of U.N. Observer Mission in Angola to help consolidate peace.
1998
Fighting resumes again between government and Jonas Savimbi’s faction of 
UNITA. UNITA’s participation in government is suspended.
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 29
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
U.N. Security Council imposes worldwide ban on purchases of unofficial 
Angolan diamonds and orders UNITA bank accounts and financial assets 
frozen.
1999 
Mandate for U.N. Observer Mission in Angola expires and, due to continued 
failure of peace process, is not extended. 
The U.N. office in Angola is authorized and given a limited, mostly 
humanitarian, mandate.
Angolan armed forces destroy conventional military capacity of UNITA and 
scatter rebels. UNITA regroups as a guerrilla force. 
2000
Government creates Angola Selling Corporation to market all diamonds 
produced in Angola.
Conflict continues with UNITA weaker but persistent as a guerrilla force.
2001
President Dos Santos announces he will not run in next elections. Next 
elections remain unscheduled.
2002
UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi is killed by government forces.
UNITA and government sign cease-fire agreement, pledging to abide by 
terms of the 1994 peace accord.
Diamonds in Angola
Diamonds are found throughout the country, though most are in the 
northeast provinces of Lunda Norte and Lunda Sul. Approximately 10 to 15 
percent of Angolan diamonds are industrial quality with an average value of 
$70 per carat, according to industry experts. The rest are high quality gem 
diamonds with an average value of $250 to $327 per carat. Artisanal diggers 
mine roughly two-thirds of Angolan diamonds. For a map of Angola, see 
figure 1.
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 30
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Figure 1:  Map of Angola
Source: CIA World Factbook 2001.
According to a U.N. Security Council report, diamonds have been a 
strategic resource for UNITA during its three wars.31 Prior to the cease-fire 
agreement, a U.N. official reported that the rebels were still smuggling 
diamonds, and the extent of UNITA’s stockpiles is unknown. However, after 
31 United Nations Security Council, Final Report of the Monitoring Mechanism on Angola 
Sanctions, S/2000/1225 (New York: Dec. 12, 2000).
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 31
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
UNITA lost ground in 1999, the government of Angola began restructuring 
the diamond industry and established the Angola Selling Corporation in 
February 2000 to be the sole legitimate buyer of Angolan diamonds. The 
Angola Selling Corporation comprises a 51 percent state interest, in the 
form of the Sociedade de Commercializacao de Diamantes, with the 
remaining 49 percent reportedly privately owned by Belgian interests and 
an Israeli diamond buyer with interests in the Russian diamond industry. 
The government of Angola also established a certificate of origin scheme 
and initiatives to register miners and traders in order to document the 
origin of diamonds and reduce informal markets. Angola Selling 
Corporation officials claim that rising government diamond revenues and a 
decrease in diamond territories held by UNITA as a result of battlefield 
losses indicate that trade in Angolan conflict diamonds is decreasing.
According to industry experts, Angolan diamond production is estimated at 
about $740 million in 2000 with the majority of official Angolan exports 
sold to Belgium.32 Although the government of Angola is still struggling to 
control nonconflict illicit trade, U.N. and State Department officials have 
stated that UNITA became a less important force in the diamond trade as 
its mining areas were recaptured. Nonetheless, an October 2001 U.N. report 
theorized that UNITA might still be selling between 25 to 30 percent of 
illegal diamonds leaving Angola.33 
32See Diamond Annual Review (2000) published by The Mining Journal Ltd.
33United Nations Security Council, Supplementary Report of the Monitoring Mechanism on 
Sanctions Against UNITA, S/2000/966 (New York: Oct. 12, 2001).
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 32
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Conflict and Diamonds 
in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo
Timeline of Major Events, 
1994-2002
1994/95  
Regional refugee crisis caused by war in neighboring Rwanda introduces 
large numbers of ethnic Hutu into the border region between Zaire and 
Rwanda. 
1997
Alliance of Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Congo-Zaire, led by 
Laurent Kabila, overthrows regime of Mobutu Sese Seko by armed force, 
with the support of the Rwandan and Ugandan governments.   Zaire is 
renamed Democratic Republic of the Congo. 
1998
War breaks out between the DRC government and rebel forces when Kabila 
tries to expel Rwandan military forces that helped him overthrow Mobutu. 
Governments of Burundi, Rwanda, and Uganda depend on Rwandan 
military presence for protection from armed groups operating in the 
eastern DRC, and thus oppose expulsion of Rwandan presence. 
1999
Lusaka Accords signed by the government of the DRC, Angola, Namibia, 
Rwanda, Uganda, Zimbabwe, and major rebel forces, calling for a cessation 
of hostilities by all forces in DRC. All parties violate cease-fire agreement.
U.N. Security Council authorizes establishment of the U.N. Organization 
Mission in Democratic Republic of the Congo to assist in implementing the 
cease-fire.
2000
Despite U.N. efforts and diplomatic activity, little progress is made 
implementing the Lusaka Accords.
2001
President Kabila is assassinated and his son, Joseph, takes over. Under 
Joseph Kabila’s leadership, progress is made toward establishing peace.
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 33
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
2002
Some skirmishes by nonstate forces continue.
Inter-Congolese dialogue, as called for in the Lusaka Accords, results in a 
political agreement signed by most political parties and rebel groups in the 
DRC.
Diamonds in the DRC
Diamonds in the DRC are generally mined in the East and West Kasai 
Provinces around the towns of Tshikapa and Mbuji-Mayi with some mining 
around the city of Kisangani. Diamond production in the DRC is more than 
half artisanal, and more than 70 percent of DRC diamonds are industrial 
quality with an average value of only $35 per carat, according to industry 
experts. For a map of the DRC, see figure 2.
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 34
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Figure 2:  Map of the DRC
Source: CIA World Factbook 2001.
Societe Miniere de Bakwanga, a parastatal that formerly held a monopoly 
over DRC diamond production, is the DRC’s largest mining company. In 
addition to Societe Miniere de Bakwanga, Cosleg, a company owned jointly 
by the Zimbabwean Defense Forces and the DRC army, was created in 
October 1999 to initiate mining operations in south-central DRC areas 
previously owned by Societe Miniere de Bakwanga and to purchase 
artisanal diamond production. However, in an attempt to regulate the 
diamond trade through a more controllable monopoly system, the Israeli 
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 35
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
firm, International Diamond Industries, was given exclusive rights in July 
2000 to buy and market diamonds from Societe Miniere de Bakwana and 
other trading firms in territories controlled by the DRC government. 
International Diamond Industries’ tenure was contentious, however, and 
the original 18-month contract was repealed in April 2001. According to an 
official at the U.N. Development Program, a new mining code to liberalize 
trade has been developed in the DRC and is currently being prepared for 
implementation.
There is no sanctions regime against diamonds traded from the DRC. 
According to a U.N. report, however, the DRC plays a vital role as a 
smuggling route for diamonds from Angola and elsewhere, and thus those 
seeking to control conflict diamonds need to address the DRC’s role in the 
conflict diamond trade. In addition, diamonds from artisanal mining have 
provided funding to rebels in the simmering conflict within the DRC.   
Industry experts estimated that diamond production in the DRC was worth 
about $585 million in 2000. U.N. trade data suggest that exports of rough 
diamonds totaled about $729 million, with the majority being imported into 
Belgium but with South Africa and United States as important buyers in 
recent years. 
Conflict and Diamonds 
in Liberia
Timeline of Major Events, 
1989 - 2002
1989
National Patriotic Front of Liberia, led by Charles Taylor, begins rebellion 
against government.
1990
Economic Community of West African States sends the West African 
Economic Community Military Observer Group as a peacekeeping force. 
Liberian President Samuel Doe is executed by splinter group of the 
National Patriotic Front of Liberia.
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 36
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
1996
Abuja Peace Accord signed. Implementation of Abuja Accord begins with 
disarmament program managed by the West African Economic Community 
Military Observer Group.
1997
Charles Taylor is elected president in elections declared free and fair by 
international observers.
2000
The United States imposes travel restrictions on Taylor government due to 
its ties with Sierra Leone’s Revolutionary United Front (RUF).
2001
U.N. Security Council imposes sanctions on Liberia, including a ban on 
diamond exports because of Liberia’s role in fomenting conflict in Western 
Africa.
Armed incursions of Liberian rebels from Guinea take place in Liberia’s 
Lofa county. Liberian and Guinean relations continue to deteriorate.
Foreign Ministers of the Mano River Union countries (Liberia, Sierra Leone, 
and Guinea) meet in Monrovia to discuss a head of state summit among the 
three nations.
2002
President Charles Taylor declares a state of emergency as Lofa county 
fighting spreads towards Monrovia. Refugees from Lofa flow into refugee 
camps and neighboring countries.
Diamonds in Liberia
Liberian diamond production was estimated by industry experts to have 
been 160,000 carats worth approximately $27.2 million in 2000. All of 
Liberia’s current production is alluvial. For a map of Liberia, see figure 3.
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 37
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Figure 3:  Map of Liberia
Source: CIA World Factbook 2001.
Liberia has been linked by the United Nations to the trade in conflict 
diamonds, particularly the trade in diamonds produced by Sierra Leone’s 
RUF.34 In March 2001, the U.N. Security Council imposed a series of 
34United Nations Security Council, Report of the Panel of Experts appointed pursuant to 
Security Council resolution 1306 (2000), paragraph 19, in relation to Sierra Leone, 
S/2000/1195 (New York: Dec. 20, 2000).
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 38
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
punitive sanctions on the Taylor regime, including a global prohibition on 
the direct or indirect import of rough diamonds from or through Liberia. 
Ironically, follow-up reports by the United Nations stated that Liberian 
diamonds are now being smuggled through Sierra Leone. 
According to U.N. data, in both 1998 and 1999, more than $270 million 
worth of rough diamonds were imported worldwide from Liberia, most of 
which, according to the Congressional Research Service,35 were attributed 
to diamonds smuggled from Sierra Leone and the transshipment and re-
export of diamonds from Russia and elsewhere to avoid Belgian import tax 
payments. Year 2000 imports of rough diamonds from Liberia fell to about 
$102 million, according to U.N. data.
Conflict and Diamonds 
in Sierra Leone
Timeline of Major Events, 
1991-2002
1991
RUF, led by Foday Sankoh, begins rebellion against government of Joseph 
Momoh. 
1992
Sierra Leonean Army Captain Valentine Strasser assumes power after 
leading a coup to oust Momoh from office. 
1994
RUF overruns diamond areas and begins to threaten Freetown.
1995
The government of Sierra Leone hires a private security force, Executive 
Outcomes, to fight the rebels. Executive Outcomes drives the RUF from 
Freetown and proceeds to retake many diamond areas.
1996
Ahmad Tejan Kabbah of the Sierra Leone People’s Party wins presidential 
elections. 
35Congressional Research Service, Diamonds and Conflict: Policy Proposals and 
Background (Dec. 5, 2001).
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 39
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Government of Sierra Leone and RUF negotiate Abidjan peace agreement, 
but it fails.
1997
RUF leader Sankoh is arrested in Nigeria.
Members of Sierra Leone Army, calling themselves the Armed Forces 
Revolutionary Council, overthrow Kabbah government and join forces with 
the RUF.
1998
RUF/Armed Forces Revolutionary Council junta is driven out by West 
Africa’s Economic Community Military Observer Group; Kabbah 
government is restored to power. 
U.N. Security Council establishes U.N. Observer Mission in Sierra Leone.
1999
Government and RUF sign power-sharing agreement, the Lome Accord. 
Foday Sankoh is released on pardon. 
U.N. replaces observer mission with larger mission, the U.N. Mission in 
Sierra Leone, to assist government in implementing Lome peace 
agreement.
The disarmament and demobilization of combatants stall and fighting 
continues. 
U.S. Agency for International Development’s Office of Transition Initiatives 
begins providing technical assistance to government of Sierra Leone to 
address conflict diamonds.
2000
RUF takes approximately 500 U.N. peacekeepers and military observers 
hostage. All are eventually released.
RUF leader Sankoh is recaptured and imprisoned.
All imports of diamonds from Sierra Leone are banned by U.N. Security 
Council Resolution 1306. 
Diamond exports resume when government of Sierra Leone presents 
elements of new export regime.
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 40
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
RUF and government sign Abuja Agreement cease-fire, but RUF does not 
disarm and at end of year controls almost two-thirds of country.
2001
U.N. Mission in Sierra Leone increases in strength and deploys throughout 
the country. Disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration process gains 
speed. 
United Nations authorizes a Special Court for Sierra Leone and is working 
to develop a Truth and Reconciliation Commission for the country.
2002 
The Joint Committee on Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration, 
composed of representatives of the government of Sierra Leone, the RUF 
and the U.N. Mission in Sierra Leone, declare the disarmament process 
complete.
Presidential and parliamentary elections have been announced for May 
2002. 
Diamonds in Sierra Leone
Diamonds in Sierra Leone are principally found in the east and southeast 
portions of the country. Diamond deposits are primarily alluvial, with some 
kimberlite deposits. According to industry experts, Sierra Leone diamonds 
are of a high quality with an estimated average carat value of $250 in 2000. 
For a map of Sierra Leone, see figure 4.
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 41
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Figure 4:  Map of Sierra Leone
Source: CIA World Factbook 2001.
The Sierra Leone diamond market suffered from corruption and 
mismanagement throughout the 1970s and 1980s, causing a rise in 
smuggling. In the 1990s the RUF became involved in mining and trading 
diamonds to help fuel its rebellion against the government of Sierra Leone. 
Between 1997-1999, only 36,384 carats were officially exported, compared 
with roughly 2 million carats annually in the 1960s. According to a U.N. 
report, it has been estimated that, in 1999, the government of Sierra Leone 
lost approximately $68.8 million worth of diamond exports to criminal 
Appendix II
Situation in Countries Primarily Associated 
with Conflict Diamonds
Page 42
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
activity.36 The United Nations has also found that Liberia, Guinea, and 
Burkina Faso are important destinations for smuggled Sierra Leone 
diamonds. 
The United Nations banned the import of all diamonds from Sierra Leone in 
July 2000, with the provision that rough diamonds controlled by the 
government of Sierra Leone through a fully operational diamond 
certification scheme would be exempted. By October 2000, the government 
of Sierra Leone was able to implement the called for diamond certification 
scheme developed with the help of the High Diamond Council of Belgium, 
and the governments of the United Kingdom, the United States, and 
Belgium, and was thus exempted from the ban. According to a government 
official from Sierra Leone, however, some RUF diamonds might simply be 
flowing through the legitimate system now. In addition, diamond mining by 
all parties has continued at a rapid pace since disarmament, according to 
U.S. State Department officials. 
The United Nations reports official diamond imports in 2000 from Sierra 
Leone as about $14 million. Industry experts, however, report Sierra Leone 
production of rough diamonds at more than $87 million in 2000.
36United Nations Security Council, Report of the Panel of Experts appointed pursuant to 
Security Council resolution 1306 (2000), paragraph 19, in relation to Sierra Leone, 
S/2000/1195 (New York: Dec. 20, 2000).
Page 43
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Appendix III
Structure and Economic Importance of the 
International Diamond Industry
Appendix I
Further understanding the diamond industry’s structure and importance 
provides insights into the challenges faced by those attempting to address 
conflict diamonds. Diamond mining is characterized by large, contained, 
deep-mining operations and widely scattered alluvial surface mining 
operations, the former of which could be somewhat more easily subject to 
controls. While the majority of rough diamonds are traded through a small 
number of key countries, diamonds are traded around the world, 
contributing to the difficulty in tracking their origin. Though cutting and 
polishing is largely driven by labor costs and expertise, more mining 
countries are trying to encourage domestic cutting and polishing activities 
in order to supplement mining revenues. For a number of mining countries, 
revenues earned from the international diamond industry are economically 
significant.
Diamond Mining
Figure 5 shows that diamond mining occurs in approximately 20 different 
countries worldwide; however, the majority of rough diamonds are 
extracted in deep mines located in seven countries. 
Appendix III
Structure and Economic Importance of the 
International Diamond Industry
Page 44
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Figure 5:  Countries That Mine Rough Diamonds, 2000
Source: The Mining Journal, Ltd.
Moreover, because of the substantial capitalization and sophisticated 
infrastructure required for deep mining, diamond mining in these seven 
countries is done primarily by one of four large companies (see table 4). 
Appendix III
Structure and Economic Importance of the 
International Diamond Industry
Page 45
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Table 4:  Rough Diamond Mining, 2000 
Note: Companies listed are those that mine in countries characterized as having primarily deep mining 
operations.
Source: Mining Journal.
Although world diamond mining is highly concentrated, the share of rough 
diamonds mined in African countries by entities other than De Beers—22 
percent—is nevertheless significant in terms of value: about $1.8 billion in 
production value and about $2 billion in exports in 2000. For these African 
countries, much of the rough diamond supply is found in surface alluvial 
fields. Alluvial diamonds are collected by individual artisanal diggers using 
a simple sieve or shovel, sold to local dealers, and eventually exported. 
Rough Diamond 
Trading
As with mining, the majority of rough diamonds are traded through a few 
key markets, though a much larger number of countries engage in the 
trade. The De Beers Diamond Trading Company (DTC) markets 
approximately 65 percent of rough diamond production by value. This 
includes all diamonds from De Beers’ mining operations and the operations 
of its partnerships in Namibia and Botswana and a portion purchased from 
Alrosa Ltd. and BHP Billiton. After purchase, the DTC sorts its rough 
diamonds at its London office and sells them to designated buyers called 
sight-holders at scheduled times throughout the year. About half of De 
Beers’ sight-holders trade through their offices in Antwerp, Belgium, which 
is also the principal market for non-DTC diamonds. According to the 
Belgian Ministry of Economic Affairs, Antwerp is the largest trading center 
for rough diamonds with between 5 million and 10 million rough stones 
Currency in thousands of dollars (U.S.)
Mining company
Location of mining 
operations
Value of mined
diamonds
Percent of world
supply of
diamonds
De Beers 
Consolidated Mines 
Ltd.
Botswana, Namibia, 
South Africa, and 
Tanzania
$3,541,720
45
Alrosa Ltd.
Russia
1,595,000
20
BHP Billiton
Canada
453,555
6
Rio Tinto
Australia
360,600
5
Other mining 
operations
Africa, China, and Latin 
America
1,906,120
24
Total
$7,856,995
100
Appendix III
Structure and Economic Importance of the 
International Diamond Industry
Page 46
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
checked daily at the Antwerp Diamond Office. As important cutting and 
polishing markets and hosts to a number of other De Beers’ sight-holders, 
the United States, India, and Israel are also large diamond trading centers. 
Though trading of rough diamonds is dominated by the DTC, United 
Nations (U.N.) data suggest that more than 100 countries worldwide export 
rough diamonds. Figure 6 shows that 77 percent of total rough diamond 
exports in 2000 came from either a mining country or one of five main 
trading centers. The remaining, 23 percent of rough diamond exports, 
worth approximately $5.4 billion, came from 77 other countries around the 
world. 
Appendix III
Structure and Economic Importance of the 
International Diamond Industry
Page 47
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Figure 6:  Countries That Export Rough Diamonds, 2000
aThe five largest reported trading centers are Belgium, India, Israel, the United States, and the United 
Kingdom. 
Source: U.N. data except for Botswana, Namibia, and South Africa, which did not report their diamond 
trade statistics to the United Nations. Data for Botswana and Namibia are from the World Bank, and 
data for South Africa are from the South African Revenue Service.
Appendix III
Structure and Economic Importance of the 
International Diamond Industry
Page 48
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Rough Diamond 
Cutting and Polishing
There are a number of established centers for cutting and polishing of 
rough diamonds, as well as emerging markets. Currently, India is the 
world’s largest cutting and polishing center with around $6.5 billion of 
polished diamond exports in both 1999 and 2000. Driven partially by low 
labor costs, 9 out of 10 rough diamonds are cut and polished in India by a 
workforce of approximately 700,000. Israel, Belgium, and China are also 
large cutting and polishing centers, and the United States is an important 
center for polishing of high quality gems. 
Despite the existence of established cutting and polishing centers, some 
countries that mine rough diamonds are trying to expand cutting and 
polishing activities to capture the value added revenues and expand 
employment.37 According to industry experts, though mining countries 
currently supply less than 10 percent of the polished market, they expect a 
larger share of this activity to be diverted from traditional centers to mining 
countries due to political and economic pressure on those governments to 
create opportunities for increased mineral wealth. For example, both 
Namibia and South Africa have legislation mandating some domestic 
cutting and polishing. 
Economic Importance 
of the Diamond 
Industry
The international diamond industry provides substantial economic benefits 
to a number of countries, though direct economic contributions vary 
depending on the extent of conflict or nonconflict related smuggling, the 
way diamonds are mined, the presence of activities such as cutting and 
polishing, and the government tax system.38 
Table 5 lists estimates of the economic importance of diamond mining in a 
few select countries and suggests that diamond sales can account for a 
significant portion of total merchandise exports and gross domestic 
product. For example, in countries with mostly alluvial mining, diamond 
37Though profit margins in cutting and polishing are relatively smaller than in mining, 
cutting and polishing is a labor-intensive activity and generates employment. Industry 
experts estimate that in Botswana, for example, 23 jobs are created for every $2 million of 
capital employed in mining while 170 jobs are created for every $2 million of capital 
employed in cutting and polishing. 
38Potential direct economic contributions may include diamond sales revenues, foreign 
exchange generated from diamond exports, government revenues, wages for employees, 
and industry investments. Indirect benefits may include payments for support services such 
as transportation or insurance and/or social investments made by large diamond companies.
Appendix III
Structure and Economic Importance of the 
International Diamond Industry
Page 49
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
exports in 2000 accounted for 74 percent of total merchandise exports in 
the Central African Republic and 21 percent of total merchandise exports 
in Guinea. In countries with mostly deep mining, this share was 79 percent 
for Botswana and 48 percent for Namibia. 
Table 5:  Estimates of the Economic Importance of Diamond Mining for Selected 
Countries, 2000 
aIn countries with alluvial mining done by artisanal operators, the number of diggers is often unknown 
due to the absence of a legal framework requiring registration.
bAccording to the U.S. Agency for International Development, the Sierra Leone government started 
charging a 3 percent tax on rough diamond exports in 2000. This estimate includes possible export tax 
revenues but does not include possible revenues from diamond licenses. 
Source: Trade data is from the U.N., except for Botswana and Namibia whose trade data is from the 
World Bank. Mining values are from The Mining Journal, Ltd; Gross domestic product figures are from 
the World Bank; and employment estimates are from the U.S. State Department. Estimates of 
government revenues are from the following: Angola’s is from the diamond mining company Ascorp, 
Botswana’s and Namibia’s are from De Beers, with supporting data from the World Bank, South 
Africa’s is from the U.S. State Department, with an exchange rate provided by the World Bank, and 
Sierra Leone’s is from the United Nations.
In addition to exports, economic contributions are most visible in 
Botswana, where diamond sales account for more than one-third of its 
gross domestic product and provide over $1 billion in government revenues 
(worth half of total government earnings) and 6,000 jobs. Debswana, a joint 
venture mining company between De Beers and the government, is the 
second largest employer in the country and returns more than 70 percent of 
Currency in dollars (U.S.)
Rough
diamond
exports as% of
total
merchandise
exports
Value of
diamond mining
as% of gross
domestic
product
Government
revenues
from
diamond
industry
Current
employment
in diamond
industry
Countries with alluvial mining
Angola
8.1
8.4
$66,000,000
unknowna
Central African 
Republic
74.2
7.4
not available
unknown
Guinea
21.3
3.3
not available
unknown
Sierra Leone
18.6
13.7
423,418 b
unknown
Countries with primarily deep mining
Botswana
78.7
40.1
1,197,800,000
6,000
Namibia
47.9
12.0
48,000,000
2,000
South Africa
5.0
0.9
53,043,478
15,200
Appendix III
Structure and Economic Importance of the 
International Diamond Industry
Page 50
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
its profits to Botswana in the form of taxes, royalties, dividends, and 
activities such as cutting and polishing. According to the International 
Monetary Fund, the diamond industry has allowed Botswana to earn 
foreign exchange reserves, create government budget surpluses, and 
become a growing economy in Africa. 
Though somewhat less prominent, the diamond industry is also visibly 
important in Namibia and South Africa. In Namibia, diamond earnings 
account for 12 percent of its gross domestic product and the industry 
employs up to 2,000 people. Namdeb, a joint venture company between De 
Beers and the government, is also the largest taxpayer. In South Africa, the 
diamond industry makes up a smaller share of the economy given the 
greater level of economic diversification. Nonetheless, more than 15,000 
people are employed in the South African diamond industry and, according 
to the U.S. Department of State, an estimated three to six jobs in support 
service industries are generated for each job in mining.
Page 51
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Appendix IV
Historical Data on African Diamond Exports
Appendix IV
According to official United Nations (U.N.) data, estimated exports of 
rough diamonds from nonmining African countries decreased in 2000. As 
shown in table 6, the total value of rough diamonds reportedly exported 
from these countries went from about $293 million in 1990 to about $793 
million in 1996 to only about $64 million in 2000. Accounting for a large part 
of this trend, rough diamond exports went from about $648 million in 1996 
to about $39 million in 2000 for Congo-Brazzaville and from about $129 
million in 1996 to about $18 million in 2000 for the Gambia. 
Appendix IV
Historical Data on African Diamond Exports
Page 52
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Table 6:  Value of Estimated Rough Diamond Exportsa from Africa, 1990-2000
Currency in thousands of dollars (U.S.)
1990
1991
1992
Producing countries
Angola
$260,546
$48,677
$182,784
Botswana
1,412,000
1,455,000
1,374,000
Central African Republic
75,178
78,539
76,337
Democratic Republic of the Congo
289,020
473,436
384,883
Ghana
140,470
105,360
112,924
Guinea
82,835
91,254
102,032
Ivory Coast
101,322
112,073
110,932
Kenya
89
27
1,036
Liberia
390,833
136,313
312,739
Namibia
328,000
n/a
n/a
Sierra Leone
84,342
131,793
210,271
South Africa
516,417
329,813
154,830
Tanzania
7,964
146
360
Zimbabwe
n/a
114
505
Total: Producing countries
$3,689,017
$2,962,543
$3,023,635
Nonproducing countries
Benin
1,162
n/a
n/a
Cameroon
205
175
29
Congo-Brazzaville
122,167
167,683
335,170
Gambia
77,956
102,058
130,973
Guinea Bissau
n/a
68
n/a
Mali
11,305
36,655
34,983
Nigeria
73,391
53,471
647
Rwanda
n/a
n/a
213
Senegal
326
9,415
698
Togo
5,642
3,648
3,596
Uganda
n/a
n/a
n/a
Zambia
1,320
3
8
Total: Nonproducing countries
$293,473
$373,175
$506,316
Total
$3,982,489
$3,335,717
$3,529,950
Appendix IV
Historical Data on African Diamond Exports
Page 53
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
 
aEstimated exports are derived using the sum of world imports from each country.
Note: n/a means not available.
Source: U.N. data except for Botswana, Namibia, and South Africa, which did not report their diamond 
trade statistics to the United Nations. Data for Botswana and Namibia are from the World Bank. Data 
for South Africa are from the South African Revenue Service.
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
$143,464
$123,535
$161,510
$253,636
$322,969
$352,725
$551,131
$633,265
1,379,000
1,384,000
1,437,000
1,721,000
2,095,000
1,477,000
2,132,000
2,164,000
84,959
62,076
90,093
112,655
106,374
160,415
156,031
168,515
471,625
750,674
824,525
856,020
722,098
677,269
833,510
728,975
204,130
264,885
212,316
225,678
202,859
133,568
206,784
58,952
191,622
113,854
101,856
85,348
115,690
125,087
143,275
163,166
106,259
71,326
129,043
210,533
116,723
44,469
52,219
61,244
306
42
18
n/a
1
46
59
0
291,745
318,212
766,156
556,313
328,923
277,458
290,243
101,861
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
459,000
709,000
92,629
104,288
108,805
113,825
129,009
73,941
34,393
14,114
167,215
146,493
194,136
515,000
860,385
851,454
1,297,676
1,390,456
222
5,974
215
1,682
6,579
5,518
8,144
30,294
1,658
3,802
5,613
9,762
7,888
1,235
1,557
1,976
$3,134,833
$3,349,161
$4,031,286
$4,661,453
$5,014,499
$4,180,187
$6,166,022
$6,225,819
n/a
n/a
3,419
1,343
1,061
421
103
21
3
4
348
n/a
2,565
5,367
5,812
884
327,590
260,429
430,506
647,880
503,555
80,858
64,194
39,153
64,594
59,144
122,394
129,237
132,716
101,503
54,650
18,396
69
32
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
1,289
n/a
15,268
13,985
14,510
8,573
3,350
2,043
4,734
5,476
449
3,252
4
20
n/a
4
n/a
n/a
n/a
29
442
n/a
712
16
236
n/a
3
875
505
1,985
3,174
256
58
n/a
4,800
18,139
22,758
2,865
3,453
1,107
15,646
214
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
203
1,364
1,170
13
63
36
688
597
381
25
15
39
$412,840
$355,924
$595,573
$792,500
$651,171
$192,965
$147,907
$64,197
$3,547,673
$3,705,085
$4,626,859
$5,453,953
$5,665,670
$4,373,152
$6,313,929
$6,290,016
Page 54
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Appendix V
Comments from the Department of State
Appendix V
Appendix V
Comments from the Department of State
Page 55
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Appendix V
Comments from the Department of State
Page 56
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Page 57
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Appendix VI
Comments from the Department of the 
Treasury
Appendix VI
Appendix VI
Comments from the Department of the 
Treasury
Page 58
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Page 59
GAO-02-678 Conflict Diamonds
Appendix VII
GAO Contacts and Staff Acknowledgments
Appendix VI
GAO Contacts
Phillip Thomas (202) 512-9892
Kathleen Monahan (415) 904-2237
Acknowledgments
In addition to those individuals named above, Zina Merritt, Kendall 
Schaefer, Sharla Draemel, Mark Dowling, and Janey Cohen made key 
contributions to this report. 
(320027)
GAO’s Mission
The General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, exists to 
support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities and to help improve 
the performance and accountability of the federal government for the American 
people. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal programs and 
policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other assistance to help 
Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding decisions. GAO’s 
commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of accountability, 
integrity, and reliability.
Obtaining Copies of 
GAO Reports and 
Testimony
The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is 
through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-
text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older 
products. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents 
using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, 
including charts and other graphics.
Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and 
correspondence. GAO posts this list, known as “Today’s Reports,” on its Web site 
daily. The list contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO e-mail this 
list to you every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to daily
E-mail alert for newly released products” under the GAO Reports heading.
Order by Mail or Phone
The first copy of each printed report is free. Additional copies are $2 each. A check 
or money order should be made out to the Superintendent of Documents. GAO 
also accepts VISA and Mastercard. Orders for 100 or more copies mailed to a single 
address are discounted 25 percent. Orders should be sent to:
U.S. General Accounting Office
441 G Street NW, Room LM
Washington, D.C. 20548
To order by Phone: 
Voice: (202) 512-6000 
TDD: (202) 512-2537 
Fax: 
(202) 512-6061
To Report Fraud, 
Waste, and Abuse in 
Federal Programs
Contact:
Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm
E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470
Public Affairs
Jeff Nelligan, managing director, NelliganJ@gao.gov (202) 512-4800
U.S. General Accounting Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149 
Washington, D.C. 20548
United States
General Accounting Office
Washington, D.C. 20548-0001
Official Business
Penalty for Private Use $300
Address Service Requested
Presorted Standard
Postage & Fees Paid
GAO
Permit No. GI00
