As of December, 1995, the DOE Environmental
Management program (EM) has established eleven site-
specific advisory boards at the Hanford, Idaho, Nevada,
Monticello, Fernald, Los Alamos, Sandia, Savannah
River, Pantex, Oak Ridge, and Rocky Flats sites.  These
boards were established by DOE in close cooperation
with state environmental agencies and regional EPA
offices.
The site-specific advisory boards (SSABs) were
established to provide site specific advice.  The board
chairs, however, do meet several times a year on an "ad
hoc" basis to discuss site-related and national issues
and concerns.  
EM also established a national EM advisory board
(EMAB).  This board provides broad national advice that
complements the advice from our SSABs.  Greater
interaction between the SSABs and the EMAB is
anticipated in the future.
In addition, the State and Tribal Government Working
Group (STGWG), established in 1989, gives affected
states and Indian nations a voice in the DOE decision-
making process. For more information, contact Don
Beck, Office of Public Accountability, DOE, (202) 586-
7633.
Box 10:  Department of Energy
CHAPTER 4
ADVISORY BOARDS
Introduction
___________________________________________________________________________
__
As more information has become available to public stakeholders through community
involvement programs as described in Chapter 3, some stakeholders have requested a greater
role in the decisions that affect the health and environment of their communities.  In its
Interim Report, the Committee recommended that facilities establish advisory boards to meet
this need.  Since the publication of the Interim Report, the Committee estimates that over 200
advisory boards addressing federal facility cleanup have been established either at the
initiative of the regulated or regulating agencies, or the request of public stakeholders.  For
example, DOE has established 11 site-specific advisory boards (SSABs) and DOD has
established over 200 Restoration Advisory Boards (RABs).  This overwhelming response to
the Committee's recommendations has initiated a new way to approach community and
federal agency partnerships at these facilities.  
In this chapter, the Committee restates its
recommendations for the establishment and
operation of advisory boards.  It also
includes new recommendations that have
emerged through the collective experience
of the first two years of implementing the
Committee's original recommendations.  
Interim Report Recommendations
___________________________________
__
In the 1993 Interim Report, the Committee
recommended that federal agencies establish
advisory boards to provide independent
policy and technical advice to the regulated
and regulating agencies with respect to key
cleanup decisions. The Interim Report
proposed a model approach for
implementing the boards and included
recommendations for when boards should
be established and how they should be formed, operated, and financed.  
DOD is establishing Restoration Advisory Boards
(RABs) at all closing installations and at operating
installations where there is sufficient, sustained interest
on the part of the community.  RABs are generally
consistent with the concepts found in the Interim Report. 
Policy and implementing guidelines on RABs were
published in 1994, and each of the Services has
promulgated guidance.  (See Appendix D)
As of January, 1996, approximately 200 RABS have
been established.  RABs bring together people who
reflect the diverse interests within the local community,
enabling the early and continued flow of information
among the affected community, the DOD installation and
the regulatory agencies.  The RAB complements other
community involvement efforts, but does not replace
them.  DOD's policy is that community members of RABs
should reflect the diverse interests within the local
community and should live or work in the affected
community or be impacted by the restoration program.  
The member selection process is designed to be
unbiased and open, and is conducted in cooperation
with regulatory agencies and the community.  Once the
RAB has been formed, the installation selects a DOD co-
chair and the community members select a community
co-chair.  The co-chairs serve as equal partners and
establish meeting agendas.  Both co-chairs are
responsible for ensuring members have the opportunity
to raise issues and concerns and that their
representatives participate in an open and constructive
manner.
Installations are charged with providing administrative
support to the RABs such as meeting facilities,
preparation of minutes, copying/printing of documents,
mailings, public notices, outreach material and meeting
facilitation.  Citizen groups can apply for Technical
Assistance Grants through the EPA.  In addition, the
National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1995
provided new authority for DOD to provide up to $7.5
million in technical assistance funding to members of
RABs.  DOD is in the process of identifying options for
providing this assistance.  For more information, contact
Marcia Read, Environmental Security, DOD, (703) 697-
9793.
Box 11:  Department of Defense
A brief description of how agencies are
implementing the boards can be found in
Boxes 10-14.  In institutionalizing the
boards, most of the agencies have issued
guidance documents for how these boards
should be established and run.  To obtain
copies of these guidance documents refer to
Appendix D which includes points of
contacts for each agency.  
The Committee applauds the massive effort
undertaken by the regulated agencies to
implement the advisory board
recommendations.  At the vast majority of
facilities, community participants appreciate
the opportunity to take part in the cleanup
decision-making process.  Similarly, agency
officials are realizing the merits of 
stakeholder participation.  Although it is too
soon to evaluate the overall effect of the
advisory boards in the cleanup process, it
appears that the successful formation of
advisory boards is fostering or supporting a
more cooperative approach among
regulators, regulated agencies, and
communities. 
Continuing Problems
___________________________________
__
In implementing any major new concept
such as establishing advisory boards at
hundreds of facilities of several different
agencies, challenging issues will arise.  In implementing the Interim Report recommendations
for advisory boards, agencies and public stakeholders have learned many lessons about
establishing and operating advisory boards.  Below is a list of concerns that the Committee
has identified, as problems that have either continued despite the establishment of advisory
boards, or arisen through implementation:
Carrying out both its oversight and technical assistance
responsibilities, EPA participates on advisory boards
established by other federal agencies.  EPA has worked
with DOD and DOE to develop policy and guidance on
the creation and functioning of advisory boards at their
facilities.  In addition, EPA has piloted advisory boards at
10 non-federal facility NPL sites.  Through its Technical
Assistance Grant (TAG) program, EPA provides funds to
community groups to provide more effective community
involvement.  As of November 1995, TAGs have been
awarded at 29 federal facilities. For more information,
contact Sven-Erik Kaiser, OSWER/FFRO, EPA (202)
260-1606.
Box 12:  U. S. Environmental Protection Agency
Community Assistance Panels (CAPS) - ATSDR has
established CAPS operating at Otis Air Force Base
(Massachusetts), the McClellan Air Force Base site
(California), and the Cornhusker Army Ammunition Plant
Site (Nebraska).  These panels inform the public about
site-specific scientific findings and provide a means for
community participation in ATSDR activities.  It is
ATSDR policy to either convene a CAP meeting or
provide a written update to the community on its
activities at 90-day intervals.  For more information,
contact Mark Bashor, ATSDR (404) 639-0730.
Box 13:  ATSDR
•
Mistrust among some stakeholders
persists at some facilities.
•
Orientation to the advisory board
process can be frustrating and time
consuming.
•
The amount of technical information
necessary to understand cleanup
options and their implications can be
overwhelming. 
•
There is, in many cases, a lack of sufficient representation from affected communities
of color.  The membership serving on advisory boards does not always reflect the
diversity of communities in which the facilities are located. 
•
There is a lack of clarity regarding local governments' role in the advisory board
process.
•
Advisory boards are often considered the sole focus for agency outreach efforts to
affected and surrounding 
communities.  
•
There is a lack of clarity with respect
to the advisory board's role and
expected interaction with other
advisory groups addressing related
issues such as reuse.
•
There needs to be a process by which
advisory boards can be evaluated.  
•
To date, some agencies have made
little effort to share information
among advisory boards.  The wealth of information that has been gained at some sites
with effective boards has not been readily shared with sites establishing new boards.   
•
Lack of clarity about who and what bodies the advisory board should advise.
Recommendations
___________________________________________________________________________
___
USDA, DOI, and NOAA have not yet established
advisory boards.  At this point, there has not been
sufficient interest at these agencies' facilities.  However,
if and when advisory boards are established by one of
these agencies in the future, they will benefit from the
lessons learned and information provided by DOE and
DOD from their experiences with the role, authority,
membership, and evaluation of advisory boards.  
In many cases, these agencies have participated in the
advisory board process.  They have served as interested
stakeholders on advisory boards established by other
agencies and have worked with the advisory boards at
others to provide input and expertise on natural resource
management and other technical issues involving the
work of their agencies.
Box 14:  Departments of the Interior, and
Agriculture, and National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
Based upon the lessons learned during the past two years of establishing advisory boards and
the recent concerns noted, the following recommendations build upon the proposed model for
advisory boards found in the Interim Report.  In many cases, the following recommendations
duplicate the 1993 model.  However, some ideas are new or are a revision of the old
recommendations.  
The following model approach to the
formation of advisory boards is intended to
serve as an example for how to establish
advisory boards at facilities where they do
not currently exist and as guiding principles
for improving existing advisory boards.  The
Committee believes that its
recommendations are sufficiently broad to
permit flexibility for each agency and the
affected communities to adapt them to their
own circumstances. 
I.
Overview and Scope
The Committee recommends that federal agencies establish advisory boards 
to provide independent policy and technical advice to the regulated and regulating agencies
with respect to key cleanup decisions.  
The Committee believes such boards can improve the decision-making process by:
•
Providing a setting for direct, regular contact between agencies and a diverse set of
public stakeholders;
•
Providing a forum for public stakeholders, local governments, and agencies to
understand the competing needs and requirements of the government and affected
communities;
•
Providing a forum for discussing citizen issues and concerns, thus enabling the
development of a more complete and satisfactory plan or decision;
•
Enabling citizen review and the evaluation of plans and their technical adequacy in
more depth than is possible in single opportunity public participation efforts;
•
Permitting a more detailed consideration of issues than is possible as a result of the
minimal legal requirements identified in various state and federal laws; and
      DOE, Site-Specific Advisory Board Guidance, November 14, 1994, page 2.
1
      Department of the Navy, Implementing Guidance for the Establishment of Restoration Advisory Boards,
2
February 9, 1994, page 2.
Thus far, one of the more successful public involvement
initiatives in the DOE's nationwide network of nuclear
materials facilities has occurred at DOE's Fernald site
near Cincinnati, OH.  A decade ago, relations between
Fernald and its neighbors were so strained that 14,000
area residents filed a class action lawsuit against the
agency and its prime contractor seeking damages for
exposures to off-site pollution and loss of property
values.  After the lawsuit was settled in late 1988, the
dialogue between plant operators and neighbors
continued to be an uneasy one even as the mission at
Fernald changed from uranium processing to
environmental cleanup in 1990.  Still, the public
involvement initiatives that coincided with the Fernald
site's change in mission have already gathered strong
support from both agency officials and citizens.  A
Fernald Citizens Task Force, formed in 1993, was the
first formally organized site specific advisory board in the
DOE system and is cited by both citizens and agency
officials as an important success story.  Among the
innovative public involvement approaches at Fernald is a
so-called "partnering" experiment where individual
members of the citizens task force are matched with
individual site officers and managers to improve
communication and expedite problem solving.  
Box 15:  The Fernald Advisory Board
•
Allowing cleanup decisions to consider values as well as technical data. 
There have been some instructive examples of how advisory boards have served to improve
the decision-making process at their respective facilities dramatically.  The information in
Boxes 15-17 provides examples of such efforts at Moffett Naval Air Station, Charleston
Naval Base, and Fernald. 
The Committee wishes to make clear that
advisory boards should be used to
complement rather than duplicate or
supplant broader site level cleanup public
involvement initiatives.  Current guidance
documents by DOE and the Department of
the Navy, for example, mirror this
Committee recommendation.  DOE's
guidance notes that "advisory boards
comprise only one facet of a total public
participation program at a site."   The
1
Navy's guidance document states that
"Restoration Advisory Boards will not take
the place of community outreach and
participation activities required by law,
regulation, or policy."   Not every public
2
stakeholder will have the time or inclination
to participate in advisory boards and the
Committee believes it is vitally important
that all members of the public be afforded
their full rights and privileges with respect to public involvement.  Agencies should ensure 
opportunities exist for individuals 
who are not members of advisory boards to 
participate in discussions regarding cleanup.  
The recommendations contained in this section are intended to apply broadly to all 
federal facility cleanup activities, regardless of the statute under which they are conducted.  
II.
When Advisory Boards Should be Established  
The Committee recommends that agencies form advisory boards at facilities where no
advisory committee currently exists and where there is a need evidenced by:
Moffett Field, former Pacific headquarters for the Navy's
subchasing P-3C "Orion" aircraft, sits in the heart of
Silicon Valley, at the southern edge of the San Francisco
Bay.  Its 26 Installation Restoration Program sites
include a massive plume of shallow groundwater
contaminated with TCE and other volatile organic
compounds.  The plume, shared with electronics industry
Superfund sites just to the south, threatens local drinking
water supplies as well as the Bay and its wetlands.
In early 1990, the base commander, Captain Tim
Quigley, established a Technical Review Committee
(TRC), composed of Navy personnel, regulators, and
representatives of the local community, including the
Silicon Valley Toxics Coalition (SVTC).  Quigley
established an active community relations program,
disseminated fact sheets, and shared more detailed
technical information upon request.
Through the TRC and other community relations
activities, local residents and their representatives
gained respect for the Moffett cleanup program, but the
SVTC and others remained critical of the remediation
schedule.  They took their case to the press, elected
representatives, and Defense Department officials. 
Informed by participation in the TRC, they focused on the
so-called "regional" TCE plume.
In 1994, the Navy turned over responsibility for the Naval
Air Station to other federal agencies, but it continues to
operate the facility's restoration program.  Also in 1994,
the Navy began the process of converting the TRC into a
restoration advisory board.
The RAB meets monthly.  At meetings and informally
between meetings, public stakeholders and local
government representatives on the RAB discuss
proposed cleanup remedies with the Navy, other
responsible parties, and the regulatory agencies.  As a
result of the RAB's discussions, the Navy has more than
once revisited its proposals.  For more information,
contact Lenny Siegel, Pacific Studies Center (415) 969-
1545.
Box 16:  The Moffett Field Advisory Board
•
an affected local, state, tribal, or federal government entity requesting the
establishment of an advisory board; or
•
at least fifty residents of the community or region in which a facility is located signing
a petition requesting an advisory board.  Petitions should be submitted to the facility
manager, installation commander, or other lead official at the facility.  Copies of the
petition should also be provided to state, tribal, and regulatory agencies. 
Prior to initiating the establishment of a
board, state and federal agencies should
evaluate existing public involvement
programs to determine the community's
need and desire for a new board.  Such an
assessment process should solicit the input
of local governments, community groups,
local citizens, workers, and other
stakeholders. If an assessment is made that
an advisory board is not requested or
required, the regulated agency should
consider ways to inform the public of
cleanup activities through other available
fora periodically, as discussed in the more
general community involvement sections of
Chapter 3. 
III.
Existing Advisory Boards
Where advisory boards already exist, the
Committee intends for its recommendations
to build upon existing groups and not to
supplant them, particularly where they have
proven successful.  For example, where an
advisory board, committee, or group
currently exists for addressing cleanup
issues, agencies may need to increase the
scope of issues to be addressed by the
group, add members to ensure
representation of a wider constituency, or
change the way in which the group interacts
with the general public in order to be
consistent with these recommendations.  
When more than one advisory board exists, agencies should consider consolidating their
activities, or establishing clear communication between the groups to determine if and how
     DOD and EPA, Restoration Advisory Board Implementation Guidelines, September 27, 1994, page 2. 
3
     FACA, Public Law No. 92-463, 5 U.S. Code Appendix 2.
4
The Charleston Naval Station and Shipyard has served
as an economic cornerstone in the Charleston, SC area
for nearly one hundred years.  Notice of the base closure
generated a great deal of concern about the impact
closure would have on the community.  The
establishment of the Restoration Advisory Board (RAB)
provided a critically important communications link
between the installation, the community and those state
and federal agencies involved in with the closure
process.  Recognizing that base reuse was dependent
upon base cleanup, the RAB immediately focused its
efforts on moving the cleanup forward as quickly and
smoothly as possible.  This has been accomplished by
working with each of the various agencies toward the
end of ensuring that the needs of the community are
consistently a primary consideration in the decision-
making process.  
One of the strengths of the RAB is that the membership
reflects the diversity which exists within the greater
Charleston community.  This strength in turn ensures
that those with an interest in the base closure will have
the opportunity to be heard.  The Navy and the several
state and federal agencies do their work competently but
their goals are different from that of the RAB.  The
mission of the RAB is to focus the competence found in
the other agencies for maximum benefit to the
community.  The Charleston RAB has consistently,
functioned as a cohesive group with shared common
interests without acrimony.  For more information,
contact Arthur Pinckney, Grassroots Conversion
Coalition (803) 884-2646.
Box 17:  The Charleston, SC Station and
Shipyard Restoration Advisory Board
their scope of issues overlaps.  For example, DOD guidance specifically directs installations
to expand or modify existing Technical Review Committees to become Restoration Advisory
Boards, which allow for greater community representation. 3
Federal agencies must also consider that
some advisory board-type organizations
were established as features of federal
facility oversight agreements signed
between some states and federal agencies. 
When there is a lack of consensus regarding
the need/desirability of additional boards or
groups, the development of Memoranda of
Understanding should be considered in
order to clarify the roles of existing and
proposed entities.
IV.
Advisory Board Mission Statement
A statement outlining the mission and duties
of the advisory board should be developed. 
At a minimum, it should provide for the
advisory board to advise both the regulated
and regulating agencies on key policy and
technical issues and decisions related to
cleanup at the facility.  If an advisory board
is not yet formed, a regulated or regulating
agency may solicit the assistance of a small,
diverse group to assist with the initial 
drafting of the  mission statement.  
Any such draft should later be approved by the full board.  Advisory boards should also
develop comprehensive by-laws and groundrules 
that establish common understanding about 
advisory board procedures.
V.
Federal Advisory Committee Act  Charter
4
FACA is a public law that was enacted to outline operational guidelines for boards,
committees or similar groups that are established by federal agencies to provide advice to the
federal government.  FACA requires agencies to follow certain formalized procedures
including chartering, maintaining balanced memberships, providing public notice of meetings,
and holding meetings open to the public.  In addition to the statutory requirements, agencies
establishing advisory boards must comply with their own implementing regulations, the
administrative guidelines of the U.S. General Services Administration (GSA), and the
approval of OMB.
In the Interim Report, the Committee stated that it "does not believe it is necessary or prudent
to charter all SSABs as federal advisory committees."  The Committee supported its
recommendation by pointing out that the recommended approach to the establishment and
operation of boards is consistent with the spirit of FACA to create advisory committees that
are balanced and subject to an open process.  Furthermore, the Committee wished to avoid
unnecessary burdens that may hamper the creation of such boards.  
Since the release of the Interim Report, the Clinton Administration has placed limits on the
creation of new FACA committees.  Partly in response, agencies have approached FACA
charters for their advisory boards in at least two different ways.  DOD, building on the
approach it had taken with its Technical Review Committees (TRCs), which were a precursor
to RABs, has not chartered their RABs as federal advisory committees.  DOE has established
a single FACA charter for all of its SSABs.  Regardless of whether agencies charter their
advisory boards, the Committee recommends that boards and agencies comply with the spirit
of FACA regarding maintaining balanced membership, holding open meetings, and providing
public notice for meetings in manners that are appropriate for the facilities' community.   
The Committee notes that many of the administrative provisions in both the FACA statutory
language and its implementing regulations are burdensome at best and intrusive in many
cases.  FACA includes several provisions that are not always helpful when applied to
community advisory boards.  For example, FACA requires agencies with advisory boards to
provide public notice of meetings in the Federal Register; for local advisory boards,
mechanisms such as publication in local papers or notice by mail may be more effective.  It
also empowers the chartering agency with the authority to adjourn meetings and approve
agendas—powers which some communities believe could be abused.  The Committee
encourages agencies that charter boards to make very judicious use of FACA authorities and
to do so in consultation with board members.  Finally, chartering agencies should also seek to
reduce the bureaucratic burden of the law on board members to the greatest extent possible.  
VI.
Scope of Advisory Boards
The Committee believes the boards should focus on protection of human health, cleanup,
waste management, and technology development issues that are clearly relevant to the
cleanup of the facility.  In focusing on cleanup, these boards may provide independent advice
on issues identified in their mission statements such as:   
•
ensuring that appropriate measures (both interim and permanent) to protect human
health and the environment against substantial and imminent risks are implemented as
early as possible;
•
identifying cleanup activities and projects; 
•
tracking progress on those activities/projects;
 
•
providing information and perspectives on cleanup priorities; 
•
tracking possible implications for other communities along transportation corridors
and in areas of waste storage facilities when discussing final waste disposition
possibilities;
•
evaluating possible employment opportunities and associated risks, local economic
benefits provided by the cleanup process, and appropriate vehicles for providing this
information to the public; 
 
•
addressing important issues related to cleanup, such as land use, level of cleanup, risk
management strategies, waste management, technology and economic development
issues related to cleanup; and
•
developing cleanup strategies.  
The advisory boards should have the discretion to hear presentations on the social, economic,
cultural, aesthetic, public health, and worker health and safety effects of cleanup and waste
management and technology development issues related to cleanup.  In addition, the
Committee agrees that advisory boards should hear presentations on other environmental
management decisions that advisory board members regard as relevant and appropriate.    
At many facilities there are separate boards or groups whose primary mission is to address re-
use issues at the facility.  In addition, there may be other community groups addressing
similar cleanup issues at the same, or another nearby facility.  If there is more than one
advisory board addressing similar federal facility issues, the Committee recommends that the
boards should make all efforts to communicate with one another. 
The Committee believes advisory boards should remain separate from redevelopment
authorities, but they should work together wherever possible.  Issues relating to
redevelopment, such as determining future land uses, may require involvement and
representation of different public stakeholders and agency personnel from those involved with
boards established to provide advice regarding cleanup decisions.  The Committee suggests
advisory boards as described in this report should only address anticipated future land uses
when it relates to cleanup decisions. When future land use is addressed, efforts should be
made to sufficiently involve stakeholders with key interests in land use, such as local
governments, in the board's discussions.
VII.
Role of Regulated and Regulating Agencies
As stated above, the advisory board is intended to be a forum through which advice can be
given to both regulated and regulating agencies on cleanup and waste management and
technology development related to cleanup.  The regulated agency should serve as the host of
the advisory board and should provide administrative assistance, meeting facilities, and other
logistical support as necessary.  The Interim Report recommended that senior representatives
of both regulated and regulating agencies should serve as "ex-officio" participants of the
advisory board.  The term ex-officio was used to imply that representatives of these agencies
should attend advisory board meetings and participate actively in advisory board discussions
by making their views known.  However, because the advice from the advisory boards will be
directed at their agencies, the Interim Report recommended that agency representatives should
not take part in final decisions about what recommendations are made. 
Since the publication of the Interim Report, DOE and DOD have established advisory boards
that involve regulated and regulating agencies in different ways.  DOE's SSABs essentially
follow the model outlined in the Interim Report.  DOD has directed RABs to include
regulated and regulating agency representatives as regular board members and for the
installation commander or his or her designee to serve as co-chair along with a community
representative.  (For copies of DOD and DOE guidance documents on this issue see the points
of contact in Appendix D).   
Because both models seem to be working, the Committee remains silent in this report
regarding whether regulated and regulating agencies should serve as ex-officio or full
members.  Nonetheless, experience from RABs, SSABs, and advisory boards in the private
sector proves that community members may stop participating actively in boards because
senior managers do not come and actively participate in board meetings, or senior managers
ignore the advice of board members without providing an explanation.  Regardless of their
title, the Committee strongly recommends that regulated and regulating agencies' role be
defined in three ways.  First, the most senior level person available with site-specific cleanup
responsibility from the regulated and regulating agency should participate in board meetings. 
Second, the participants from the regulated and regulating agencies should be responsive to
the concerns and advice of the advisory board or provide a reasonable explanation for not
adhering to the advice.  Third, representatives from regulating and regulated agencies should
serve as information sources for the board, providing updates and background as needed.  
VIII.
Advisory Board Membership
The Committee recommends that advisory boards should reflect the full diversity of views in
the affected community and region and be composed primarily of people who are directly
affected by facility cleanup activities.  Boards should also attempt to maximize participation
from public stakeholders in a manner that reflects the ethnicity, race, and distribution of
income within the affected communities.  The Committee recommends the following public
stakeholders, where they exist, be given the opportunity to be included as board members:
•
individual residents that live in or own property around the communities or regions in
which a facility is located;
•
representatives of citizen, environmental, and public interest groups whose members
live in the communities or regions affected by the environmental contamination and
related cleanup efforts at a facility;
•
workers or representatives of workers involved in or affected by cleanup operations at
the facility, with a priority for cleanup and production workers who are currently
employed at the facility; 
•
representatives of Tribes and other indigenous peoples that have treaty or statutory
rights that are affected by environmental contamination and related cleanup activities
at the facility; and
•
representatives of local government.
Appropriate qualities for an advisory board member include an ability to focus on cleanup
issues and a willingness to devote the time over an extended period necessary to serve
effectively on a board.  Public stakeholders should not be disqualified because they are critics
of activities at the facility.  Every effort should be made to include divergent interests and
viewpoints, regardless of technical expertise.   
In addition, representatives of other federal, state, and local government agencies should be
included on the board, as appropriate, to represent their interests as natural resource trustees,
managers of adjacent or impacted public lands or recipients of lands.  In some cases,
potentially responsible parties (PRPs) from the private sector directly involved in or affected
by facility cleanup activities could participate at the discretion of the advisory board. 
Advisory boards, in conjunction with their host agency, should clarify the specific role that
each of these entities play, particularly in the board's decision-making process.  
The Committee recommends that in order to address environmental equity concerns, special
efforts should be made to provide notice and opportunity to participate for people who are or
have historically been disproportionately impacted by site contamination.  
The Committee recommends that the size of the boards should be limited to promote
efficiency and encourage participation, while also ensuring that the major public stakeholders
or groups of public stakeholders are adequately represented.  The Committee recommends
that the size of the advisory board should be determined by the community in collaboration
with the agencies.  
IX.
Membership Selection Processes for Advisory Boards
The Committee's Interim Report provided the following
guidelines for the membership selection process:
 
Regulating agencies shall actively and publicly solicit
nominations for advisory board membership from
interested individuals and organizations, ensuring that
ample notification is given to those with an active interest
or obvious stake in cleanup activities at the site.  Such
notification should also be given to national
organizations that have expressed an interest in that
agency's cleanup program and by publication of a notice
in the Federal Register.  Interested organizations and
individuals, including those whose nomination has not
been solicited by the regulating agencies, should submit
nominations for advisory board membership to the
regulating agencies.  Furthermore, the regulating
agencies shall solicit nominations from the governor,
local congressional representative(s), state legislators,
and affected county, city, and tribal governments.  In
addition, the regulating agencies have a responsibility to
inform and solicit the interest of potentially affected
community members who initially appear uninterested or
unaware.  
Based on the above criteria, the regulating agencies
should review all nominations, submit a proposed list of
advisory board members to the regulated agency, and
make this list publicly available.  This list should be
mailed to all who were nominated or submitted
nominations and published in the Federal Register.
The regulated agency shall accept the recommended list
of advisory board participants unless it determines that
the list does not ensure a sufficient diversity of
viewpoints or an appropriate balance of affected
interests.  Decisions of the regulated agency to accept or
reject the proposed list must be made and explained
openly and publicly.  Once again, all who have been
nominated or submitted nominations in the first step
should be notified of the decision of the regulated
agency.
If the regulated agency rejects the proposed list, the
regulating agencies, with the advice of federal, state,
tribal, and local government representatives, shall
propose, and make publicly available, an alternative list
that addresses the specified imbalance or lack of
diversity.  
If advisory board membership selections issues have not
been resolved after step 4, the regulating and regulated
agencies will refer the matter to higher levels of authority
within their agencies for final resolution.  For more
information, contact The Keystone Center (970) 468-
5822.
Box 18:  FFERDC Interim Report Member
Selection Process
In its Interim Report, the Committee
recommended very specific procedures for
choosing members to serve on the advisory
board.  A description of this process can be
found in Box 
18.  Since this time, some communities have
followed this exact set of procedures with
success.  However, other communities have
chosen very different methods that have
typically been equally successful.  An
example of one of these processes can be
found in Box 19.  In addition, several
agencies, and military services have
established specific guidance documents for
choosing board members that differs from
the Committee's recommendations. 
Examples of this language can be found in
Appendix E.  Although these guidance
documents provide general direction to field
staff, specific implementation of advisory
boards is intended to be adapted to the needs
of the individual facilities.  Given the above,
the Committee recognizes that there are
many ways to effectively select individuals
to serve on advisory boards.  Regardless of
the specific process used, the Committee
stresses the importance of using an open and
fair process that leads to the creation of a
diverse and balanced board.  
Advisory boards, once established, should
develop procedures for adding, replacing, or
removing board members.  In doing so, the
advisory board should consider carefully the
need to assure that the board does not
become too large so as to be unmanageable
and that the full diversity of views in the
community/region are fairly represented. 
Procedures for adding new members should
give special emphasis to: 
•
interests that, in the view of the advisory board, are not adequately represented at the
time of the initial formation of the advisory board; and
In the Spring of 1993, community members requested
that DOE establish a citizens' advisory board for the
Pantex Plant in the Panhandle of Texas, near Amarillo. 
In response, DOE, EPA Region 6, and the Texas
Governor's Office sponsored two public meetings to
discuss procedures for setting up an advisory board, and
DOE hired a neutral third party facilitator to assist with
the process.  In addition to putting advertisements in the
local media, organizational lists from groups such as the
Chamber of Commerce, The Peace Farm, NAACP, and
unions at the plant were obtained and individuals were
sent invitations.  Approximately 200 community
members attended.  
During the two workshops, full consensus was reached
by all parties in attendance (including DOE, EPA, the
Texas Attorney General Office, and other state
regulatory agencies in addition to a multitude of
community members and plant workers) regarding the
scope of issues the advisory board should address, the
accountability of agencies to the board and the board to
the public, the size of the board, and the membership
selection process.  In brief, the selection process
included a group of six representatives (a representative
from the Governor's Office and the Office of the Attorney
General, plus four local residents) chose a 16 person
selection committee, including two from each of the
following categories:  area resident, regional resident,
labor, Pantex worker, agricultural sector, business
community, environmental organization, and local
government).   The selection committee then sorted
through more than 80 applications, conducted
interviews, and selected the first eight nominees for the
advisory board.  This core group then selected 12 more
names and submitted the slate of 20 names to the
Secretary of Energy.  Secretary of Energy Hazel O'Leary
reviewed the list to ensure balance and diversity and
approved it.    
Although the process was cumbersome and slow, it
involved the full diversity of community members and
helped to establish trust between DOE and the
community and between the widely varying groups
within the community.  It also produced an advisory
board that looks like the community in regard to race,
ethnicity, sex, income levels, and perspectives regarding
the Pantex Plant.  For more information, contact The
Keystone Center, (970) 468-5822.
Box 19:  Selection Process for DOE Pantex
Plant
•
expressions of new interests that may not have existed or were not considered at the
time of the initial formation of the advisory board.
Although the process by which board
members are initially chosen is extremely
important in regard to the credibility of the
board, allowing established boards to add, 
replace, and remove board members should
help provide an effective safety valve for
correcting unfair selection processes. 
Notwithstanding the recommended role of
the advisory board on these matters, it
remains the obligation of all participants—
including the regulated and regulating
agencies—to ensure that the membership of
the advisory board is composed of a
manageable number of people, is properly
balanced, and adequately represents the
diversity of views within the affected 
community.
X.
Role of Contractors
Agencies should consider including
contractor representatives as a part of their
team because of the important role
contractors often play in actually planning
and conducting cleanup activities on behalf
of regulated agencies.  However, because
contractors support the regulated agency,
the Committee agrees that contractor
participation in advisory board discussions
should never serve as a substitute for the
participation of senior representatives of the
regulated agency.  Contractor employees in
decision-making capacities should not serve
as regular members of advisory boards.
XI.
Role of Local Government
Officials
Because of the diverse services local governments provide, ranging from land use planning to
managing water and sewer systems, it is essential that local government officials be consulted
and given the opportunity to be closely involved in the advisory board process from the
beginning.  Local governments have traditionally filled a broad set of responsibilities that are
relevant to federal facility cleanups in their jurisdiction, including: 1) protecting public health
Most Defense Department-sponsored Restoration
Advisory Boards conduct much of their business without
formal votes. Many, however, have written their own
charters establishing voting procedures to fall back 
upon should the normal give-and-take prove insufficient.
For example, the "voting table" of the Moffett Field
Restoration Advisory Board includes the following rules
among sixteen separate contingencies:
 
Issue
Who Votes
Required
Number of
Votes
 
Set Agenda
Whole RAB
Majority
 
Elect Community 
Community 
Majority
Co-Chair
members only
Form Committee
Community 
Two thirds
 
members only
For more information, contact Lenny Siegel, Pacific
Studies Center, (415) 969-1545.
Box 20:  Moffett Field Restoration Advisory
Board Decision-Making Process
and safety through services, education, and regulations; 2) protecting or enhancing the
community's quality of life through community comprehensive planning; and 3) securing a
viable economic future.  Therefore, they may provide advisory boards with information
regarding local comprehensive plans, laws and regulations, history, culture and
demographics, and may assist in community involvement activities.  In many cases, local
government is the institutional authority that will address the effects of cleanup decisions long
after federal decision makers have withdrawn from the community.
As part of the formation of an advisory board, federal agencies should meet with and sponsor
workshops for local government officials to explain the advisory board process.  Recognizing
that facility cleanups often affect the jurisdictions of several counties and towns, federal
conveners should focus their primary efforts on consulting with local governments most
directly affected by the federal facility cleanup.
In practice, local government involvement in federal facility decision making varies from
facility to facility.  Local government officials should have the opportunity to decide, taking
into account local laws and community preference, if and how they will participate in a
federal agency-sponsored advisory board.  Local government options for participation may
include:  1) full member; 2) ex-officio participant; or 3) advisory board convener.  In addition,
the local government may decide not to participate in the advisory board.
XII.
Decision-Making Process
At the outset of the advisory process, the
board should determine explicitly how it
will make decisions about what advice and
recommendations it should give, who
should give the advice, and in particular,
how to ensure that dissenting views are
addressed.  In general, DOE boards tend to
operate by consensus with regulating and
regulated agencies not taking part in the
decision making.  In general, DOD boards
tend to provide individual advice with all
parties participating in the discussion.  Box
20 shows an example of how one advisory
board makes decisions.
XIII.
Operating Procedures
At the establishment of each advisory board,
advisory board members as a group should develop appropriate groundrules and
DOD has provided orientation training for RAB
community members to help them prepare for the
technical and operational issues addressed by the RAB. 
The training also provides skills for acting as
communications conduits for the community.  Topics in
the training sessions have included:  the purpose and
responsibilities of the RAB; regulatory background
information; facility status and tour; the base mission;
and communication skills.  Typically. RAB members
have received 10-15 hours of training.  These efforts
have proven to be most effective when accomplished
early on in the process of establishing a RAB.  For more
information, contact Marcia Read, Environmental
Security/Cleanup, DOD, (703) 697-9793.
Box 21:  Department of Defense RAB Training
operating procedures to allow for the efficient and productive operation of the group.  Each
advisory board should consider establishing procedures regarding the following:
•
Naming a chairperson, hiring a coordinator, or appointing an independent facilitator,
as deemed necessary by the advisory board, whose principal role would be to ensure:
—
advisory board meetings are run effectively and in a manner that is consistent
with the advisory board's agreed upon groundrules;
—
the board maintains its focus on cleanup issues and waste management and
technology development issues related to cleanup; and
—
whatever logistical and administrative tasks that the advisory board determines
are necessary to play its advisory role effectively are accomplished.
•
Forming subcommittees where and when it is appropriate;  
•
Determining what type of public record is kept of meetings (video, minutes, general
summary, etc.);
•
Establishing procedures for adding, replacing, and removing advisory board members;
•
Determining how to provide advance public notice for meetings effectively;
•
Deciding what, if any, terms, rotational schedule, term limits, or use of alternates are
appropriate to help ensure a balance of interests and continuing opportunity for access
to advisory board participation; and
•
Determining when the work of the advisory board is complete or the overall interest in
participating has diminished to such a level that the advisory board should be
dissolved.  
The regulated and regulating agencies
should also establish and make public
operating procedures that, to the extent
possible, attempt to ensure continuity in the
availability of the staff who are principally
responsible for interacting with the advisory
board.
IV.
Education and Training
Many organizations are undertaking efforts to educate
community members about the issues surrounding
federal facilities cleanups.  The following are a few
examples of efforts that have occurred to date.  For more
information on these efforts, please contact the people
listed.
Xavier University's Deep South Center for
Environmental Justice has spearheaded an effort of
community leaders to strengthen citizen's right to know
and encourage the participation of community persons in
military cleanup activities.  Specifically, the project is
aimed at preparing community members to serve on
DOD advisory boards and continues through October,
1996.  Bev Wright (504) 483-7340.
San Francisco State University has held workshops to
provide members of advisory boards with the
background information necessary to effectively serve as
advisors on their boards.  Aimee Houghton (415) 904-
7750.
Council of Energy Resource Tribes has conducted
workshops for affected tribes on both the local and
national level about DOD cleanup issues.  The
workshops provide information on the regulatory
framework, community involvement, remediation, and
the federal grant process.  Merv Tano (303) 296-2378.
The League of Women Voters Education Fund 
assists its local chapters with many on-going education
efforts about DOE cleanup issues. For information on
these efforts contact their national office.  Division of
Natural Resources (202) 429-1965.
The Department of Defense has held seven regional
workshops designed to familiarize DOD, EPA, states,
tribes, and community members with DOD's RAB policy. 
Topics in the workshops included:  RAB purpose, RAB
establishment, member selection process, and agency
roles.  Marcia Read (703) 697-9793.
Box 22:  Training Workshops
A comprehensive orientation at the outset of
the advisory board's work followed by a
continuing education program tailored to the
needs of both citizen and agency
participants can considerably aid in the
formation and growth of advisory boards. 
Examples of some training efforts are
included in Boxes 21-22.  Particular
attention should be given to education for
board members from communities or other
stakeholder groups that have traditionally
not been engaged in discussions regarding
environmental issues at the facility. 
Although at the outset agencies have a vital,
participatory role in the education process, it
is the board members themselves who
should ultimately decide on the process and
direction of education efforts.  Contained in
this section is an extensive listing of topics
that should be considered in the educational
needs assessment of the advisory board. 
Advisory boards are cautioned that it will
likely not be practical to obtain in-depth
education on all of these topics, especially
in a short period of time; topics should be
prioritized based on the needs of the board
members.    
Because the technical issues and level of
public understanding of these issues can
vary dramatically from facility to facility, the Committee recommends that an advisory board
training needs assessment be conducted for each advisory board.  Among other factors, the
needs assessment should elicit input on training topics, the incorporation of training into the
broader mission of the advisory board, and ideas and preferences for finding and enlisting
qualified trainers or instructors.
A.
Technical Assistance Notification
Immediately upon forming an advisory board, members should be notified with regard to the
options available for receiving technical assistance in the review of environmental issues at
the facility.  The options should include those offered by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, the facility operator, and any other relevant program offered by federal, state, or
private entities.  The notification should include the opportunities and procedures for utilizing
independent experts in addressing relevant problems and issues.  
B.
Orientation
Creating a successful advisory board involves building a new relationship between facility
managers and the people affected by environmental issues at the facility.  Based on
experiences at federal facilities that have created or are in the process of creating advisory
boards, it is clear that a well-crafted and thorough initial orientation for prospective board
members and agency participants can provide a valuable foundation for this relationship. 
Member orientation, which may take several meetings to complete, should help provide a
better and more common understanding of the facility and its environmental needs, and the
communities and their environmental needs.  It should also help ensure that advisory board
members have the knowledge and tools they need to begin the process.  
Although the structure and pace of orientations should be arranged to fit the particular needs
and circumstances at each facility, the process may include but not be limited to such
elements as:
•
team building;
•
facility tour and orientation to current mission(s);
•
facility history, including agency and public perspectives;
•
natural resources overview;
•
cultural history and sensitivity to cultural issues;
•
overview of federal operations, past and present;
•
overview of past and present agency environmental policies and practices;
•
overview of applicable state and federal environmental regulations, including federal
facility agreements;
•
the relationship between policies, regulations and agreements and the current
environmental management agenda at the facility.
•
responsibilities of agencies to the public and to the advisory board;
•
expected role of the advisory board in facility environmental decision making,
including scope of issues to be addressed by the board;
•
present and future land use issues and their effect on cleanup decision making;
•
the impact of the facility upon public health and the environment;
•
the agencies' budget process;
•
the agencies' procurement process;
•
the role and interests of local government in land-use planning and other relevant
issues; and
•
citizen right-to-know laws.
C.
Team Building
Since it is important for advisory boards to function as effectively as possible, the orientation
ought not to focus purely on the exchange of information.  It should also encourage an
element of team building for advisory board members.  This is based on the premise that all
advisory board members will need to expend some time and effort toward forming a cohesive
unit, identifying common goals and expectations and laying mutually accepted ground rules
for conducting advisory board's activities.  This process might include voluntary participation
in facilitated team-building exercises and/or workshops involving all board members,
including regulated and regulating agency participants.
D.
Ongoing Education
The preparation and continuing education of advisory board members is vital to the quality
and substance of their advisory role.  Likewise, the ability of agency personnel to
communicate intelligibly and responsively with advisory board members is vital to both the
health and efficiency of the advisory process.  For these reasons, the Committee recommends
that agencies work with advisory boards to develop a slate of options for technical training for
advisory board members, while at the same time pursuing communication and other such
training that can enable agency personnel to interact more effectively with advisory board
members and the public at large.  
In determining who should conduct training for advisory board members, agencies should
consider:
•
the expressed preferences of advisory board members;
•
the history of the relationships between the community and the agency, and the
resultant trust level between the two;
•
the ability of agency or contractor personnel to express concepts in an
understandable manner to advisory board members; and
•
the ability of presenters to exercise cultural sensitivity.
Technical education options might include such things as:
•
Periodic technical workshops for advisory board members and alternates on
specific technical issues affecting the facility's environmental management.
•
The development of specific educational materials (i.e., maps, toxicity profiles,
risk assessment processes, cultural and archaeological histories, applicable laws
and regulations) that assist board members as they move toward
recommendations on key issues.  Included in these materials should be any
reports, summaries, issue papers, etc., developed by the board or board
subcommittees on specific issues. 
•
One-on-one tutorials where board members could have direct access to agency
specialists who would be assigned to cooperate in such a manner.  
Boards should make a special effort to consider training programs that could be provided by
advisory board members or local community members.  Particularly in instances where
mistrust between the agency(ies) and community is an obstacle, consideration should also be
given to involving advisory board members in the training of other members as part of a
mentoring program.  Another approach to consider in such circumstances is the development
of a partnering program involving advisory board members and agency personnel in which
trust and communication building activities are incorporated into the work and function of the
advisory board. 
To the extent practicable, training and education opportunities should be open to members of
the community who are not members of advisory boards.  Options include registration for
workshops and sessions by interested individuals with the sponsoring agency, and video-
taping sessions for viewing by interested individuals and groups.  By doing so, agencies make
better use of limited resources and provide training materials for new members of advisory
boards. 
XV.
Accountability
First and foremost, all advisory board members have a responsibility to work in a manner that
promotes efficient and effective cleanup that protects human health and the environment. 
Federal agencies and regulators have a responsibility to respond to recommendations and
advice from advisory board members by providing information on: 
•
recommendations or advice that can or will be implemented;
•
recommendations that need to be modified in order to be implemented; and 
•
recommendations that cannot be or will not implemented and why.  
The advisory boards may request a written response to any recommendation or advice made
by its members.  Advisory boards and agencies should maintain a record of recommendations
or advice made by the board and the status and substance of all responses.  Advisory boards
also have the responsibility to respond to issues raised by the regulated agencies.  A log of
such issues and responses should be kept. 
Members have an obligation to attend all advisory board meetings to the extent possible. 
Members also have a responsibility to portray data accurately or information provided to them
as members of the advisory board.  If members distribute draft documents to others outside of
the advisory board, they must indicate the preliminary or draft nature of the document.  
Advisory board members representing an organized interest have a responsibility to share
information with and provide feedback from the constituencies they represent.  Members of
the advisory board also have a responsibility for bringing community issues and values to the
discussion, particularly from the constituency they are representing.   
VI.
Interaction with the Public
Members of the public, who may not have the time, resources or inclination to participate on
an advisory board, must nonetheless be given opportunities to be kept adequately informed of
and involved in cleanup decisions affecting their lives and their communities.  As such,
advisory boards should conduct their activities in a manner that complements rather than
duplicates or supplants broader public involvement efforts, some of which are legally
required.  To this end, members of the advisory board, along with the participating regulated
and regulating agencies, should make every effort to coordinate the timing and focus of
advisory board activities with the need for broader public involvement activities as identified
in the comprehensive community involvement plan for the facility.  The Committee
encourages regulated and regulating agencies to use the advisory board as one of many
methods to obtain information to be included in the comprehensive community involvement
plan about how and when such broader public involvement activities should be conducted.  In
addition, in order to maintain trust and accountability, interested members of the public
should be notified of advisory board meetings, advisory board meetings should be open to the
public, and some type of record documenting the meetings should be made available to the
public.  Finally, advisory boards should provide opportunity for public comment at their
meetings and should make every effort to respond to both written and oral comments that are
submitted in a timely manner.
XVII. Advisory Board Input on Negotiated Cleanup Agreements
The Committee believes the public should be informed of any efforts to negotiate formal
cleanup agreements between regulated and regulating agencies (e.g., Interagency Agreements
as per Section 120 of CERCLA).  In addition, the agencies conducting the negotiations should
make an effort to ensure that their negotiators are kept informed of community concerns and
issues.  In many cases, advisory boards offer regulated and regulating agencies a good
opportunity for focused and meaningful input into the negotiations because of their
background knowledge of issues at the facility, and their ability to respond quickly to
negotiator's concerns and questions.  Appropriate information exchange includes any risk
assessments having bearing on the negotiated cleanup, schedules for cleanup activities and
their associated costs, priorities for cleanup that should be considered for enforceable
milestones, and provisions for interaction with the public and the advisory board in future
decisions.  
Under ideal circumstances, the advisory board may develop priorities and timeframes related
to cleanup efforts at the facility that can be used as input into the cleanup agreement
negotiations.  Agency negotiators should communicate directly with advisory boards on
issues of mutual concern.  For example, the Rocky Flats Citizens Advisory Board co-
sponsored public workshops on the draft Rocky Flats Cleanup Agreement.  In addition, the
agencies conducting the negotiations have used an information liaison as well as an on-line
bulletin board system to keep the public informed.    
XVIII.
Administrative and Technical Assistance Funding
The Committee recommends that the regulated agency should provide advisory board funding
for both administrative support and technical assistance in order to ensure meaningful public
involvement.  The first two sections that follow outline the general principles the Committee
agrees to regarding each type of funding.  The last section discusses a number of funding
implementation issues.
A.
Administrative Funding
The Committee recommends that regulated agencies serving as "hosts" of the advisory board
should provide funding to cover the routine administrative needs of advisory boards that will
allow them to operate efficiently and effectively, such as meeting space, document
duplication, and mailings.  The Committee agrees that funds should be provided for food,
lodging, and travel expenses of local advisory board members who must travel overnight to
attend meetings, hiring a coordinator or independent facilitator (where deemed necessary by
the advisory board), and other similar expenses necessary for advisory board business.  
The Committee recommends that regulated agencies should work with advisory boards to
establish a limit or ceiling on administrative costs for each advisory board.  Advisory boards
should be responsible for establishing priorities and allocating the administrative funding
provided.  
B.
Technical Assistance Funding
The Committee supports providing advisory boards with technical assistance funding in cases
where there is a clear need.  In many instances, citizen members serving on advisory boards
lack the technical resources to monitor and comment effectively on the technical aspects of
investigation and cleanup at these facilities.  Also, some advisory members lack trust and
confidence in the governments' technical advisors due to past environmental and health
problems in their communities.  Investing such funds in developing the knowledge and the
expertise of the community can lead to more cooperative efforts and improved cleanups.  
Therefore, to help ensure more effective and meaningful participation, the Committee
recommends that advisory boards receive technical funding support in cases where there is a
clear need.  Specific examples of uses of such funding include:  providing travel, per diem,
and compensation for an outside expert to make a presentation to the board, hiring a
consultant to assist board members in reviewing documents, and providing local training
courses to educate advisory board members regarding relevant regulatory processes.  
The Committee agrees that technical assistance funding should be used to complement, rather
than duplicate, the technical programs of both the regulated and regulating agencies. 
Therefore, regulated and regulating agencies first have the responsibility to produce technical
documents that are clear and concise, to the extent feasible.  Further, to avoid duplication, 
advisory board technical assistance funds should not be used for performing additional
sampling.  In addition, the Committee agrees that technical assistance should not be used to
underwrite legal actions in any way, including the preparation of testimony or the hiring of
expert witnesses.  The work of any advisory board technical consultant should occur
concurrently with the on-going efforts of the regulated and regulating agencies so as not to
slow down or impede the process.  It is the responsibility of the regulated agency to help
coordinate this review process and to provide information to expedite the ability of the board
to provide timely input.    
C.
Implementation of Administrative and Technical Assistance Funding
The following section includes recommendations on who should be eligible for the funding,
determining the appropriate amount of funding, and finding potential mechanisms for
channeling funding to advisory boards. 
Potential Recipients
The Committee recommends that advisory boards should demonstrate a clear need to be
eligible for assistance.  The Committee recommends that regulated agencies with advisory
boards, such as DOD, DOE, NOAA, and ATSDR, in consultation with other stakeholders,
develop specific national criteria for demonstrating need.  To accelerate the implementation of
this program, the Committee urges the regulated agencies to begin this process of consultation
as soon as possible.  
In addition to establishing need, the Committee recommends three other criteria in regards to
who should receive funding.  First, the Committee intends for the technical assistance funding
to be used primarily for the education and support of community members, in particular those
who serve on advisory boards.  Although some activities may be directed at the entire board,
such as group training sessions or presentations to the board, the Committee agrees that the
intended audience of these funds is not the regulated or regulating agencies, private sector
responsible parties, or contractors who may be participating in the advisory board.  Recipients
of such funds, however, should ensure that any funded activities are open to other interested
members of the community, where possible and appropriate.  
Second, the Committee recommends that such funding should be available to advisory boards
at both NPL and non-NPL facilities.  
Third, the Committee recommends that technical assistance funding provided to advisory
boards under this program should be coordinated with any future grants at these sites
provided by EPA under the Technical Assistance Grants (TAG) program.  EPA and regulated
agencies should work together to ensure that recipients of technical assistance through an
advisory board do not duplicate or compete with TAG recipients. Overall, the Committee
recommends that EPA give strongest consideration to providing technical assistance funding
to an advisory board that represents the diverse community.  In cases where a community
seeks both a TAG grant and advisory board technical assistance at the single facility, the
burden should be upon the group requesting the TAG grant to demonstrate unique and special
circumstances justifying a second grant to a community.  
Amount of Funding
In conjunction with the above effort by regulated agencies to establish criteria for
demonstrating need for technical assistance, the Committee recommends that regulated
agencies work with other stakeholders to establish guidelines for targeted amounts of funding. 
Although circumstances differ widely between the regulated agencies that have advisory
boards, including DOD, DOE, NOAA, and ATSDR, the Committee recommends the
following factors be considered in determining the appropriate amounts of administrative and
technical funding:
•
The Committee anticipates that advisory board technical assistance funding
needs will be proportional to the level of cleanup assessment activities
occurring at a facility in a given year, assuming no significant new technical
challenges emerge.
•
Greater amounts of funding should be provided in the early phases of the
federal facility cleanup process in recognition of the fact that technical
assistance needs will be greater during these early phases of the decision-
making process.   Funding levels should be reassessed after site remedies have
been selected.
•
Funding levels should fall as advisory board members become more
knowledgeable about the cleanup activities of the regulated and regulating
agencies. 
Potential Funding Mechanisms
A number of federal statutes and regulations tightly control methods for regulated agencies to
provide funding to advisory boards.  At a minimum, the rules require monies be carefully
tracked and accounted for through an established legal entity.  The Committee recommends
that individual advisory boards and the regulated agency providing the funds should work
together to determine an appropriate mechanism for making administrative and technical
assistance funds available to the advisory board.  Possible mechanisms identified by the
Committee include:
•
Channeling the funds through a member of the advisory board that represents a
public interest and/or citizen-based organization that has nonprofit legal status
who would administer the funds in a timely and accountable manner;
•
Channeling the funds through a nonprofit organization that is or has been
created for the explicit purpose of serving as a legally responsible fiduciary and
administrator of the funds;
DOE's Office of Environmental Restoration and Waste
Management (EM) is currently finalizing its design for
evaluating the Site-Specific Advisory Board (SSAB)
Initiative.  The purpose of this early evaluation is to
enable the SSABs, facilities and DOE to capitalize on
the processes that are working well and to identify for
improvement the processes that are not working well. 
The evaluation will be conducted at the eleven facilities
where SSABs have been established:  Fernald, Hanford,
Idaho, Los Alamos, Monticello, Nevada, Oak Ridge,
Pantex, Rocky Flats, Sandia, and Savannah River.
The technical team responsible for the evaluation
includes three social researchers from Pacific Northwest
Laboratories and three independent consultants with
expertise in public involvement and evaluation.  In
keeping with the spirit of public participation, the team
has worked in close consultation with the SSAB
Evaluation Steering Committee that includes the Federal
Coordinator and a SSAB representative from each
facility.
The Committee has worked to develop agreement on a
consolidated list of goals, on which the evaluation will be
based, and on the measures that will be used to assess
performance.  
The proposed evaluation will include two components: 
1) A survey of board members, DOE Site Area/Field
Office representatives, representatives from other
regulatory agencies involved with site activities, and
some members of the public; and 2) A self-evaluation of
SSAB Initiative activities and accomplishments (i.e.,
performance) specific to each site.
DOE envisages both components of the evaluation—the
survey and the self-evaluation—as an iterative process
to be linked to the boards' annual planning process.  The
survey, conducted by DOE/HQ in the near term, will use
a mail-out questionnaire to gather information on the
perspectives of the various participants on SSAB
processes, relationships, and outcomes and provides an
independent assessment of the initiative across all sites. 
The self-evaluation, conducted by each SSAB, provides
a means for each board to tailor the evaluation to its own
site context and needs through assessment of its
previous year's achievements and identification of issues
and goals for the upcoming year.  Each component of
the evaluation is intended to contribute to the board's
planning process so that information from both can be
used to identify problems and successes and enable the
boards to benefit from their experience. For more
information, contact Don Beck, Office of Public
Accountability, DOE, (202) 586-7633.
Box 23:  Evaluation of DOE's Site-Specific
Advisory Boards
•
Channeling the funds through an independent entity, such as a university or
accounting firm, that is mutually agreed upon by the citizen members of the
advisory board and the regulated agency that is providing the funds; 
•
Channeling the funds through a state or local government agency that is both
capable and willing to
administer the funds in a
timely and accountable
manner; and
•
Using a regulated or
regulating agency, or their
contractor to oversee the
direct disbursement of
administrative and technical
funds.
Under each of these options, the
participating, newly created, independent, or
local, state, federal governmental entity
would serve in a legally responsible
fiduciary capacity, administering the funds
in a manner to be decided by the advisory
board in collaboration with the regulated
agency.   
XIX.
Evaluating Advisory Boards
As advisory boards become more
established, there is a need on the part of all
those involved in the advisory board process
to evaluate the boards' effectiveness in
enhancing the decision-making process at
federal facilities.  An example of DOE's
advisory board evaluation process can be
found in Box 23.  The Committee
encourages boards and those interacting
with the boards to first set realistic
expectations during the early stages of their
development.  Some boards have expressed
a concern that before they are effectively
able to participate in the decision-making
process at their facility, they must go
through an education period and trust-
building process.  This is similar to the
contentious and difficult start-up processes of advisory boards that advise private sector
companies on cleanup issues.  It should be noted that some of those boards have been
productive and valuable to the community and companies, after having gone through a similar
learning period. 
Once a board is up and functioning, the Committee suggests that it establish a self evaluation
process to address the goals of the board at the various stages of its development. 
 
The Committee acknowledges that facility level federal staff have strong incentives for
demonstrating the success of their advisory boards to headquarters and Congress.  Setting
aside this need, however, or in addition to it, advisory boards should conduct their own honest
evaluation.  The Committee suggests some general guidelines for developing an evaluation
process, recognizing that the advisory boards have varying specific goals that they and the
agencies they advise have set out for them, depending on what stage they are in the
development process.    
In designing a specific evaluation process, it should be recognized that there are several
parties interested in the advisory board's work:  the regulated and regulating agencies; the
board members themselves; and public stakeholders.  Each interested party should be
represented in formulating the evaluation exercise. 
Generally, the model approach outlined in the Interim Report put forth the following goals for
the boards:  to improve the quality of and public support for environmental decisions at the
facility.  The human and fiscal resources devoted to the establishment and functioning of an
advisory board should be viewed as an investment in accomplishing these two basic goals. 
Beyond these two basic goals, it is important to evaluate the board's progress towards meeting
the site-specific goals identified by the individual advisory board.
The Committee believes that a three-step process may be useful in evaluating the progress
towards these goals.  This process includes:
•
Articulating the goals the boards and agencies have identified for themselves;
•
Identifying the actions and associated milestones necessary to achieve those goals; and
•
Assessing the board's progress in taking those actions and achieving its goals.    
Beyond this basic process, the boards may individually decide to evaluate their work on a
more substantive basis.  This is a decision that should be made on a case-by-case basis, by
those involved in designing the evaluation process.  The following are types of specific
questions that may be useful.
•
Are members knowledgeable about major issues, community views, and the
decision-making process?  Is the community knowledgeable about and supportive of
the actions of the board?
Communication among EM SSAB members is
encouraged and strengthened through three vehicles: 
EM Progress, Internet access and EM SSAB Chair
meetings.  On a quarterly basis various EM SSAB
members submit stories to be published in the newsletter
EM Progress.  The stories are printed in a distinct SSAB
section of the newsletter for distribution to over 6,500
internal and external EM customers, including SSAB
members and chairpersons.  Many SSABs choose to
share information on obstacles met and overcome,
Board operation, and Board recommendations that have
influenced EM decisions and achieved significant cost
savings.  In an effort to encourage electronic
communication, EM recently established an EM SSAB
Home Page on the Internet's World Wide Web. 
Individuals with Internet access can use the page to find
the latest information on SSAB activities.  Lastly, the
Chairpersons of each local board meet biannually with
Headquarters and field representatives to share lessons
learned, resolve potential conflicts, review upcoming
actions, and plan for the future needs.  For more
information, contact Don Beck, Office of Public
Accountability, DOE, (202) 586-7633.
Box 24:  Communication Efforts Among DOE
SSABs
•
Has the advisory board process contributed to agreement about the cleanup process? 
Were the recommendations useful in terms of resolving disputes between the public
stakeholders?  Or is the advisory board itself useful for resolving disputes?
•
What major factors are impeding the progress of the advisory board?  What can be
done to address these impediments?
•
Were the recommendations useful in terms of facilitating effective cleanups that
ensure protection of public health and the environment? 
•
Can the advisory board point to cost reductions or other efficiencies resulting from
their recommendations?  
•
Have agencies responded and adequately communicated actions to implement
recommendations and/or reasons for not implementing recommendations?
•
Does board membership continue to
reflect adequate diversity among
interested stakeholders?
•
Are education and training
opportunities for board members
adequate for the number and type of
issues that are coming before the
board?  
•
Has the board accomplished its goals
such that termination of the advisory
board is appropriate?
With close to twenty federal facilities, there is a high
density of advisory boards in the San Francisco Bay
Area.  Each RAB has its own individual challenges to
address, however, all share common concerns and in
some cases, problems.
In the Spring of 1994, Arc Ecology convened the San
Francisco and Monterey Bay Area RAB Community
Member Caucus to address shared concerns, provide
support for one another, monitor the activities of RABs
within the region and provide general information
sharing.  The Caucus is a voluntary network of
cooperating community members from the Restoration
Advisory Boards of NAS Alameda, Oakland Fleet
Industrial Supply Center, Mare Island Shipyard, Hunters
Point Shipyard, Treasure Island Naval Station, Moffett
Field Naval Air Station and Fort Ord.
The Caucus is facilitated by Arc Ecology, a San
Francisco headquartered nongovernmental organization
with over a decade of experience in the area of defense
cleanup and conversion.  While meetings occur mostly in
Arc's offices, they occasionally rotate among the
participating RAB communities.  The agenda is set by
the RAB Caucus itself with technical support, legislative
and budgetary analysis provided by local
nongovernmental organizational resources like the San
Francisco Bay Area Base Closures Environmental
Network (reuse), CAREER/PRO (national policy), and
Arc Ecology (technical & legal).  Minutes are taken at
each monthly meeting and mailed to Caucus members. 
Caucus members report back meeting discussions and
decisions at their individual RAB meetings.  Caucus
members have begun to identify regionally shared RAB
concerns and are developing projects to address them. 
The Bay Area RAB Community Member Caucus has
formed a strong collaborative community spirit to
address federal facility cleanup in the San Francisco and
Monterey Bay region and in October, 1995 began to
reach out to other RABs in the state to form a California-
wide RAB Caucus.  For more information contact Arc
Ecology 415-495-1786.
Box 25:  Bay Area Community RAB Caucus
•
Has the advisory board interacted
with other public stakeholders, and if
so how?
In addition to considering the above
evaluation process, the Committee
recommends that boards pursuing an
evaluation process consider the evaluation
process developed by DOE, in conjunction
with advisory board members from all of its
facilities.  
XX.
Networking Advisory Boards
The Committee believes that linking public
stakeholders and agencies across the
country may allow public stakeholders to
share the burden of extensive technical and
legal research that currently overwhelms
many public stakeholders.  When advisory
boards, agencies, and regulators share
information, solutions can arise more
quickly than when parties work in isolation. 
Often, this exchange of information can
save time and money for all involved.  A
network may also be used as a resource for
communities and site level agency personnel looking for new cleanup remedies and
clarification on environmental laws and regulations, pending legislation and budget updates.  
Some efforts are already underway to establish communications between facilities in regions
of the nation, as well as across federal agency complexes.  Examples of these efforts are
included in Boxes 24-26.  
Specifically, the Committee encourages federal agencies to support efforts that will assist
communication between public stakeholders at a national level.  For example, DOE guidance
suggests that DOE headquarters may play a role in establishing communication among
     DOE, Site-Specific Advisory Board Guidance, November 14, 1994, page 14.
5
This electronic clearinghouse was set up as a support
system for advisory board members.  The goal of the
conference is to provide a "place" where people who
work on the many issues of federal facilities cleanup can
carry an ongoing dialogue, build alliances and discuss
solutions to the complex problems that surround this
procedure.  
  
Since its inception in October of 1994, the cpro.military
conference has developed a list of subscribers that
include advisory board members, grassroots
environmental organizations, educators, regulators,
federal agencies and people involved in cleanup in
Panama, Germany, and Canada.  Conversation topics
include the workings of advisory boards, military RAB
guidance, environmental law, budget cuts, legislative
process, toxic substances, and other general information
sharing.
  
For example, in January of 1995 a conference
participant posted his concerns about the apparent
backsliding of the local base commander.  The RAB and
local base had worked hard at establishing a relationship
where information was shared, concerns could be voiced
and trust was beginning to build.  Within hours of his
posting he was contacted by a Navy official in
Washington, also a subscriber to the cpro.military
conference.  The potential conflict was resolved within a
day or two and what might have been an incident that
could have brought everyone back to square one was
averted.  Both the RAB members and Navy personnel
benefitted, saving time and money.  For more
information, contact Aimee Houghton, San Francisco
State University Urban Institute, (415) 904-7750.
Box 26:  "cpro.military"  Conference on
Military Base Closure, Cleanup and
Conversion
advisory boards across facilities, through the use of an electronic bulletin board.   Efforts to
5
increase communication across facilities might 
include:
•
Providing information to existing networks;
•
A national electronic clearinghouse
where information is posted almost
as it is happening; 
•
A newsletter that addresses the vast
array of issues in federal facility
cleanup; 
•
Making effective use of the media,
including the Internet, World Wide
Web, local access television, local
print media, and radio stations; and  
•
Other communication methods, such
as networks formed at national
meetings.
In creating any network, the network should
develop a charter that articulates its scope
and responsibilities.  In addition, these
networks should be publicly accessible.
Conclusion
___________________________________
__
The Committee is encouraged to see that its recommendations for the establishment of
advisory boards have been successful to date.  It is hoped that boards will continue to be
established and operate in a manner consistent with the spirit of these recommendations.  
Advisory boards provide an important forum for stakeholders and agencies to explore the
complex problems associated with federal facility cleanups.  In the next chapter, the
Committee has updated its recommendations on one of the more complex issues facing
federal facilities, that of setting priorities and allocating funding in a manner that is fair and
consistent with public stakeholder values. 
Chapter 5
