 
 
 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality 
Assurance Function Has Established a Solid 
Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be 
Further Enhanced 
 
February 2003 
 
Reference Number:  2003-20-067 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report has cleared the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration disclosure 
review process and information determined to be restricted from public release has been 
redacted from this document. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY 
                                    WASHINGTON, D.C.  20220 
 
                          INSPECTOR GENERAL 
                                      for TAX 
                              ADMINISTRATION  
 
 
February 27, 2003  
 
 
MEMORANDUM FOR DEPUTY COMMISSIONER FOR MODERNIZATION & 
CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER  
 
 
FROM: 
Gordon C. Milbourn III 
 Acting Deputy Inspector General for Audit 
 
SUBJECT: 
 Final Audit Report - The Business Systems Modernization 
Quality Assurance Function Has Established a Solid Set of 
Policies and Procedures That Can Be Further Enhanced  
(Audit # 200220017) 
 
 
 
This report presents the results of our review of the Business Systems Modernization 
(BSM) Quality Assurance (QA) function.  The overall objective of this review was to 
identify gaps between the existing BSM QA policies and procedures and best practice 
QA policies and procedures. 
In a previous review by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration, we 
determined that an independent BSM QA function with policies and procedures had not 
been established.1  Since that time, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has established 
a BSM QA function with a solid set of policies and procedures.  The BSM QA function 
has also begun to conduct effective audits of BSM activities. 
In summary, while much progress has been made, policies and procedures concerning 
independence, planning, skills assessments, standards compliance, stakeholder 
involvement, corrective action processing, and metrics could be enhanced to improve 
future operations.  During the review, we shared our results with the Associate 
Commissioner, BSM, and the BSM QA Manager.  Several actions were taken to 
address the issues we raised; these actions are discussed throughout the report.  For 
actions that could not be completed during the time period of our review, we provided 
detailed recommendations to assist the BSM QA function in continuously improving its 
operations.  These recommendations included initiating and documenting an 
                                                 
1 Significant Risks Need to Be Addressed to Ensure Adequate Oversight of the Systems Modernization Effort 
(Reference Number 2000-20-099, dated June 2000). 
2 
 
independent path to staff, plan, execute, and report on the status of Business Systems 
Modernization Office processes and products, enhancing existing QA policies and 
procedures, and improving BSM QA performance metrics. 
Management’s Response:  The Deputy Commissioner for Modernization & Chief 
Information Officer generally agreed with our recommendations and is taking 
appropriate corrective actions to further improve BSM QA procedures.  These actions 
include assessing the appropriateness of including an escalation process in the BSM 
QA procedures and revising the procedures as necessary, enhancing audit and 
corrective action procedures, and developing a metrics methodology.  We agree that 
these actions are a good start toward improving the independence and operations of the 
BSM QA function.  Management’s complete response to the draft report is included as 
Appendix IV. 
Copies of this report are also being sent to the IRS managers affected by the report 
recommendations.  Please contact me at (202) 622-6510 if you have questions or  
Gary V. Hinkle, Acting Assistant Inspector General for Audit (Information Systems 
Programs), at (202) 927-7291. 
 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
 
Table of Contents 
Background ...............................................................................................Page   1 
An Effective Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance  
Organization Has Been Established..........................................................Page   2 
Enhancements Can Be Made to Further Improve Quality Assurance  
Policies and Procedures............................................................................Page   3 
Recommendations 1 and 2: .......................................................... Page 11 
Recommendation 3: ...................................................................... Page 12 
Appendix I – Detailed Objective, Scope, and Methodology.......................Page 13 
Appendix II – Major Contributors to This Report........................................Page 14 
Appendix III – Report Distribution List .......................................................Page 15 
Appendix IV – Management’s Response to the Draft Report ....................Page 16 
 
 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  1 
In 1998, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) initiated the 
Business Systems Modernization (BSM) program to 
modernize its outdated computer systems and related 
information technology.  The BSM program is one of the 
most complex and expensive efforts ever undertaken by the 
IRS.  
In Fiscal Year (FY) 2000, the Treasury Inspector General 
for Tax Administration (TIGTA) performed the first in a 
series of audits to evaluate the IRS’ oversight of the new 
BSM effort.1  The review included an assessment of the 
BSM Quality Assurance (QA) function.  As a result of the 
audit, we recommended that the IRS establish an 
independent QA function that reported directly to the IRS 
Chief Information Officer (CIO).  We also recommended 
that the IRS finalize and fully implement QA policies and 
procedures.  
Since the completion of our first audit, the IRS has 
established a BSM QA function, whose mission is to 
provide BSM senior management with confidence that the 
products being built and services being provided for all 
modernization activities are produced by repeatable, 
standardized, and effective processes and conform to 
applicable contractual, program, and project requirements.  
The BSM QA function conducts audits of the Business 
Systems Modernization Office (BSMO)2 organizational 
units, the PRIME3 Quality Management Office, the TRW4 
QA organization, and other contractor program functions 
and projects.  
Our audit was conducted at the IRS National Headquarters 
in Washington, D.C., between June and November 2002 in 
                                                 
1 Significant Risks Need to Be Addressed to Ensure Adequate Oversight 
of the Systems Modernization Effort (Reference Number 2000-20-099, 
dated June 2000). 
2 The IRS created the BSMO to oversee the BSM effort. 
3 The PRIME contractor and integrator for BSM is Computer Sciences 
Corporation, which heads an alliance of leading technology companies 
that provide assistance to the IRS. 
4 The TRW Corporation is responsible for developing certain  
finance-related BSM projects. 
Background 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  2 
accordance with Government Auditing Standards.  Detailed 
information on our audit objective, scope, and methodology 
is presented in Appendix I.  Major contributors to the report 
are listed in Appendix II. 
The IRS has established an effective BSM QA organization 
by creating a set of policies and procedures, hiring staff to 
perform QA activities, conducting effective audits, and 
enlisting the MITRE Corporation5 to provide an independent 
review of BSM QA operations.  
Policies and procedures for performing audits and other QA 
activities were first established in June 2000 and have been 
refined since that time.  In addition, documentation of the 
purpose and scope of the function has been established.  
In March 2001, the BSMO hired the Dynamics Research 
Corporation to begin conducting QA audits.  Before that 
time, the BSMO supplemented the BSM QA staff with 
MITRE Corporation personnel.  At the end of our audit 
work, three IRS and seven Dynamics Research Corporation 
employees were assigned to the BSM QA function.   
Since March 2001, the BSM QA function has published five 
audit reports dealing with a number of critical issues.  These 
audits included a review of the Integrated Master Schedule,6 
the Process Asset Library7 management process, the 
acquisition management process, the PRIME Quality 
Management Office, and the TRW QA organization.  We 
found that the reports raised significant issues and provided 
important feedback for the areas under review.  
The BSM QA function has also recognized the need to 
continuously improve.  During our review, the BSMO 
tasked the MITRE Corporation to perform an independent 
review of the BSM QA function to verify that the function 
                                                 
5 The MITRE Corporation provides the IRS with specific expertise in 
managing the systems modernization program. 
6 The Integrated Master Schedule is a collection of project schedules 
that have been integrated to form a program view that represents project 
dependencies. 
7 The Process Asset Library is a web-based repository that contains 
systems life cycle process documentation. 
An Effective Business Systems 
Modernization Quality Assurance 
Organization Has Been 
Established  
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  3 
was performing activities according to policy, plans, and 
procedures.  The MITRE Corporation found that the BSM 
QA function had generally adhered to policies and 
procedures; however, some improvement opportunities were 
noted.  
Similar to the MITRE Corporation, we identified areas for 
improvement.  During our review, we compared BSM QA 
policies and procedures to best practice audit procedures.  
We communicated any areas for improvement to the 
Associate Commissioner (AC), BSM, and BSM QA 
Manager.  Comments from the AC, BSM, and BSM QA 
Manager are interspersed throughout the remainder of this 
report. 
The reporting level for the BSM QA function has 
increased; however, further steps can be taken to 
enhance independence 
We previously recommended that the BSM QA function 
report directly to the CIO.  Currently, the BSM QA function 
reports to the AC, BSM.  The Government Auditing 
Standards indicate that auditors “…should report the results 
of their audits and be accountable to the head or deputy head 
of the government entity and should be organizationally 
located outside the staff or line management function of the 
unit under audit.”  While not designated as an internal audit 
organization, the BSM QA function does perform audits of 
the BSMO, which is headed by the AC, BSM.  In this way, 
the BSM QA function is similar to an internal audit 
function. 
Current policies and procedures indicate that the AC, BSM, 
is responsible for:  1) ensuring adequate BSM QA staffing;  
2) approving the BSM QA Plan; 3) approving BSM QA 
policies and procedures; 4) receiving and reviewing status 
reports; and 5) resolving untimely, unresolved, or 
ineffective responses to QA reports.  Since BSMO audits 
are within the scope of BSM QA activities, some of these 
activities might involve a conflict of interest for the  
AC, BSM (who is directly responsible for BSMO 
operations). 
Enhancements Can Be Made to 
Further Improve Quality 
Assurance Policies and 
Procedures  
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  4 
The current AC, BSM, is considered a “champion” for the 
BSM QA function; however, we believe that policies and 
procedures should specifically articulate a clearer 
independent path to staff, plan, execute, and report on the 
status of BSMO processes and products should this situation 
change.  Without organizational independence, a future  
AC, BSM, could eliminate (or not fully staff) the BSM QA 
function, hold undue influence over BSM QA reporting, or 
redirect QA resources away from audits of the BSMO. 
The AC, BSM, indicated that he did not feel that increasing 
the independence for the BSM QA function would improve 
operations because the CIO would not have the time to 
manage the BSM QA function properly and the focus 
currently provided by the function would therefore suffer.  
The AC, BSM, also indicated that he considered BSMO 
audits to be only a small aspect of the BSM QA mission. 
The BSM QA function should implement proactive,  
risk-based planning 
The Control Objectives for Information and Related 
Technology8 suggests critical success factors to look for 
during an independent audit of an information technology 
program.  Two of these critical success factors are:   
1) risk-based planning is used to identify business and 
information technology activities for initial and cyclical 
reviews, and 2) audits should be planned and conducted 
proactively.  
We determined that an informal planning process was being 
used to determine priorities and to select the modernization 
processes, programs, and projects to receive QA audit 
coverage.  Currently, the BSM QA Manager discusses the 
priorities with the AC, BSM, and establishes a 6-month 
rolling audit schedule.  The BSM QA Manager and the  
                                                 
8The Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology is a 
generally applicable and accepted standard for good information 
technology security and control practices that provides a reference 
framework for management, users, and information systems audit, 
control, and security practitioners.  
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  5 
AC, BSM, meet frequently to discuss program status and 
priorities and to make revisions to the QA audit schedule.  
Without a formal risk-based planning process, the BSM QA 
function may not be reviewing BSM processes, programs, 
and projects with the highest risks and priorities.  Using 
informal methods to identify priorities and establish the 
audit schedule could allow significant risks in critical BSM 
activities to go undiscovered.  The MITRE Corporation’s 
recently completed independent review of the BSM QA 
function supports the need for a formal, proactive,  
risk-based planning process. 
To assist in the effort to improve proactive, risk-based 
planning, we provided the AC, BSM, with an example of a 
risk-based planning model that could be used for planning 
audits.  The AC, BSM, agreed that a more formal process 
was needed and stated that he felt that risk-based planning 
was being conducted; however, the method had not been 
documented.  We determined that not having a documented 
risk-based planning method was due to the function’s 
relatively early stage of development. 
Management Action:  The BSMO has identified 
improvements to the QA planning process as a high-level 
goal for FY 2003. 
The BSM QA function should analyze current and 
future skills needs 
Human capital is defined by the National Academy of 
Public Administration as the “identification of competencies 
and skills … needed to realize an organization’s mission and 
operating goals.”  According to the General Accounting 
Office (GAO), acquiring and developing staffs whose size 
and skills meet agency needs is one of the most pervasive 
challenges now facing the Federal Government.9   
During our review, the IRS and contractor employee 
turnover rates were extremely high.  According to the BSM 
QA Manager, some of this turnover was to correct the skill 
                                                 
9 NASA Management Challenges:  Human Capital and Other Critical 
Areas Need to be Addressed (GAO-02-945T, dated July 2002). 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  6 
mix within the BSM QA function.  In a changing 
environment, it is important that needed skills are 
documented so that current and future BSM QA and 
contractor personnel can be assessed to determine if staff are 
collectively qualified or need training.  Without an analysis 
of skill levels, the BSM QA function may not be able to 
meet the Government Auditing Standards, which require 
that audit teams collectively possess the knowledge and 
skills needed to conduct an audit. 
However, the BSM QA function had not assessed current 
skill levels against needed skills.  To assist in the effort to 
improve QA human capital planning, we provided the  
AC, BSM, and the BSM QA Manager with an example of a 
model that could be used for assessing skills gaps.  We 
determined that not conducting detailed human capital 
planning was due to the function’s relatively early stage of 
development.   
Management Action:  The BSM QA Manager stated that she 
had begun working on general and specific competencies 
needed within the BSM QA program and had developed a 
proposed training plan.  This action is in addition to human 
capital actions being taken at the Modernization, 
Information Technology and Security (MITS) Services level 
of the IRS. 
Both the TIGTA and the GAO have reported weaknesses 
regarding human capital planning within the BSMO.10  
According to the IRS, the MITS Services organization will 
be establishing a MITS Services-wide skills inventory.  The 
MITS Services organization has also created a human 
factors life cycle and conducted interviews with its 
executives to determine current and future skills gaps.  
                                                 
10 Significant Risks Need to Be Addressed to Ensure Adequate Oversight 
of the Systems Modernization Effort (Reference Number 2000-20-099, 
dated June 2000); and Business Systems Modernization:  IRS Needs To 
Better Balance Management Capacity with Systems Acquisition 
Workload (GAO-02-356, dated February 2002). 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  7 
Since there is an outstanding recommendation to improve 
human capital planning, we are not making any additional 
recommendations at this time. 
The BSM QA function should plan and execute audits 
using a recognized, professional standard 
The Government Auditing Standards require a reference in 
each audit report to the standard being used for conducting 
the audit.  The audit plans prepared by the BSM QA 
function did not include a reference to a recognized 
professional standard that would be followed.  Also, only 
three of the five audit reports we reviewed included a 
reference to a professional standard.  
Without following a recognized professional standard, 
audits may not be conducted uniformly and may not be 
comparable.  We determined that a professional standard 
was not included in the QA documentation due to the 
function’s relatively early stage of development. 
Audit communications during fieldwork should be 
improved 
The Government Auditing Standards require that audit 
results be reported timely.  In our opinion, interim reporting 
to those being audited helps ensure conformity with this 
standard.  
The BSM QA procedures require communication during 
various phases of the audit, including planning, preparation, 
performance, and reporting.  However, this contact does not 
include status reporting during fieldwork with anyone other 
than BSM QA management.   
In the absence of such interim reporting, there can be greater 
difficulty in reaching agreements, as well as a tendency to 
receive negative feedback from those being audited.  
Incorporating such status reporting during fieldwork could 
result in corrective actions being taken timelier, as well as 
the receipt of more timely input from those being audited. 
After we discussed this issue with the AC, BSM, and the 
BSM QA Manager, the BSM QA Manager stated that the 
function had worked hard on improving communications 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  8 
during planning and reporting.  However, it now needed to 
focus on improving communications during audit fieldwork. 
Management Action:  The BSM QA Manager indicated that 
more frequent status briefings have already been initiated in 
a current audit and that procedures would be revised in the 
future. 
Corrective action processing procedures can be 
improved  
The BSM QA function performs process audits to determine 
if processes conform to applicable plans, standards, 
procedures, and requirements.  When the audit team 
identifies findings or observations during the review, they 
are reported in either Corrective Action Reports (CAR) or 
Improvement Opportunity reports.  CARs are issued for 
findings, while Improvement Opportunity reports are issued 
for observations.  The BSM QA procedures define findings 
as non-adherence to a standard and observations as 
improvements to existing processes or documentation   
(e.g., procedures which are out-of-date, incomplete, unclear, 
or confusing). 
The BSM QA contractor is required to monitor and validate 
that corrective actions have been taken.  In addition, BSM 
QA procedures require that priorities be assigned to the 
corrective actions.  We determined that procedures could be 
improved in both of these areas. 
Procedures for assigning priorities can be improved  
We reviewed a judgmental sample of eight CARs and found 
that the lowest priority was improperly assigned to six of the 
CARs.  Although the procedures list the priorities and the 
elements that make up the priorities, the procedures do not 
provide a formal method for assigning the priorities to 
individual CARs.  The six CARs that were assigned the 
lowest priority included findings such as modernization 
products could be delivered with unresolved quality issues, 
the PRIME Quality Management Office was not sufficiently 
independent, and not all program and project QA activities 
were being performed. 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  9 
The BSM QA Manager explained that the CAR procedures 
were outdated and did not apply when the CARs were first 
generated.  Therefore, the BSM QA function did not use the 
procedures to assign priorities.  Instead, the priorities were 
informally assigned to the CARs (i.e., no reasons were 
documented explaining why a particular priority was 
assigned).  Without appropriate priorities being assigned, 
corrective actions may not receive appropriate priority 
attention or visibility. 
Management Action:  The BSM QA Manager stated that a 
follow-up audit of the PRIME Quality Management Office 
has been initiated to review the corrective actions taken on 
the CARs, including the six CARs that were identified as 
having an inappropriate priority rating. 
The BSM QA Manager also indicated that revisions to the 
verification and validation procedures have been drafted, 
including a method of assigning priorities to corrective 
actions. 
Corrective actions were closed before they were verified 
and validated 
We reviewed a judgmental sample of eight CARs and one 
Improvement Opportunity report and found that the 
corrective actions in six of the CARs were not verified and 
validated.  Although the six CARs were closed, the BSM 
QA function did not obtain sufficient evidence that the 
corrective actions had been completed prior to closure.  The 
unresolved issues in these six CARs include potential 
quality defects in delivered modernization products and 
programs or projects that the PRIME Quality Management 
Office had never audited. 
These issues were identified because the BSM QA 
corrective action verification and validation processes are 
still maturing.  For example, we noted that the procedures 
did not require the creation of a follow-up audit or 
monitoring plan to ensure that corrective actions were 
completed.  Without an adequate follow-up process, the 
BSM QA function has no assurance that the problems 
identified in the CARs have been corrected.  
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  10 
Management Action:  The BSM QA function initiated a 
follow-up review of the PRIME Quality Management 
Office.  The audit will include a review of the status of prior 
corrective actions.  The BSM QA Manager also indicated 
that revisions to the verification and validation procedures 
have been drafted.  The procedures will include definitive 
guidance on developing appropriate issue (or finding) 
statements, setting a timeline for completion of the 
corrective actions, and preparing follow-up and monitoring 
plans as appropriate.  
Measuring the performance of the QA program could be 
improved 
The BSM QA procedures require that metrics be developed 
and captured to assist in achieving QA objectives and 
measuring the effectiveness of the QA program.  The QA 
procedures include quality goals and objectives and contain 
the metrics to be captured and analyzed.  The Control 
Objectives for Information and Related Technology 
suggests that an effective QA system should include  
well-defined, measurable quality standards.  Also, the 
system should contain key goal indicators to measure the 
effectiveness of the QA program, such as increased 
customer satisfaction with services rendered. 
Our review showed that the BSM QA measurement process 
is still maturing.  Although QA metrics were defined in the 
QA procedures and some metrics were captured, procedures 
for the selection and use of metrics need to be improved.  
We noted that metrics to determine the effectiveness of the 
BSM QA function had not been established, standards had 
not been developed to analyze against actual metrics, and 
metrics were not consistently captured and analyzed.  We 
also noted that certain metrics were being captured that 
could be counter-productive due to their focus on quantity 
versus quality. 
Without a good measurement process, IRS management 
cannot ensure an effective and efficient BSM QA function is 
in place.  To assist in the effort to improve the QA metric 
program, we provided the AC, BSM, and BSM QA  
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  11 
Manager with examples of best practices metrics that could 
be used for QA activities. 
Management Action:  The BSMO has identified developing 
QA measures as a high-level goal for FY 2003. 
Recommendations 
To ensure that the BSM QA function continues to improve, 
we recommend that the BSM QA Manager:  
1. Initiate and document an independent path to staff, plan, 
execute, and report on the status of BSMO processes 
and products. 
Management’s Response:  The BSMO QA Office will 
assess the appropriateness of including an escalation process 
in the BSM QA procedures and revise the procedures as 
necessary. 
Office of Audit Comment:  We agree that this action is a 
good start toward improving the independence of the BSM 
QA function.     
2. Enhance existing QA policies and procedures. 
a. Select and document a recognized professional audit 
standard that is followed when planning, executing, 
and reporting audits. 
b. Institute and document an interim reporting process 
to interested stakeholders (e.g., those being audited) 
during fieldwork. 
c. Develop, implement, and document a formal  
risk-based planning process to select modernization 
processes, programs, and projects for coverage. 
d. Revise procedures to include a methodology for 
assigning priorities to the corrective actions. 
e. Require follow-up audit plans and monitoring plans 
be developed to guide verification and validation 
activities. 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  12 
f. Require meetings be held with those responsible for 
taking corrective actions to reach agreement on what 
corrective actions will be implemented and when the 
implementation should be completed. 
Management’s Response:  The Deputy Commissioner for 
Modernization & CIO agreed with the recommendation and 
plans to enhance audit and corrective action procedures.   
3. Improve BSM QA performance metrics. 
a. Develop standards to analyze against the actual 
metrics to measure the progress in achieving goals 
and objectives. 
b. Develop a procedure and methodology for uniformly 
selecting, capturing, analyzing, and using metrics. 
c. Incorporate best practice metrics into the QA 
procedures.  
d. Remove or minimize metrics that focus strictly on 
capturing numbers because they may be  
counter-productive. 
Management’s Response:  The Deputy Commissioner for 
Modernization & CIO agreed with the recommendation and 
plans to develop a metrics methodology.  
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  13 
 
Appendix I 
 
 
Detailed Objective, Scope, and Methodology 
 
The overall objective of this review was to identify gaps between the existing Business Systems 
Modernization (BSM) Quality Assurance (QA) policies and procedures and best practice QA 
policies and procedures.  To accomplish our objective, we determined if any gaps existed 
between best practice QA policies and procedures and current BSM QA policies and procedures 
and evaluated any ongoing improvement or corrective actions being taken in the following areas:  
A. Independence. 
B. Planning. 
C. Metrics and Management Information Systems. 
D. Standards Compliance. 
E. Stakeholder Involvement. 
F. Corrective Action Processing. 
G. Skills/Training Needs. 
 
 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  14 
Appendix II 
 
 
Major Contributors to This Report 
 
Scott Wilson, Assistant Inspector General for Audit (Information Systems Programs) 
Gary V. Hinkle, Acting Assistant Inspector General for Audit (Information Systems Programs) 
Scott Macfarlane, Director 
Troy Paterson, Audit Manager 
Ken Carlson, Senior Auditor 
Paul Mitchell, Senior Auditor 
Wallace Sims, Senior Auditor 
 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  15 
Appendix III 
 
 
Report Distribution List 
 
Acting Commissioner  N:C 
Associate Commissioner, Business Systems Modernization  M:B 
Chief Counsel  CC  
National Taxpayer Advocate  TA  
Director, Legislative Affairs  CL:LA 
Director, Office of Program Evaluation and Risk Analysis  N:ADC:R:O 
Office of Management Controls  N:CFO:F:M 
Audit Liaison: 
Associate Commissioner, Business Systems Modernization  M:B 
 
 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  16 
Appendix IV 
 
 
Management’s Response to the Draft Report 
 
 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  17 
 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  18 
 
The Business Systems Modernization Quality Assurance Function  
Has Established a Solid Set of Policies and Procedures That Can Be  
Further Enhanced 
 
Page  19 
 
