a
GAO
United States General Accounting Office
Report to Congressional Requesters
April 2004
STATE DEPARTMENT
Issues Affecting 
Funding of Iraqi 
National Congress 
Support Foundation
GAO-04-559
 
 
 
www.gao.gov/cgi-bin/getrpt?GAO-04-559. 
 
To view the full product, including the scope 
and methodology, click on the link above. 
For more information, contact Jess Ford at 
(202) 512-4268 or fordj@gao.gov. 
Highlights of GAO-04-559, a report to 
congressional requesters  
April 2004
STATE DEPARTMENT
Issues Affecting Funding of Iraqi National 
Congress Support Foundation 
State’s funding of INCSF programs totaled nearly $33 million for the period 
March 2000 through September 2003.  This money was made available 
through 23 cooperative agreements and amendments that provided short-
term funding at irregular intervals.  The funds were provided for several 
purposes, including establishing new satellite television capability (Liberty 
TV), newspaper publication, and information collection programs.  About 
$10 million was earmarked for Liberty TV broadcasting activities, which 
included hiring staff, establishing studio operations, and actual broadcasting. 
There were several periods during which State did not have an agreement to 
fund INCSF’s program, causing State to later fund INCSF activities 
retroactively.  State’s funding approach affected INCSF’s ability to conduct  
television broadcast operations.  Liberty TV broadcasted from August 2001 
to May 2002, when funding shortages caused by funding and policy disputes 
between State and INCSF resulted in termination of broadcasting.  Attempts 
to restart Liberty TV failed due to a combination of factors, including 
continued disagreements between INCSF and State over funding 
requirements for the broadcasts, the rapidly changing conditions associated 
with the war in Iraq, and INCSF’s relocation of operations to Iraq in May 
2003.  INCSF repeatedly complained to State that the short-term nature of 
the funding agreements made it difficult to run an effective television 
broadcasting operation.   
 
State cited three reasons why it was unable to reach long-term funding 
agreements with INCSF:  (1) State was concerned about INCSF’s 
accountability for funds and operational costs, based largely on results of 
audits of INCSF, and remained concerned even after INCSF took steps to 
improve its accountability during late 2001 and 2002; (2) INCSF resisted U.S. 
government policy prohibiting INCSF operations inside Iraq; and (3) State 
questioned both the usefulness of INCSF’s information collection program 
and whether it was appropriate for State to fund it. (In May 2002 State 
decided to drop its funding for the information collection program, effective 
August 2002.)  Against this background and the sporadic funding 
arrangements that characterized the program, the process of proposal and 
counterproposal continued without producing agreements that could lead to 
restarting Liberty TV.  Through their inability to work together to restart 
Liberty TV, State and INCSF missed a chance to reach the Iraqi people at 
critical times prior to and during the March 2003 war in Iraq.     
 
As part of the efforts by the United 
States to oust Saddam Hussein, a 
critical element of U.S. policy 
included funding the Iraqi National 
Congress as the lead Iraqi 
opposition coalition.  In 1999, the 
Iraqi National Congress Support 
Foundation (INCSF) was 
established to provide an 
organizational structure for 
Department of State funding.  From 
March 2000 until September 2003, 
the Department of State funded 
several INCSF programs, including 
television broadcasting.  INCSF’s 
broadcasting goals  included 
broadcasts into Iraq focusing on 
providing the Iraqi people unbiased 
news and information and updating 
them on efforts to bring democracy 
to Iraq. 
 
GAO was asked to review (1) the 
history of the Department of State’s 
funding of INCSF broadcasting 
activities and (2) the key issues 
affecting State’s funding decisions. 
Page i
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
Contents
Letter
1
Results in Brief 
2
Background 
3
State’s Funding Was Generally Provided on a Short-term Basis 
4
Inability to Reach Long-term Agreements Centered on Concerns 
over Financial Management, Operations in Iraq, and Information 
Collection 
8
Agency Comments and Our Evaluation 
15
Scope and Methodology 
16
Appendixes
Appendix I:
Comments from the Department of State
18
Appendix II:
Comments from the Iraqi National Congress Support 
Foundation
21
Table
Table 1: Description of State’s Cooperative Agreements with  
INCSF
5
 
Abbreviations
INC
Iraqi National Congress
INCSF
Iraqi National Congress Support Foundation
OIG
Office of the Inspector General
This is a work of the U.S. government and is not subject to copyright protection in the 
United States. It may be reproduced and distributed in its entirety without further 
permission from GAO. However, because this work may contain copyrighted images or 
other material, permission from the copyright holder may be necessary if you wish to 
reproduce this material separately.
Page 1
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
United States General Accounting Office 
Washington, D.C. 20548
Page 1
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
A
 
 
 
 
April 30, 2004
Leter
The Honorable Norm Coleman
Chairman
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
Committee on Governmental Affairs 
United States Senate
The Honorable Sam Brownback
The Honorable Jon Kyl
The Honorable Rick Santorum
United States Senate
As part of long-standing efforts by the United States to oust Saddam 
Hussein, the Iraq Liberation Act of 19981 noted that regime change in Iraq 
should be the policy of the United States.  Consistent with that act and 
other legislation, a critical element of U.S. policy included funding the Iraqi 
National Congress as the lead Iraqi opposition coalition.  In 1999, the Iraqi 
National Congress Support Foundation (INCSF) was established to provide 
an organizational structure for Department of State funding.  From March 
2000 until September 2003, the State Department provided funds to the 
INCSF for several programs, including planning for the renewal of Radio 
Hurriah broadcasts and establishing new satellite television capability 
(Liberty TV), newspaper publication, and public information and 
information collection programs.2  INCSF’s broadcasting goals included 
direct radio and television broadcasts into Iraq focusing on providing the 
Iraqi people unbiased news and information and updating them on efforts 
to bring democracy to the country.
In response to your questions about the amounts and timing of Department 
of State funding for INCSF broadcasting activities, this report (1) describes 
the history of the Department of State’s funding of INCSF broadcasting 
activities and (2) examines the key issues affecting State’s funding 
decisions for the broadcasting programs.  To perform our work, we 
reviewed State’s cooperative agreement documents with the INCSF and 
1Public Law 105-338.
2The INCSF’s information collection program consisted of INCSF field officers stationed in 
countries surrounding Iraq maintaining contact with Iraqi dissidents living inside Iraq and 
collecting information from them on the political, economic, and military activities of 
Saddam Hussein’s regime.
Page 2
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
met with State officials in the Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs and the 
Bureau of Administration.  We also examined audit files in State’s Office of 
the Inspector General (OIG) and met with OIG officials.3  In addition, we 
met with a consultant hired by INCSF to help improve the foundation’s 
accounting and financial management systems and who frequently acted as 
a representative on behalf of INCSF in discussions with State, and we 
obtained information from INCSF’s former controller and from its Liberty 
TV manager.  To assess the reliability of the data used in this report, we 
reviewed relevant documents and obtained necessary information from 
State and INCSF personnel.  We conducted our review from September 
2003 to April 2004 in accordance with generally accepted government 
auditing standards.  (See p. 16 for the details of our scope and 
methodology.) 
Results in Brief
State’s funding of cooperative agreements for INCSF totaled nearly $33 
million for the period March 2000 through September 2003 when State’s 
funding ended.  This money was made available through 23 cooperative 
agreements and amendments that provided short-term funding at irregular 
intervals.  Moreover, there were several periods during which State did not 
have an agreement to fund INCSF’s program, causing State to later fund 
INCSF activities retroactively.  State’s funding approach affected INCSF’s 
ability to conduct broadcast operations.  State provided seed money for 
radio broadcasting but did not provide additional funding because it could 
not identify a location for a transmitter that was acceptable to both State 
and the INCSF.  About $10 million was earmarked for Liberty TV 
broadcasting activities, which included hiring staff, establishing studio 
operations, and broadcasting.  Liberty TV broadcasted from August 2001 to 
May 2002, when funding shortages caused by funding and policy disputes 
between State and INCSF resulted in termination of broadcasting.  
Attempts to restart Liberty TV failed due to a combination of factors, 
including continued disagreements between INCSF and State over funding 
requirements for the broadcasts, the rapidly changing conditions 
associated with the war in Iraq, and INCSF’s relocation of operations to 
Iraq in May 2003.  INCSF repeatedly complained to State that the short-
term nature of the funding agreements made it difficult to run an effective 
broadcasting operation.  
3OIG conducted two audits of INCSF: Review of Awards to Iraqi National Congress 
Support Foundation (01-FMA–R-092, September 2001) and Follow Up Review of Iraqi 
National Congress Support Foundation (AUD/CG-02-44, September 2002).
Page 3
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
State cited three reasons why it was unable to reach long-term funding 
agreements with INCSF:  (1) State was concerned about INCSF’s 
accountability for funds and operational costs, based largely on results of 
audits, and remained concerned even after INCSF took steps to improve its 
accountability during late 2001 and 2002; (2) INCSF resisted U.S. 
government policy prohibiting INCSF operations inside Iraq; and (3) State 
questioned both the usefulness of INCSF’s information collection 
program4 and whether it was appropriate for State to fund it. (In May 2002, 
State decided to drop its funding for this program.) Against this 
background and the sporadic funding arrangements that characterized the 
program, the process of proposal and counterproposal continued without 
producing agreements that could lead to restarting Liberty TV.  Through 
their inability to work together to restart Liberty TV, State and INCSF 
missed a chance to reach the Iraqi people at critical times prior to and 
during the March 2003 war in Iraq.   
Background
The Iraq Liberation Act of 1998 authorized U.S. assistance to support a 
transition to democracy in Iraq in key areas, including radio and television 
broadcasting.  In 1999 President Clinton designated the Iraqi National 
Congress (INC) as eligible to receive assistance under the act.5  INC was 
formed in the early 1990s when the two main Kurdish militias—the 
Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan—
participated in a June 1992 meeting of dozens of opposition groups in 
Vienna.6  INC subsequently developed into a broad-based coalition of 
political organizations opposed to Saddam Hussein.  In 1999, INCSF was 
established as a foundation to provide support to INC and to provide an 
organizational structure for State’s funding of INC.7 A seven-member board 
of directors (the INC Leadership Council) governed INCSF.  INCSF was 
4INCSF intended its information collection program to gather data on several issues, 
including the Hussein government’s military, political, and economic activities, and 
information about its alleged weapons of mass destruction programs and its ties to terrorist 
groups.
5Subsequent funding for INC came from appropriations made to carry out the Economic 
Support Fund provisions of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended.
6In October 1992, major Shiite Islamic groups joined the coalition.
7INCSF was established as a foundation to provide administrative, financial, and other 
support to the Iraqi National Congress and was incorporated as a nonprofit organization in 
August 1999 in the state of Delaware.
Page 4
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
headquartered in London, England, until the end of the war, when its 
operations were relocated to Baghdad.  During its cooperative agreements 
with State, INCSF also maintained field offices in Washington, D.C.; 
Damascus, Syria; and Tehran, Iran.  In April and May 2003, INCSF began the 
process of relocating its offices to Baghdad.
From the beginning of its relationship with State, INCSF’s plans for 
broadcasting into Iraq represented one of its major initiatives, along with 
plans for resuming publication of a newspaper INC had established in 1992, 
participating in Department of Defense training programs, and establishing 
humanitarian and information collection programs.  INCSF envisioned 
radio as a key medium for the dissemination of information to the Iraqi 
people.  It planned to reestablish Radio Hurriah and have a signal 
receivable in Iraq by early 2001.8  To expand the area of coverage, INCSF 
also planned to purchase a high-power transmitter in Iraq.  Radio 
broadcasting was to focus on news, current affairs, and programs 
dedicated to democracy and human rights.  Based on its prior television 
experience (from August 1993 to August 1996, INC operated a television 
production and transmission facility in Iraqi Kurdistan), INCSF’s plans for 
Liberty TV included setting up a studio in London and using satellite 
equipment to broadcast directly to Iraq.  Planned programming included 
news, current affairs, and programs censored by the regime in Baghdad.  
State’s Funding Was 
Generally Provided on 
a Short-term Basis
Beginning in March 2000, State entered into a series of cooperative 
agreements with INCSF that included funding totaling nearly $33 million as 
of September 2003, but most of this funding came under agreements and 
amendments provided at irregular intervals, involved some retroactive 
funding, and were short-term and thus affected INCSF’s ability to 
broadcast.  Table 1 describes State’s cooperative agreements with INCSF in 
further detail. 
8Until 1996, INC had operated Radio Hurriah from a U.S. government tower in Kuwait and 
broadcast into Iraq in Arabic for 14 hours daily.  
Page 5
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
Table 1:  Description of State’s Cooperative Agreements with INCSF
 
Agreement
Award
date
Effective
date
Agreement
period
Amount
Purpose
1
3/31/00
3/31/00
3/31/00 to
9/31/00
$267,784
Establish INCSF office and
develop plan/proposal for long-term U.S. support 
Amendment 1
9/19/00
3/31/00
(No change)
0
Administrative change to revise budget with no 
additional funds or change in 
performance period
Amendment 2
a
a
Extended to 
11/30/00
0
Extend agreement period
Amendment 3
a
a
(No change)
0
To reflect new address of 
recipient
2
9/29/00
9/29/00
9/29/00 to
2/28/01
$4 million
Support INCSF’s programs,
including headquarters and
regional operations, broadcasting, humanitarian 
activities, and information collection 
Amendment 1
2/28/01
2/28/01
Extended to
3/31/01
0
Extend agreement period
Amendment 2
3/30/01
3/31/01
Extended to
5/31/01
0
Extend agreement period
Amendment 3
5/30/01
6/1/01
Extended to
6/30/01
0
Extend agreement period
Amendment 4
6/29/01
6/29/01
Extended to
9/30/01
$4 million
Continue funding of INCSF’s core programs
Amendment 5
6/29/01
6/29/01
No change
$2 million
Continue funding of INCSF’s core programs
Amendment 6
9/29/01
9/30/01
Extended to 
10/15/01
0
Extend agreement period
Amendment 7
10/15/01
10/15/01
Extended to 
10/31/01
0
Extend agreement period
Amendment 8
10/31/01
10/15/01
Extended to 
11/15/01
0
Extend agreement period
Amendment 9
12/04/01
11/01/01
Extended to 
12/31/01
$1.7 million
Continue funding of INCSF’s core programs
Amendment 10
2/08/02
1/1/02
Extended to
3/31/02
$2.9 million
Continue funding of INCSF’s core programs
Amendment 11
8/20/02
3/31/02
No change
$900,000
Add funds in August 2002 for “prior expenses”
3 “bridge grant”
5/17/02
4/1/02
4/01/02 to
5/31/02
$2.4 million
“Austerity budget” support for personnel, direct 
services, television, newspaper, and other costs
4
11/15/02
6/1/02
 11/15/02 to
1/31/03; providing 
pre-award costs 
from 6/01/02 to 
1/31/03
$6.58 million
Renew funding for headquarters and regional 
operations, television costs 
(including returning Liberty TV to the air), 
humanitarian activities, newspaper, and trainee 
expenses
Page 6
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
Source: GAO analysis of State Department data.
aInformation not available in State’s files.
bAccording to State, the amendment was undated but covered specific costs incurred during 
December 2002.
Agreement 1 laid the groundwork for initial planning, and Agreement 2 
described what INCSF hoped to achieve in the broadcasting area.  These 
goals included (1) setting up a satellite television facility in London to 
broadcast directly into Iraq and (2) planning and preparing to resume 
broadcasting of Radio Hurriah from inside Iraq and via satellite and the 
Internet.  From March 2000 through May 2002, State provided about $17 
million to INCSF through the first two cooperative agreements and 
amendments and Agreement 3 (the 2-month “bridge grant” for April and 
May 2002).9 Of this $17 million, only limited funding was for Radio Hurriah, 
largely because an acceptable location for a transmitter could not be found.  
About $5 million was earmarked for Liberty TV broadcasting activities, 
which included hiring staff and establishing studio operations.  Liberty TV 
broadcasting actually began in August 2001.  However, upon becoming 
operational, Liberty TV encountered technical problems that forced it to 
broadcast from the United States based on a signal transfer from London.  
Liberty TV had goals of original broadcasting for 24 hours a day, but at the 
peak of its operations it only had original broadcasts of 4 hours.  It went off 
the air on May 1, 2002, because of funding disputes between State and 
INCSF which, according to an INCSF representative, left the INCSF 
seriously short of funds to pay its bills.  After the bridge grant expired on 
May 31, 2002, State and INCSF did not conclude a new agreement until 
Amendment 1
No dateb
12/12/02
Signed 2/05/03
$282,042
Add funds and authorize London conference 
expenses
Amendment 2
3/02/03
1/23/03
Extended to
7/31/03
0
Extend agreement period
Amendment 3
6/2/02
2/5/03
2/05/03 to
7/31/03
$7 million
Continue funding of agreement categories except 
humanitarian 
Amendment 4
10/30/03
7/31/03
Extended to
9/30/03
0
Extend agreement period
5
11/15/02
6/1/02
6/01/02-7/31/02
$619,800
Transition costs for information collection program, 
until another agency could begin funding
Total
$32.65 million
(Continued From Previous Page)
Agreement
Award 
date
Effective 
date
Agreement 
period
Amount
Purpose
9This total excludes $900,000 provided under amendment 11 in August 2002.
Page 7
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
November 2002.10 Funding in that new cooperative agreement (Agreement 
4) and its amendments included about $4.67 million for (1) restarting 
Liberty TV and (2) “pre-award” costs incurred by INCSF for the period not 
under the agreement, including salaries for Liberty TV staff retained by 
INCSF. 
Parties Made Serious 
Attempts to Reach Long-
term Accord but Were 
Unable to Do So
In the course of the relationship between the two parties, State several 
times offered INCSF longer-term agreements that INCSF would not accept.  
For example, for the period March 2000 through February 2001, State and 
INCSF had concluded the first two cooperative agreements totaling about 
$4.27 million.  In April 2001, as an alternative to short-term amendments to 
Agreement 2, INCSF requested a new 5-month agreement totaling $29 
million that included funding for 24-hours-a-day satellite television 
broadcasting, installation of a small transmitter in Iraq, and 24-hours-a-day 
radio broadcasting from inside Iraq.   State rejected the proposal.  Similarly, 
in September 2001, INCSF requested $23 million over 5 months.  According 
to the proposal, Liberty TV operations would be expanded to 24 hours a 
day, and radio operations would be initiated via a transmitter inside Iraq.  
State rejected INCSF’s proposal but in late September 2001 made a 
counteroffer of $8 million for a 5-month cooperative agreement.  State 
renewed the same offer in early November 2001.  While emphasizing that it 
was not prepared to fund INCSF activities inside Iraq, State did offer to 
fund a series of activities, including publication of the newspaper, satellite 
TV broadcasting, information collection analysis, and startup of radio 
broadcasting using a transmitter based in Iran.   INCSF declined State’s 
offer.
10In August 2002, State provided an additional $900,000 under Amendment 11 to Agreement 
2, for expenses incurred through March 31, 2002.
Page 8
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
Inability to Reach 
Long-term Agreements 
Centered on Concerns 
over Financial 
Management, 
Operations in Iraq, and 
Information Collection 
Three main concerns affected State’s funding decisions for INCSF and 
thwarted the parties’ ability to negotiate and conclude long-term funding 
agreements:  concerns over INCSF’s financial management and 
accountability based largely on the results of audits of INCSF; the desire of 
INCSF to operate inside Iraq, which was inconsistent with U.S. policy; and 
State’s increasing concerns about the appropriateness and merits of 
funding INCSF’s information collection program.   State officials 
acknowledged that the use of frequent short-term amendments to the 
cooperative agreements, plus the substantial period of time that an 
agreement was not in force in 2002, significantly complicated management 
of the program and made it difficult for INCSF to accomplish its objectives. 
However, State officials said that these arrangements were necessary in 
view of the financial management, policy, and operational issues that arose 
during the program.  INCSF repeatedly claimed that the short-term nature 
of State’s funding led to financial problems in the organization and 
disrupted Liberty TV’s ability to pay its bills.
Financial Management and 
Accountability Concerns 
In the very early stages of State’s agreements with INCSF, State received 
strong indications that INCSF had inadequate controls over cash transfers.   
For example, in 2000, a CPA firm reviewed INCSF’s controls as part of 
Agreement 1.  The review identified concerns about INCSF’s travel 
reimbursement procedures, use of non-U.S. flag-carriers, and its cash 
payment practices.  Also that year, State notified INCSF that it needed to 
rectify certain compliance issues before it could draw down funds.  These 
issues included INCSF’s lack of proper documentation to support 
expenditures and the questionable use of cash payments.  In early 2001, 
another CPA audit examined INCSF’s operations as part of State’s 
agreements and identified significant noncompliance and control issues 
affecting implementation of Agreement 2.  According to a State document, 
the auditor “appear[ed] to confirm what we [State] suspected—that the 
INCSF is not complying with the myriad of regulations that grantees are 
required to comply with.”   
Audit by State’s Inspector 
General 
Concern grew in State that there were serious mishandling of money issues 
that needed to be examined in INCSF to avoid a potentially embarrassing 
situation for the administration and for State.  In early 2001, some 
allegations about fraud within INCSF also circulated within State.  State’s 
concerns about accountability and the potential for misuse of funds led to 
an audit of INCSF by State’s Office of the Inspector General (OIG) in mid-
2001.  The OIG audit covered the initial $4.3 million in awards to INCSF 
Page 9
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
under Agreements 1 and 2.  The OIG found serious financial management 
and internal control weaknesses, particularly in the cash management 
aspects of INCSF’s information collection program.11 The OIG also found 
that INCSF had an inadequate accounting and financial management 
structure, insufficient accounting staff, and inadequate banking procedures 
and that State had not created a total budget for the second cooperative 
agreement incorporating the funding that had been awarded to the INCSF 
up to that point.  The OIG questioned approximately $2.2 million in INCSF 
costs.  As a result, the OIG recommended that State withhold, or at least 
restrict, future funding to INCSF until it implemented adequate and 
transparent financial controls.  The OIG also recommended that INCSF 
acquire expert financial management assistance to set up a standardized 
accounting system, hire a financial officer, establish cash management 
procedures, develop written accounting policies and procedures, and 
incorporate into its agreements with State a budget that accurately 
reflected approved costs.  Although several accounting and internal control 
weaknesses were identified, OIG officials said that they found no evidence 
concerning the prior accusations of fraud.  An INCSF representative 
acknowledged that it had financial management and accountability 
weaknesses in the early stages of the agreements.  However, the 
representative believed that INCSF made significant improvements in late 
2001 and early 2002 to correct the weaknesses and to respond to the OIG 
audit.  
OIG officials said that their audits of INCSF were done in accordance with 
generally accepted government audit standards and that their work was 
similar to other grant and cooperative agreement audits they had 
conducted.
Concerns about Operations 
in Iraq and Information 
Collection
From the beginning of its relationship with INCSF, State had policy 
concerns that ultimately affected funding decisions and plans for several 
programs, including Radio Hurriah and Liberty TV.  At the beginning of the 
cooperative agreements with INCSF, State officials said that the U.S. 
government had adopted a general policy of prohibiting INCSF operations 
inside Iraq.   State officials said that the presence of U.S.-funded INCSF 
staff within Iraq could open the door to potentially disastrous diplomatic 
11For example, the OIG found nearly $600,000 in unsupported cash transactions in the first 
audit.  The OIG described the situation as including questionable disbursement policies and 
limited documentation. 
Page 10
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
situations if INCSF operatives were caught and/or killed by Iraqi troops.  
INCSF resisted this policy.  From INCSF’s perspective, working inside Iraq 
was vital for the success of many of its programs.  To begin radio 
broadcasting inside Iraq, INCSF wanted to purchase and install a suitable 
transmission tower within the country.  The INCSF also wanted the existing 
information program to collect data on the Hussein government’s military, 
political, and economic activities for input into its newspaper, Al Mutamar, 
and for Liberty TV broadcasts.  In addition, INCSF believed that elements 
of that data could be used in its diplomatic activities to reinforce views of 
the international community that the Hussein government represented a 
danger to its neighbors.  Further, INCSF saw the program as an effort to 
gather information on the government’s alleged weapons of mass 
destruction programs and its ties with international terrorist groups. 
However, State maintained its position, refusing to fund radio activities 
inside Iraq and limiting its funding of information collection to areas 
outside and bordering Iraq.   In commenting on a draft of this report, State 
noted that, as the grantor, it had entire discretion to determine whether a 
grant to the INCSF would further and be consistent with U.S. government 
policies, and to condition any such grant to ensure that it would.  State 
further believed that as a grantee, INCSF was an instrument of U.S. 
government policy, and, as such, was not in a position to disagree with 
State on how State’s funds could be used.
In addition to concerns about operating inside Iraq, State’s OIG had 
questioned the nature of INCSF’s information program and its lack of 
controls over cash transactions, particularly those that were used as part of 
activities in the field.  In State’s view, the potential for fraud in an officially 
State-sponsored program posed a risk that State was not prepared to take.  
Finally, State officials doubted the value of the information obtained 
through the program, a claim that the INCSF vigorously disputed.   
Continued Efforts to Reach 
Long-term Agreements 
As these financial management and policy issues were emerging, State and 
INCSF continued their efforts to conclude new long-term agreements, with 
little success.  For example, in fall 2001, State offered INCSF an $8 million 
agreement for 5 months that would provide television and radio funding 
but did not fund operations in Iraq.   INCSF did not accept State’s proposal, 
largely because it held firm to the position that not letting INCSF operate 
inside Iraq would result in the disintegration of the organization.   In 
February 2002, INCSF proposed another long-term agreement totaling 
$37.5 million covering March through December 2002.  As part of that 
proposal, INCSF believed that several elements of INCSF’s mission needed 
Page 11
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
to be addressed by both parties, including the lack of a complete INCSF 
communications strategy without a radio program and the need for a 
higher-quality television operation.  In addition, INCSF believed it was 
imperative that its information collection program be expanded to ensure 
timely and reliable intelligence on developments inside Iraq and provide 
critical information on Saddam’s alleged weapons of mass destruction 
program and involvement in international terrorism.  State determined 
around mid-March that the proposal was incomplete and, because INCSF 
indicated that it needed funds quickly, recommended that the overall 
proposal be considered in stages, with the first priority to get current 
operations in order, including Liberty TV.12
In late March 2002, State said it stood ready again to discuss a cooperative 
agreement for 9 months (April through December 2002), with an initial 
period funded at $3.6 million for 3 months to provide funding continuity 
until full accord on the elements of the agreement could be achieved.  
Concerning INCSF’s continuing proposals for starting up radio operations, 
State said that INCSF’s proposals were no longer a priority because (1) the 
Kurdish Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan opposed 
the plans and (2) both of those groups operated radio stations in Iraq, and 
the United States funded its own Radio Free Iraq.  INCSF believed that 
State’s response to its proposal called into question State’s commitment to 
a new relationship and its general commitment to the INCSF.  Of significant 
concern to INCSF were State’s demands for a short-term (3-month) funding 
period, as well as its continuing lack of support for a radio station.
Negotiating Stalemate in 
May 2002
In lieu of a long-term agreement, State notified INCSF that it planned to 
award Agreement 3, referred to as the “bridge grant,” for 2 months (April 
through May 2002).  State viewed its proposal as an austerity budget that 
would enable INCSF to get its house in order, including Liberty TV, and 
notified INCSF that what State considered as cost overruns under the prior 
grant would be handled with one or more “mop-up” amendments.13 As 
discussed below, INCSF regarded its unpaid bills as resulting from a failure 
on State’s part to meet its funding obligations.   State’s initial proposal for 
12State officials visited Liberty TV in late 2001 and identified significant management and 
personnel issues.
13In August 2002, State provided INCSF an additional $900,000 to cover expenses incurred 
under the last amendment to Agreement 2.
Page 12
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
the bridge grant caused great concern in INCSF for several reasons.  First, 
it called for “heightened federal stewardship,” including on-site State 
participation in INCSF’s budget management and approval of all costs.  
INCSF believed that such conditions were unjustified and unacceptable, 
stating that it had already taken a number of steps to improve financial 
management consistent with the OIG recommendations.  According to 
INCSF, it had hired internal accounting staff and a management consultant 
and implemented new and consolidated accounting systems.  It also said 
that new procedures for documenting cash transactions were being 
installed.  According to OIG officials, in a follow-up audit in mid-2002, OIG 
found that INCSF had taken several steps to implement recommendations 
for improved financial management and controls but had not fully 
implemented them.  According to OIG officials, limited funding by State 
contributed to INCSF’s difficulties in improving its financial systems.  
INCSF said that such funding made it difficult for INCSF to pay for 
implementation of a new accounting system and contributed to delays in 
making reforms of the foundation’s accounting systems.  
Discussions between the two parties concerning the bridge grant further 
illuminated the financial issues faced in the program.   Specifically, at the 
end of April 2002, INCSF complained to State that it had been operating for 
a month without a funding agreement and had incurred a $2 million 
shortfall.   According to INCSF, that shortfall occurred because State had 
erroneously estimated INCSF’s monthly core operating costs at $850,000 to 
$900,000 during implementation of Agreement 2, whereas INCSF believed it 
was operating under a previously approved budget with estimated costs of 
$1.24 million.  Implications for Liberty TV were particularly serious.  
Because of its financial shortcomings, INCSF had received notice that its 
service provider would terminate service for Liberty TV on April 30 
because INCSF had not paid its bills.14 On May 1, 2002, Liberty TV stopped 
its broadcasting operations.   
State subsequently modified its proposal and signed the bridge grant 
agreement on May 17, awarding $2.4 million for the period April to May 
2002 but deleting requirements for its on-site participation in budget 
14According to INCSF documents, Liberty TV managed to stay on the air until May 2002 by 
delaying payment to suppliers and withholding employees’ salaries.  However, INCSF said it 
could not pay many of its bills including satellite TV services, satellite transmission, and 
news services. 
Page 13
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
management and approval of costs.  Although the grant budget included 
funding for Liberty TV, broadcasting did not resume.
No Agreement from June to 
November 2002 
INCSF operated without an agreement from June until November 2002, 
largely due to an impasse between the two parties over the information 
collection program.  At a meeting of top INCSF and State officials in late 
May 2002, State officials said that the department would no longer fund the 
information collection program.  However, State offered INCSF a new 7-
month cooperative agreement totaling $8 million for the period June 10 
through the end of 2002 that included about $4.2 million for Liberty TV and 
represented a substantial increase over the $400,000 per month funding 
levels previously supported.15 According to an INCSF representative, 
INCSF reacted negatively to the proposal for three reasons.  First, INCSF 
negotiators received the proposal in the early morning of May 29, 2002, the 
day set for U.S./INCSF negotiations and 2 days before the bridge agreement 
was due to expire.  Second, the proposal left INCSF with no funding for 
operations for the 10 days between the end of the bridge grant on May 31, 
2002, and the effective date of the proposed new agreement on June 10, 
2002.  Third, and most important, INCSF was not willing to accept an 
agreement without funding for the information collection program. 
INCSF documents indicated that INCSF was in serious financial difficulty 
by October 2002, with staff being evicted and landlords threatening legal 
action.16 Several freelance employees of Liberty TV were released, but 
Liberty TV core staff were retained in the belief that State remained 
committed to Liberty TV broadcasting.  In an attempt to successfully 
conclude a new agreement, INCSF sent a draft budget proposal to State 
that would cover costs from June through December 2002 and envisioned 
renewed Liberty TV broadcasting as soon as November 2002.   State noted, 
however, that INCSF’s proposed budget differed in significant ways from 
State’s proposals and that modifications were needed for it to serve as a 
basis for a new agreement.  State and INCSF were able to successfully 
conclude a new agreement in November 2002, in part because the 
Department of Defense agreed to take over funding of the information 
15State’s proposal was in response to INCSF’s earlier proposal of April 22, 2002.
16Although State provided about $900,000 remaining on Agreement 2, State said that INCSF 
could not use the funds for expenses incurred after March 31—the closing date for that 
agreement. 
Page 14
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
collection program.  The new agreement included about $2 million in 
funding for Liberty TV costs incurred from June through the end of January 
2003.  However, Liberty TV did not become operational, primarily due to 
disagreements between State and INCSF over the amount of the funding 
provided and the time period of State’s commitment.  Specifically:
•
INCSF expressed concern that the new agreement did not include an 
additional $1 million it requested for long-term investment costs for 
television operations.17 State attributed this decision to its unwillingness 
to fund long-term capital costs and the uncertainty of congressional 
approval of additional funding for INCSF beyond January 2003.  State 
indicated that one possible option for INCSF might include reducing 
costs of other budgeted items to cover television costs for one 
additional month but noted that option did not provide the type of 
commitment that INCSF was seeking.
•
According to INCSF documents and an INCSF representative, the 
continued negotiations and lack of agreement over costs and 
commitment time periods for funding Liberty TV delayed resumption of 
broadcasting.  INCSF told State in November 2002 that it was not 
prepared to begin Liberty TV broadcasts only to go off the air in 3 
months.  According to an INCSF representative, Liberty TV technically 
could have renewed limited broadcasting at this time because INCSF 
had retained many of the professional television staff on its payroll.  
However, INCSF’s representative said it was not willing to run an 
operation that, if taken off the air once again due to a shortage of 
funding, would further damage INCSF’s credibility.   
Agreement Extension Did 
Not Result in Broadcasts 
Before and During War 
INCSF continued planning for options to restart Liberty TV.  INCSF 
proposed that Liberty TV rent fully operational facilities on a short-term 
basis rather than invest in its own facilities.  Quotes for rental facilities 
were obtained, and one organization was tentatively selected.  In February 
2003, State extended the agreement to July 2003, and $7 million was also 
added to INCSF’s funding, including about $2.67 million for television 
operations.  INCSF notified State that it had signed two letters of intent 
with contractors that it hoped would get Liberty TV on the air: one for 
television and newspaper premises and another for television satellite 
17These cost proposals included purchase of a broadcasting studio.
Page 15
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
capability.   An INCSF official believed that Liberty TV could be operational 
2 to 3 days after signing the satellite contract.  According to an INCSF 
representative, these contracts were never signed because the drawdown 
of funds on the new February amendment was not received until March 12, 
just a few days before the war began.
INCSF at this point developed yet another strategy: to open offices and 
install a television and radio station in northern Iraq for a 4-month period 
commencing upon the issuance of an Iraqi Sanctions Regulations License.18 
According to an INCSF representative, this plan also fell through as the war 
began, and INCSF decided to move its operations to Baghdad.  In early 
April 2003, State began working with INCSF to support its transition to 
Iraq, including the redirection of funding already committed to INCSF 
programs.  According to State, those programs should include radio and 
television broadcasting at a time when it was critically important that Iraqis 
opposed to Saddam’s regime take control of the airwaves.  State funding of 
INCSF continued through September 2003 and funds were available for 
television operations.19 According to an INCSF representative, INCSF 
decided in May 2003 that it did not have a dependable offer from the 
Department of State to resume Liberty TV broadcasts.  Echoing a similar 
decision in November 2002, INCSF wanted to avoid a second shutdown of 
Liberty TV due to a gap in State funding.  INCSF instead decided to 
concentrate its energies on establishing offices and hiring support 
personnel in Baghdad.  
Agency Comments and 
Our Evaluation
The Department of State and INCSF provided written comments on a draft 
of this report (see apps. I and II).  State said that our draft report provided a 
generally accurate account of the complex and difficult relationship that 
existed between the Department of State and INCSF.  State said its actions 
with respect to INCSF were responsible and fully in accordance with U.S. 
law and administration policy.  State also said it believed our observation 
that State and INCSF, through their inability to work together to restart 
18According to an INCSF document, Treasury had issued several prior licenses to the 
foundation, including authorizations to transfer money to Iran and to gather informational 
materials in Iraq.
19Of the $13.865 million provided under Agreement 4, about $4.67 million was for television 
costs for June 2002 through September 2003.  According to INCSF, part of the money was 
used to pay salaries of television staff retained and other nonbroadcast costs, and the 
remainder was used to help set up INC operations in Baghdad.
Page 16
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
Liberty TV, missed a chance to reach the Iraqi people at critical times prior 
to and during the war in Iraq lay outside the scope of our review.  We 
disagree and believe that it is important to lay out the potential 
consequences of not successfully restarting Liberty TV, particularly in view 
of the significance that both State and INCSF attributed to television 
broadcasting into Iraq.  State also provided some technical comments and 
suggested wording changes, which we have incorporated into the report as 
appropriate.  
INCSF agreed that due to the inability of State and INCSF to work together 
to restart Liberty TV, important opportunities to broadcast to the Iraqi 
people were lost.  INCSF also provided technical comments on some of the 
points raised in our draft report concerning financial management, 
negotiation with State, and Liberty TV funding.  We incorporated those 
comments into our report as appropriate.  
Scope and 
Methodology
To document the history of State’s funding for INCSF programs and the 
issues affecting its funding decisions, we reviewed State’s cooperative 
agreement files.  We also reviewed documentation gathered by the OIG as 
part of its audits.  We also obtained files and other documentation from 
INCSF’s consultant.  The documentation we reviewed included proposed 
and finalized cooperative agreements and amendments, letters of 
correspondence between State and INCSF, and e-mail traffic.  We met with 
officials of State’s Bureau of Near Eastern Affairs and Bureau of 
Administration and also officials in State’s OIG who were responsible for 
audits of INCSF.  In addition, we met with the consultant hired by INCSF to 
help improve the foundation’s accounting and financial management 
systems, and we obtained information from INCSF’s former controller and 
its manager of Liberty TV operations.  The funding and related program 
data in this report were contained in State’s cooperative agreement files, 
OIG audit files, and documentation provided by INCSF’s consultant and its 
former controller and Liberty TV manager.  Based on our examination of 
those data and discussions with State and INCSF’s consultant, we 
concluded that the documents we were able to obtain were sufficiently 
reliable for purposes of this engagement.   
We conducted our review from September 2003 to April 2004 in accordance 
with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Page 17
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
As agreed with your offices, unless you publicly announce the contents of 
this report earlier, we plan no further distribution of it until 30 days from 
the date of this letter.  At that time, we will send copies to the Secretary of 
State and interested congressional committees.  We will also make copies 
available to others upon request.  In addition, the report will be available at 
no charge on GAO’s Web site at http://www.gao.gov.
If you or your staff have any questions about this report, please contact me 
at (202) 512-4128.  Janey Cohen, Richard Boudreau, John Brummet, and 
Lynn Moore made key contributions to this report.  
Jess T. Ford
Director, International Affairs and Trade
 
 
Page 18
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
Appendix I
 
 
Appendixes
Comments from the Department of State
Appendix I
Appendix I
Comments from the Department of State
Page 19
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
Appendix I
Comments from the Department of State
Page 20
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 21
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
Appendix II
 
 
Comments from the Iraqi National Congress 
Support Foundation
Appendix I
Appendix II
Comments from the Iraqi National Congress 
Support Foundation
Page 22
GAO-04-559 State’s Funding of INCSF
 
 
 
 
(320223)
GAO’s Mission
The General Accounting Office, the audit, evaluation and investigative arm of 
Congress, exists to support Congress in meeting its constitutional responsibilities 
and to help improve the performance and accountability of the federal government 
for the American people. GAO examines the use of public funds; evaluates federal 
programs and policies; and provides analyses, recommendations, and other 
assistance to help Congress make informed oversight, policy, and funding 
decisions. GAO’s commitment to good government is reflected in its core values of 
accountability, integrity, and reliability.
Obtaining Copies of 
GAO Reports and 
Testimony
The fastest and easiest way to obtain copies of GAO documents at no cost is 
through the Internet. GAO’s Web site (www.gao.gov) contains abstracts and full-
text files of current reports and testimony and an expanding archive of older 
products. The Web site features a search engine to help you locate documents 
using key words and phrases. You can print these documents in their entirety, 
including charts and other graphics.
Each day, GAO issues a list of newly released reports, testimony, and 
correspondence. GAO posts this list, known as “Today’s Reports,” on its Web site 
daily. The list contains links to the full-text document files. To have GAO e-mail this 
list to you every afternoon, go to www.gao.gov and select “Subscribe to  
e-mail alerts” under the “Order GAO Products” heading.
Order by Mail or Phone
The first copy of each printed report is free. Additional copies are $2 each. A check 
or money order should be made out to the Superintendent of Documents. GAO 
also accepts VISA and Mastercard. Orders for 100 or more copies mailed to a single 
address are discounted 25 percent. Orders should be sent to:
U.S. General Accounting Office 
441 G Street NW, Room LM 
Washington, D.C. 20548
To order by Phone: 
Voice: (202) 512-6000  
TDD: (202) 512-2537  
Fax: 
(202) 512-6061
To Report Fraud, 
Waste, and Abuse in 
Federal Programs
Contact:
Web site: www.gao.gov/fraudnet/fraudnet.htm 
E-mail: fraudnet@gao.gov 
Automated answering system: (800) 424-5454 or (202) 512-7470
Public Affairs
Jeff Nelligan, Managing Director, NelliganJ@gao.gov (202) 512-4800 
U.S. General Accounting Office, 441 G Street NW, Room 7149  
Washington, D.C. 20548
 
 
 
United States 
General Accounting Office 
Washington, D.C. 20548-0001
Official Business 
Penalty for Private Use $300
Address Service Requested
Presorted Standard
Postage & Fees Paid
GAO
Permit No. GI00
