The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme 
Third Year Review 
2006 
FINAL October, 2006 
Submitted by the Ad Hoc working Group on the review of the KPCS 
Contents 
Executive Summary and Major Findings…………………………………..……5 
Section A – Background 
Three Year Review – Mandate (questionnaire is Annex 1)………………………11 
Historical Perspective ………………………………………………………………..13 
Section B – Impact of KPCS 
The KP and its UN Mandate…………………………………………………………19 
Curbing Production and Trade in Conflict Diamonds……………………………..20 
Cases of KPCS Infringement ……………………………………………………….24 
The KP and Peace and Security………………………………………………...….25 
Section C -- Technical Provisions of the Scheme 
Technical Provisions, Problems and Operations………………………………….29 
Peer Review Monitoring Mechanism……………………………………………….40 
KPCS Statistical Underpinning……………………………………………………...48 
Internal Controls………………………………………………………………………55 
Section D – Organization and Working Methods 
Structure and Operational Methods ………………………………………………..61 
Includes: Working Methods………………………………………………….61
 Global Inclusive Membership…………………………………….66
 Compliance Issues………………………………………………..67 
Transparency …………………………………………………………………………72 
Includes web sites…………………………………………………………….72 
Role of Observers……………………………………………………………………..74 
Summary of Recommendations………………………………………………….79 
Annex 1, KPCS Questionnaire for the Review of the Scheme…………………..89 
Annex 2, List of Internal Controls…………………………………………………… 
Annex 3, List of Respondents………………………………………………………94 
2
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) is an example of 
international cooperation at its best. In the first three years of its operation it has 
proved remarkably successful, to the point that now the vast majority of 
production and international trade of rough diamonds are moved through official 
Kimberley channels. The successful implementation of the KPCS is based on a 
flexible and pragmatic approach, where ad hoc solutions are adopted because 
they worked, and Participants and Observers have volunteered the resources 
necessary. 
In accordance with the KPCS document, Participants agreed to undertake 
a review of the Scheme after three years. This first Review focuses on three 
major areas: first, the impact of the KPCS on the international trade in rough 
diamonds, and the extent to which the Scheme has been effective in preventing 
the flow of conflict diamonds into the legitimate trade; second, the technical 
provisions of the Scheme and whether they are functioning as planned or require 
improvement; third, the operations of the Scheme, their effectiveness and 
efficiency. 
As to its impact, the UNGA Resolution giving a mandate for the Kimberley 
Process has been renewed regularly, and has gained recognition from the UN 
Security Council. This widespread and continued international support confers an 
important measure of legitimacy upon the KPCS and acknowledges the efforts of 
KP Participants and Observers. 
As well, all available data suggest that the majority of the international 
trade in rough diamonds is now carried on within the KPCS. All significant 
diamond producing and trading centers (with the exception of Liberia, which 
remains under UN diamond sanctions) are implementing the KPCS. As well, the 
KP has contributed to substantial increases since 2003 in the proportion of rough 
diamonds exported through official channels in countries previously affected by 
conflict diamonds. Nevertheless, conflict diamonds are still being mined by rebel 
groups in Côte d’Ivoire and are reported to be entering the legitimate trade. 
There are also reports of illicit diamond extraction and trading by rebel factions 
and militias in the Democratic Republic of Congo. 
The technical provisions of the Scheme are working well overall, and are 
being enforced, as indicated by a number of seizures of irregular shipments and 
prosecutions for infringements of KPCS regulations. As to be expected with an 
international scheme of such complexity, technical problems continually arise; 
these are addressed by the Working Group on Diamond Experts and by many 
suggestions of Participants enumerated in this Review in the form of 
recommendations. The major problem that emerged in the Review is the 
effective implementation of internal controls, which remains an important 
3
challenge. This problem is addressed by a series of recommendations, which 
should be implemented immediately, as a major priority of the KP. 
The Scheme is operating well, and the statistics and peer review 
monitoring systems are proving to be essential tools. However they could be 
improved. Participants and Observers made many recommendations in the areas 
of statistical requirements and the peer review monitoring system that have been 
included in the Review’s recommendations. 
Major Findings of the KPCS Review 
Role of governments, industry and civil society 
The inclusive nature of the KP has been a key ingredient in the success of 
the KPCS with each type of actor bringing their respective interests, expertise, 
skills and knowledge to the table. 
Industry and NGO observers have been 
involved in the working groups and in review visits and missions from the 
beginning. The Participants of the KPCS are very varied, ranging from alluvial to 
industrial producers of diamonds, to trading and cutting/polishing countries, of 
different sizes, in different continents, and with vastly differing stakes in the 
diamond industry. Nonetheless the KPCS has maintained an inclusive approach 
in line with the General Assembly mandate granted to it, and has been stronger 
as a result. 
Working methods:  burden sharing and flexibility 
The flexible structure of the KP, including a rotating Chair, and devolution 
of considerable responsibilities to smaller working groups, has achieved 
remarkable progress in a very short time. A wide, and increasing, range of 
Participants and Observers have participated in review visits and missions, and 
diversity of leadership has been increasing. The frequent teleconferences and 
email exchanges utilized by working groups have ensured constant review and 
development in a very efficient, low-resource manner (and Participants in 
different time-zones have been very flexible to allow teleconferences to take 
place at the least inconvenient time for the majority). There has been a steady 
stream of innovations, developments and improvements initiated in working 
groups, transforming the KPCS over time. However, there are questions about 
the sustainability of this over the long-term. 
Website and Documentation 
The KP website, both Participant and public sections, could be improved 
to include more documentation as appropriate, and organized to show clearly 
what it contains. All Plenary documents should be made available in the working 
languages of the Plenary. Moreover all documents generated by the peer review 
4
system should be made accessible more systematically to all Participants and 
Observers, and to selected international organizations, notably in the UN system. 
Decision making 
The most important principle of the operation of the Kimberley Process, 
which has proved effective and which should be retained, is that decision-making 
is on the basis of consensus. There are no entrenched blocs of Participants but 
rather a continual search for mutually acceptable solutions on the basis of mutual 
respect and trust. Consensus has enhanced the confidence of Participants and 
the sense of shared ownership and legitimacy. 
Legal status 
The Kimberley Process is essentially a consulting intergovernmental 
mechanism operating with the support of industry and civil society aimed at 
excluding ‘conflict diamonds” from international trade channels. To achieve this 
goal, the KP Participants have adopted a Certification Scheme, established by a 
document which provides for the creation and development of an international 
certification scheme for rough diamonds, on the basis of national systems. The 
KPCS is not a legally binding document, as a matter of international law. 
However, the KP Participant countries considered it necessary to voluntarily fulfill 
the KPCS minimum requirements at the national level and have adopted relevant 
laws and/or executive acts to that effect. 
International community 
The KP has enjoyed a good relationship with the wider international 
community, notably the UN General Assembly1 and Security Council2, the WTO 
(which granted a waiver) and World Customs Organization (which agreed 
changes to its documents). The support of the United Nations has been 
important for the legitimacy and authority of the KP. At the same time, there is 
scope for enhanced co-operation with bodies working on issues of diamond 
sector governance from a development or conflict prevention perspective, both in 
the UN system and among the international financial institutions. This kind of 
cooperation will be carried out on the basis of approved regulations and bilateral 
arrangements with international organizations. 
Impact 
The Kimberley Process has had a very significant impact in curbing the 
illicit production of and trade in diamonds in countries affected by conflict 
1 Beginning with Resolution 55/56 January 29, 2001 
2 Security Council Resolution 1495 of January 28, 2003 endorsed the KPCS 
5
diamonds. 
The countries involved, with the exception of Cote d’Ivoire have 
recognized this in their responses to the questionnaire (DRC, Angola, Sierra 
Leone). Every year since the introduction of the KP has seen significant 
increases in the percentage of their diamond production and trade captured by 
legal channels and the KPCS. 
However, while it is extremely difficult to 
accurately determine the extent of the illicit trade it is thought to remain 
significant in these countries, as well as in other participant countries. 
Increasingly, Participants are becoming able to report cases of 
infringements of the provisions of the KPCS in their jurisdictions (many active 
cases are of course sub judice) demonstrating both increased awareness of 
KPCS requirements by law enforcement and customs officials, and increasingly 
effective deterrence. 
Technical provisions 
The technical provisions of the scheme, including the Kimberley Process 
Certificate, are widely considered by Participants to be appropriate and effective, 
without being unduly onerous. There are some difficulties in the relationship 
between KP definitions of technical terms and their usage in other contexts; not 
all Participants apply every technical provision to the full; and sometimes it takes 
time and/or imposes costs on industry to comply with requirements, but generally 
KPCS technical rules are felt to be consistent with other international and 
national rules, and to be proportionate. 
Overall, 71% of Participants responding directly to the question agreed 
without any caveats that the operation of the Kimberley Process Certification 
Scheme been simple and workable. None could identify areas where 
simplification 
was 
required, 
although 
some 
(29%) 
commented 
that 
implementation of existing rules could be improved. 
Implementation of internal controls 
Implementation of internal controls, as envisaged in Section lV of the 
KPCS is a crucial element of the mechanism of the Certification Scheme. 
Participant countries have taken steps to implement mandatory internal control 
requirements, as well as optional measures contained in Annex ll to the main 
document. Participants have agreed on the necessity to prepare a new list of 
internal controls which would expand the measures contained in Annex II. 
Peer review 
One of the most important features in the KP has been its system of peer 
review. The central component of this has been its system of review visits which, 
while remaining consensual, has enabled assessment and improvement of 
Participants’ implementation of the KPCS. However, there are issues related to 
6
weak or total non-compliance that would not have been discovered by the current 
system due to lack of time to undertake penetrating research into some of the 
persistent problems in the diamond industry. 
A number of possible 
improvements to this system have been identified by the Working Group on 
Monitoring and it is intended that these will be implemented during subsequent 
review visits. 
Statistics 
The KPCS has placed a high priority on collecting statistical reports from 
Participants and this has ensured that Participants are all aware of the 
requirement to provide bi-annual production and quarterly trade data, and the 
vast majority of Participants now submit their reports on a timely basis. However, 
some participants and observers are concerned about the accuracy of the data 
collected. With three years’ of data collected, the emphasis now should move to 
analysis of the data. The Working Group on Statistics has now analyzed data 
and will send its analyses to Participants for comments before reporting to the 
Gaborone Plenary on the results. 
Dispute resolution 
There has so far been one occasion on which the formal provisions of the 
KP for dispute resolution have been invoked. These led ultimately to the removal 
of a Participant. By general consensus, this instance is perceived to have 
strengthened the KPCS by showing it has teeth. To date, all other disputes have 
been handled informally by the Chair or by KP working groups within the terms of 
their mandate. In order to make dispute resolution more transparent, however, it 
may be necessary to develop and adopt criteria for the removal of the countries 
from the list of KPCS Participants. 
Participation 
There is widespread agreement that the scheme has remained open on a 
global, non-discriminatory basis to all Applicants willing and able to fulfill its 
requirements, and respondents report satisfaction with the work of the 
Participation Committee in this regard. There is still a lack of agreement on non­
compliance and the procedures for removing participants that are deemed to be 
in significant non-compliance with the KPCS. 
Industry self-regulation 
At least one Participant has a system of industry self-regulation allowing 
members of industry bodies ‘fast track’ access to KP certificates in exchange for 
them signing up to a number of detailed requirements to ensure that KP 
requirements are observed. 
Importantly, this self-regulation is subject to 
supervision and audits. Other industry systems of self-regulation, although not 
7
universal, are in place and require trade associations to institute requirements for 
KP and System of Warranties compliance among their membership, in cases of 
known non-compliance.  These requirements include providing warranties from 
seller to buyer of KP compliance for polishing diamonds as well as jewelry 
containing diamonds. Membership in these trade associations is often vital to an 
individual or company’s successful business, thus risk of termination of 
membership is an effective enforcement method. 
Technical assistance 
Although the KP was slow to address the issue of technical assistance, it 
has now responded to the needs being identified by review visits and raised by 
Participants, by setting up an informal technical assistance co-ordination 
mechanism at the Moscow Plenary currently co-ordinated by the US.  This has 
begun by drawing together a compilation of existing technical assistance 
programs for Participants and, in some cases, actual or potential applicant 
countries, drawing inter alia on review visit findings.  This work is still in its 
infancy. Any Participants requiring technical assistance are invited to make their 
needs known to the co-ordinator of technical assistance.  Furthermore, Canada, 
as Chair of the Working Group on Statistics, is also making available technical 
assistance, including workshops, specifically on statistical requirements. 
General Level of Satisfaction 
Most Participants, whether producing and trading, or trading only 
Participants, concluded in their responses that the KPCS met their requirements 
well. 
8
SECTION A
 BACKGROUND 
The Three-Year Review of the 
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme 
Background 
The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) was launched in a 
Ministerial Meeting in Interlaken, Switzerland, in November 2002.  At the launch, 
Participants agreed to begin a simultaneous implementation of the certification 
scheme in January 2003. 
In accordance with the KPCS Document, Participants agreed to undertake 
a periodic review of the scheme, with the first such review to take place within 
three years. In recognition of the difficulties experienced by some countries 
during the early months of 2003 to meet the minimum requirements for 
implementation, and the consequent brief delay in the full implementation of the 
Scheme, the Sun City Plenary (October 2003) decided that the first review of the 
certification scheme should take place not later than July 31, 2006. 
Context 
The review of the KPCS is taking take place against the backdrop of a 
changing security environment in conflict diamonds-affected countries. A number 
of conflicts have come to an end. The peace agreements in Angola, the DRC and 
Sierra Leone and increased government control over the production and trade in 
rough diamonds mean the issue is no longer as acute as it was when diamonds 
were actively fuelling wars in all three countries. At the same time, the continuing 
conflict in Cote d’Ivoire, and the fragility of peace agreements in other diamond-
producing countries that have recently emerged from conflict, means the issues 
that the KPCS was conceived to address remain highly topical from a conflict-
prevention perspective. 
Mandate 
The mandate for the review is outlined in Section VI, Paragraph 20 of the 
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) Document, which provides for a 
review of the scheme after three years. “Participants intend that the Certification 
Scheme should be subject to periodic review, to allow Participants to conduct a 
thorough analysis of all elements contained in the scheme.  The review should 
also include consideration of the continuing requirement for such a scheme, in 
view of the perception of the Participants, and of international organizations, in 
particular the United Nations, of the continued threat posed at that time by 
conflict diamonds…” 
9
Make up of Review Working Group 
At the Gatineau Plenary in 2004, Canada was selected to chair an ad hoc 
Working Group, to include also the Kimberley Process Chair and Vice-Chair, as 
well as the Chairs of the Kimberley Process Working Groups and Committees, 
and a representative group of Participants with equitable geographic balance as 
well as industry and civil society representation. 
Following consultations, the 
remaining composition of the Working Group consists of the following members: 
Australia, China, European Community, India, Israel, Russian Federation, Sierra 
Leone, South Africa, United States, World Diamond Council and Partnership 
Africa Canada/Global Witness. 
Terms of Reference 
The Moscow Plenary of 2005 gave direction to the ad hoc Working Group 
on the review of the KPCS. “In advancing its mandate, the ad hoc Working 
Group shall review the effectiveness of the different elements contained in the 
Scheme (including both the KPCS document and Administrative Decisions 
subsequently adopted by Plenary), the impact of the KPCS and the effectiveness 
of 
its 
organization 
and 
working 
methods. 
The 
review 
shall 
include 
recommendations as well as implications of the suggested course of action in 
comparison to benefits.” 
The Plenary then outlined in detail the criteria for the review, broken down 
under the following major headings: Impact, Technical Provisions of the Scheme, 
Organization and Working Methods. These detailed criteria formed the basis for 
the questionnaire which was distributed to all Participants, Observers, and 
interested international organizations (see attached 2006 Review at Annex1). 
Sources of information 
The Chair of the ad hoc Working Group was instructed separately to seek 
input from all Participants, Observers, and interested International Organizations, 
from the Kimberley Process Working Groups and Committees. As well it was to 
draw on other Kimberley Process documents, submissions related to the 
Kimberley Process and the diamond industry from other interested parties, as 
well as interviews with representatives of NGOs, governments and industry. 
Timeline 
The ad hoc Working Group was instructed to prepare a report and 
recommendations on the review of the KPCS, in consultation with Kimberley 
Process Participants and Observers. These will be presented to the Plenary in 
2006, following the detailed work-plan set out by the Moscow Plenary. 
10 
The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme 
An Historical Perspective 
The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) is an international 
certification scheme aimed at preventing conflict diamonds from entering the 
legitimate trade and from funding conflicts. Its roots are found in the Kimberley 
Process negotiations between governments, civil society and the diamond 
industry, which began in 2000 in Kimberley, South Africa. These negotiations 
gave rise to the KPCS, which was launched in Interlaken in 2002. 
Background 
During the 1990s and into the current decade, the illicit trade in rough 
diamonds fuelled armed civil wars in Angola, the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo (DRC) and Sierra Leone. The diamonds that financed these wars of 
insurgency became known as “conflict diamonds”. 
The trade in conflict diamonds first came to international attention in the 
case of Angola with Jonas Savimbi’s UNITA. Other prominent examples were the 
Revolutionary United Front rebels in Sierra Leone, with the complicity of Liberia’s 
warlord president, Charles Taylor; and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, 
and Liberia. Countless thousands died in wars funded by this trade and many 
more died as a result of indirect causes, creating a humanitarian disaster. 
In mid-1998, the UN Security Council in its resolution 1173 (1998) 
imposed targeted sanctions against UNITA, requiring all UN member states to 
prohibit the import of Angolan diamonds unless they bore a certificate of origin 
issued by the government. This model was replicated in the case of Sierra Leone 
in 2000 (SCR 1306) which imposed sanctions on the import and export of Sierra 
Leonean rough diamonds unless accompanied by a Sierra Leone certificate of 
origin. Under the Certificate of Origin regime only diamonds that were legally 
mined were allowed to be exported. Legally mined meant that they came only 
from areas under the GoSL control, and were a product of a chain of legally 
authorized transactions. Sanctions were subsequently imposed on Liberia on 7 
March 2001 (SCR 1343) on the import/export of rough diamonds. 
The Security Council also appointed Panels of Experts to monitor, inter 
alia, these embargoes. The Panel of Experts on Sierra Leone submitted a report 
to the UNSC in January 2001 making recommendations for improvements to the 
system. In its report, the Panel also expressed admiration for the new regulatory 
system and recommended that it form the basis for a global certification system 
on an “imperative basis”. Sanctions on Angolan diamonds were lifted in 
December 2002 and on Sierra Leone in July 2003.  Those against Liberia remain 
in place at the time of writing (October 2006). 
11 
A British NGO, Global Witness, in their 1998 report “A Rough Trade”, 
exposed the role of diamonds in funding Angola’s civil war, popularizing the term 
“conflict diamonds” in describing diamonds from Angola. In January 2000 the 
Canadian NGO, Partnership Africa Canada, published “The Heart of the Matter” 
a report on the role diamonds were playing in fueling Sierra Leone’s civil war. 
Later that same year the Security Council issued its own experts’ report (the so-
called ‘Fowler Report’3) on Angola, which was also very influential in raising 
awareness of the issue and prompting international response to the role played 
by diamonds in funding conflict. 
Other important actors included the Government of South Africa, which 
had an important stake in the diamond industry, and became increasingly 
concerned that the legitimate diamond industry would be tarnished by the use of 
conflict diamonds and would seriously suffer as a consequence of a consumer 
campaign led by NGOs. Two other major players in the diamond world shared 
these concerns, the De Beers conglomerate, which at that time controlled more 
than 80% of all rough diamond production, and the Belgian Government 
concerned for its diamond industry: since the early 1800s, most of the world’s 
rough diamonds have passed through Antwerp, which was also a centre for the 
trade of polished diamonds. 
In May, 2000, South Africa’s Minister of Minerals and Energy, Phumzile 
Mlambo-Ngcuka, convened a meeting on conflict diamonds in Kimberley, South 
Africa’s historic centre of diamond production. Invited were producer and trading 
countries, concerned NGOs and representatives of the diamond industry. The 
results of the meeting came to be known as the Kimberley Process. 
In July 2000, at the joint meeting of the World Federation of Diamond 
Bourses and the International Diamond Manufacturing Association in Antwerp, 
the World Diamond Council was formed to address the prevention of conflict 
diamond trade and to provide expert assistance to the Kimberley Process in 
Formulating effective systems to end the trade. 
The UN Security Council in its resolution 1295 (2000)4 in April 2002, had 
welcomed the South African proposal to convene this expert meeting to devise a 
system of controls to facilitate the implementation of the Angola diamond 
sanctions. It also called upon States and the diamond industry to develop and 
implement more effective arrangements. 
UN document S/2000/2003 (10 March 2000) available at http://documents –dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N00/335/64/img/N0033564.pdf?OpenElement 
4 Available at http://daccessdds.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N00/396/56/PDF/N009656.pdf?Open 
Element 
12 
3
The Process 
The Kimberley meeting drew on the certification system the UN required 
of Angola. It had been undercut by widespread smuggling of Angola diamonds to 
neighbouring countries, from where they were exported. European customs data 
recorded several non-producing countries such as Zambia, Rwanda and Gambia 
as countries of origin. And in the 1990s, Liberia was recorded as country of origin 
for diamonds worth billions of dollars! Certificates issued by a single country had 
proved ineffectual, but as part of a system of international certification, it was 
thought that they might prove effective, particularly if the system were based on 
good internal controls of countries involved in diamond production, trading and 
polishing. 
The Kimberley meeting provided the broad outlines of such a system. 
Plans were made for a technical meeting to flesh out the details of the system, 
which Participants hoped would be workable within months. Ultimately, the 
Kimberley Process took 30 months to establish, longer than originally estimated, 
but nonetheless lightning speed when compared with similar negotiations in the 
international fora. 
The NGO community responded to the Kimberley initiative by creating a 
coalition of more than 200 partners, including internationally known groups like 
Action Aid, Amnesty International, Oxfam, and World Vision, to generate media 
attention and pressure. A flood of articles and television news programs on 
conflict or blood diamonds caused concern in the diamond industry, although the 
NGOs had not mounted a specific campaign aimed at consumers. 
For its part, in July of 2000, the diamond industry created an organization 
called the World Diamond Council. The WDC was a coalition of diamond mining 
firms, trading companies and jewelry industry representatives created to engage 
on the issue of conflict diamonds and to represent industry interests at Kimberley 
Process meetings. 
The Kimberley Process held a dozen meetings in various African and 
European capitals and in Ottawa to work out details of the Process. Despite 
initial divergences, a final agreement was reached at Interlaken in November 
2002. 
13 
International Support 
Several other international meetings were held outside the Kimberley 
Process to support the Process and help participants to become familiar with the 
issues and possible solutions. The World Diamond Council held annual meetings 
in London and Milan in 2001 and 2002 respectively. The Clinton White House 
organized a meeting in January 2001 and the World Peace Foundation 
organized one at Harvard in October 2001. Two G8 meetings, in Okinawa in July 
2000 and at Kananaskis in Canada in July 2002, mentioned the Kimberley 
Process in their official documentation. 
A key meeting was that of the UN General Assembly which adopted 
resolution 55/56 of December 2000 endorsing the Kimberley Process and urging 
“the implementation of the certification scheme as soon as possible, recognizing 
the urgency of the situation from a humanitarian and security standpoint.” 
The Security Council, too, endorsed the KPCS in its resolution 1459 
(2003)5 which strongly supported the KPCS. 
Some Participants believed that the Kimberley Process should seek a 
waiver from the WTO, as it could be considered incompatible with the provisions 
of the GATT. Before the agreement was completed, Canada, joined by Australia, 
Brazil, Israel, Japan, Korea, the Philippines, Sierra Leone, Thailand, the United 
Arab Emirates and the United States sought a waiver from the WTO. In February 
2003 the WTO Council for Trade in Goods recommended that the General 
Council grant members a waiver for trade measures taken under the KPCS 
through to December 2006. The decision recognized the extraordinary 
humanitarian nature of this issue and the devastating impact of conflicts fuelled 
by trade in conflict diamonds on the peace, safety and security of people in 
affected countries and the systematic and gross human rights violations that 
have been perpetrated in such conflicts. 
The Agreement 
The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme was subsequently launched 
at a Ministerial meeting in Interlaken, Switzerland in November 2002. At the 
launch Participants agreed to begin a simultaneous implementation of the 
certification scheme in January 2003. It requires participating governments to 
implement import/export control regimes and to adopt control systems governing 
their private sectors, in order to create a documentary record of rough diamonds 
from mine to polished form. Rough diamonds are required to be shipped in 
sealed containers and must be exported with a Kimberley Process Certificate 
http//daccessdds.un.org/UN/DOC/GEN/N03/227/58/PDF/N0322758.pdf?OpenElement 
14 
5 
which certifies that these diamonds are conflict free. Participants are required to 
prohibit the entry of rough diamonds in unsealed containers or without proper 
certification. Participating countries are required to pass legislation to implement 
these procedures. To date 70 countries (45 plus the European Community, 
representing its 25 member states) have done so, including all major diamond 
producing, trading and cutting/polishing centers, and all are Participants in the 
Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. 
15 
SECTION B 
IMPACT OF THE KPCS 
The KP and its UN Mandate to Combat
 the Threat of Conflict Diamonds 
The Kimberley Process and the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme 
(KPCS) have been very successful and have exceeded the initial expectations of 
KP Participants and Observers. The positive impact and rapid evolution of the KP 
and the KPCS, as well as the efforts invested by KP Participants and Observers, 
are internationally acknowledged. 
Governments, the diamond industry, and civil society have worked 
remarkably well together within the KP, participating fully in the work of the 
KPCS, including at Plenary meetings and in working groups. As a result, there is 
undisputed evidence of the impact of the KP in reducing the possibility of conflict 
diamonds entering legitimate trade. Furthermore, the KPCS has enabled 
Participant states to reduce illicit diamond mining and trading. 
The initial mandate for the Kimberley Process was established by United 
Nations General Assembly (UNGA) Resolution 55/56 in December 2000. The 
UNGA Resolution called for several structural measures to regulate the trade of 
rough diamonds. It also spelled out the raison d’être of the KP, that is, to prevent 
the trade in conflict diamonds. 
The Kimberley Process Certification Scheme (KPCS) defines conflict 
diamonds as “rough diamonds used by rebel movements or their allies to finance 
conflict aimed at undermining legitimate governments.” 6 
The UNGA Resolution 55/56 (December 2000) mandate for the Kimberley 
Process has been renewed on a regular basis by the UN through the following 
UNGA Resolutions: 56/263 (March 2002); 57/302 (April 2003); 58/290(April 
2004); 59/144 (December 2004); and 60/182 (December 2005). The KP has 
gained important recognition from the UN Security Council (UNSC) through the 
UNSC Resolution 1459 (January 2003). More recently the role of the KPCS has 
been acknowledged in UNSC Resolution 1521 (December 2003 on Liberia) and 
1643 (December 2005 on Côte d’Ivoire). 
The combination of the UNSC Resolutions and the series of UNGA 
Resolutions represent an important accomplishment because it reflects 
widespread and continued international support for the KP. These Resolutions 
also confer an important measure of legitimacy upon the KPCS in their 
acknowledgement of the efforts of KP Participants and Observers. 
6 KPCS Section I. 
16 
Since the adoption of UNGA 55/56 (December 2000), the civil wars in 
Sierra Leone, and Angola have ended and so too has the trade in conflict 
diamonds from these countries. Nonetheless, there is a continuing need for the 
KPCS. Implementation of KPCS provisions enables Participants to implement 
their obligations under Security Council resolutions imposing embargoes on 
rough diamonds (currently Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire). 
Curbing Production and Trade in Conflict Diamonds 
It is difficult to quantify the exact impact of the KPCS in curbing the illicit 
production and trade of diamonds in countries affected by conflict diamonds, as 
well as on the international diamond trade. Given the difficulties posed by any 
attempts to regulate an international trade of such complexity, added to the 
problems posed by artisanal mining, porous borders, lack of infrastructure and 
the nature of the illicit trade itself, as it exists today the KP cannot completely 
control the entire trade. That being said, there is near unanimous agreement on 
the effectiveness of the KP in responding to its UN mandate. 
However, Côte d’Ivoire disagreed, stating that the KP “has not effectively 
responded to the mandate given by the relevant UN General Assembly 
Resolution to combat the threat of conflict diamonds, because, despite the 
implementation of the Kimberley Process, Ivorian diamonds have been sold to 
the international market without any sanctions for those involved in that trade.”7 
The KP identified the problem in respect of Cote d’Ivoire in 2004 and started 
monitoring the illicit production of diamonds in the north of the country in January 
2005. It provided an initial assessment of the scale and nature of the problem to 
the UN Security Council in June 2005, following a mission by a special envoy of 
the KP Chair in April of that year. Separate investigations carried out by Global 
Witness and the UN Panel of Experts on Cote d’Ivoire subsequently confirmed 
the production and trade of conflict diamonds from Cote d’Ivoire. The KP 
subsequently adopted a nine-point resolution in November 2005, with detailed 
provisions. The Chair reported to the KP intersessional in June 2006 on progress 
implementing these requirements. However, as stated by Cote d’Ivoire, these 
actions have not stopped Ivorian diamonds from reaching the international 
market. 
Estimates have varied over the past decade with respect to what portion 
of global production of rough diamonds is conflict diamonds. At the height of the 
civil wars in Sierra Leone, Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and 
Liberia8, the percentage of conflict diamonds is thought to have been in the range 
of 4 to 15 per cent between the mid-1990s and beginning of the 2000s.9 
7 Source: Côte d’Ivoire: Submission for the 2006 Review of the KPCS (March 2006). 
Liberian conflict diamonds continued to seep into the international market, at a rate of between 
100,000 and 400,000 carats per year. The expert mission in March 2005 found that, while 
potential production could be in the range of 100,000 to 400,000 carats per year, only a small 
17 
8
As the wars in these countries came to a close in the early part of the 
present decade, the volume of conflict diamonds began to decrease. Since then, 
the production of conflict diamonds has consistently fallen. In 2004, KP 
Participants reported total production (captured by the KPCS) of 160 million 
carats valued at US$ 10.3 billion. If the two estimates for current production from 
Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia are aggregated, this would mean that diamonds subject 
to UN embargoes (including, in the case of Côte d’Ivoire, conflict diamonds) 
currently amount to somewhere in the region of 0.2% of world production by 
volume. This figure does not take into account the ongoing fighting centred on 
diamond mines in the DRC. The figure should obviously be treated with great 
caution, and it does not take into account ‘illicit’ trade in a wider sense 
The Case of Côte d’Ivoire 
Rebels control two of Côte d’Ivoire’s main diamond mining areas, Bobi-
Séguéla and Tortiya, which are estimated to produce some 200,000 carats per 
10
year.
From the beginning of the KP, Côte d’Ivoire has suspended the issuance 
of Kimberley Certificates and prohibited the export of rough diamonds from its 
territory through the issuance of Ministerial decree no. 0070/mme/dm of 
November 19 2002, following the hostilities of September 18, 2002. Thus, from 
the inception of the KP, Participants have been prohibited from importing Ivorian 
diamonds. 
The Kimberley Process has taken a number of steps to objectively 
analyzing the situation in the Côte d’Ivoire.  In April 2005, the past Chair of the 
KP went to Côte d’Ivoire as special envoy of the then Chair, Russia.  This 
resulted in a report from the Chair to the Security Council, alerting the 
international community to the issue. Subsequently the UN Security Council 
nominated a diamond expert to the Panel of Experts on Cote d’Ivoire. 
Investigations conducted by Global Witness and the UN Panel of Experts 
on Côte d’Ivoire suggested that there are a number of exit routes for Ivorian 
proportion of mining sites were being worked. Specifically, the mission report notes that “during 
2004, UN sanctions and Liberian Government actions appear to have reduced visible artisanal 
mining activity that had held the potential to circumvent sanctions from 16 to 3 mining operations”. 
The UN Panel of Experts on Liberia, in its report of November 2005, estimated current Liberian 
production to be in the region of about US$ 1.2 m per month. On the assumption that Liberian 
production can be valued at somewhere around US$ 100/ct, this would be equivalent to ongoing 
annual production of somewhere in the region of 140,000 cts. Source: Kimberley Process 
Working Group on Monitoring: Submission for the 2006 Review of the KPCS (February 2006).
9 These estimates are derived from the following sources: 2002 paper by Ian Smillie, “The Kimberley 
Process, the Case for Proper Monitoring, (www.pacweb.org) ; and untitled paper by A .M.Coxon, De Beers, 
March 2000; and UN Security Council report S/2001/363, 18 April, 2001, para 54.
10 Source: Kimberley Process Working Group on Monitoring: Submission for the 2006 Review of 
the KPCS (February 2006). 
18 
diamonds, in both the north and south of the country, and smuggling routes 
operating through countries outside the Kimberley Process.  Other routes may 
involve 
Ivorian 
production 
being 
laundered 
through 
Kimberley 
Process 
participants in breach of KP rules. 
The Côte d’Ivoire situation was discussed at length during the November 
2005 Moscow Plenary which noted “that the ongoing production of rough 
diamonds in Northern Côte d’Ivoire and the possible introduction of such illicit 
diamonds into the legitimate diamond trade threaten the integrity and credibility 
of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme.” 
As part of a 9-point KP Resolution adopted by the Plenary, Participants 
and Observers were urged to “undertake all possible efforts … to ensure that 
illicit Côte d’Ivoire diamonds cannot be introduced into the legitimate trade”.11 To 
this end, the resolution called for regional cooperation in countering this threat 
and for close cooperation with UN bodies to stop the spread of conflict diamonds. 
This resolution included the suggestion that the KP should offer to cooperate with 
the United Nations in carrying out a detailed assessment of the volume of rough 
diamond production in Côte d’Ivoire and of rough diamonds exported from Côte 
d'Ivoire. Shortly thereafter (in December 2005), the UN imposed sanctions on all 
Ivorian diamond exports, thus extending the KP’s existing prohibition on imports 
from Cote d’Ivoire to all UN member states. 
The KP Chair gave an interim report on implementation of the resolution in 
the June 2006 Gaborone intersessional. As mandated by paragraphs 1 and 4 of 
the Moscow resolution, and paragraph 12 of UNSCR 1643 (2005), KP experts 
participated in a joint field trip to Côte d’Ivoire with the UN Panel of Experts on 
Côte d’Ivoire in April 2006 to assess the extent of conflict diamond production in 
the northern part of the country under rebel Forces Nouvelles control. All KP 
Participants in the region (Ghana, Guinea, Sierra Leone, Togo) have agreed to 
record the quality characteristics of their exports on the back of their export 
KPCS, an optional measure, which will allow profiling (ie identifying the 
characteristics of diamonds produced), with a view to identifying occasions where 
Côte d’Ivoire diamonds could be brought into the legitimate diamond trade. The 
resolution also requires Participants to report to the Chair any incoming 
shipments of rough diamonds which they suspect of containing diamonds of Cote 
d’Ivoire origin, and to take appropriate action taken against any of their nationals 
or companies found to be involved in the production of diamonds in Cote d’Ivoire 
or in the trade in such diamonds, where possible, and to inform the Chair of the 
KP of the action taken. The resolution also specified that the Chair should make 
this information available to all Participants and Observers. Accordingly, the 
Chair has conducted a survey (which is ongoing) of Participants through e-mail, 
and to date, one Participant has reported confiscation of one shipment of rough 
The full name of this KP document is the ‘Resolution adopted by the Kimberley Process 
Plenary Meeting, Moscow, 15-17 November 2005, on the subject of illicit diamond production in 
Côte d’Ivoire’. 
19 
11
diamonds whose contents were suspected to be of Cote d’Ivoire origin. The 
representative organizations of the international diamond industry were 
requested by the resolution to draw their affiliates’ urgent attention to the ongoing 
illicit production of rough diamonds in Côte d’Ivoire, and to request the full 
cooperation of all sections of the international diamond industry in ensuring that 
rough diamonds produced in Côte d’Ivoire cannot be introduced into the 
legitimate trade, which they have done. 
Despite greater international awareness of the problem of conflict 
diamonds created by the Kimberley Process, the trade in conflict diamonds has 
not yet been totally eradicated. The Côte d’Ivoire situation demonstrates the 
need for vigilance on the part of all KP Participants and Observers concerning 
the threat of conflict diamonds. 
Information from KP Review Visits 
While accurate statistics on the current production and trading of conflict 
diamonds are very difficult to determine, other markers provide pointers to the 
positive impact of the KPCS. 
All available data suggest that the major proportion of the international 
trade in rough diamonds is now carried out within the KPCS. All significant 
diamond producing and trading centres (with the exception of Liberia, which 
remains under UN diamond sanctions) are now implementing the KPCS. 
While the peer review mechanism does not by itself yield a detailed 
quantitative assessment of the percentage of the trade now covered by the 
KPCS, the reports of review visits (particularly to conflict-diamond-affected 
countries) do show overall trends and developments. The review visits carried 
out to date to the Democratic Republic of Congo, to Sierra Leone, and to Angola, 
countries affected in the past by conflict diamonds, together with the statistical 
reports and responses to the questionnaires from these Participants, point to 
very substantial increases in the proportion of diamonds exported through official 
channels as a result of KPCS implementation, alongside other factors such as 
overall stabilization of the countries in question and the implementation of peace 
agreements. 
In addition to review visits, the KP has carried out ad-hoc monitoring 
activities of the two countries that are currently subject to UN embargos on their 
diamond exports – Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. All diamond exports from Liberia 
currently have to be considered illicit, and those from Côte d’Ivoire are conflict 
diamonds. 
The report of the KP expert mission to Liberia of February 2005 found 
that Liberia’s potential production capacity lay somewhere between 100,000 and 
20 
400,000 cts/year; while it was not possible for the expert mission to give a 
precise estimate of ongoing (illicit) production, it noted that only a small 
proportion of potential mining sites were being worked on. The report specified, 
“during 2004, UN sanctions and Liberian Government actions appear to have 
reduced visible artisanal mining activity that had held the potential to circumvent 
sanctions, from 16 to 3 mining operations.” The UN Panel of Experts on Liberia, 
in its report of November 2005, estimated current Liberian production to be in the 
region of about US$ 1.2 m per month. It is likely that at least a significant 
proportion of this production is reaching world markets by various routes. 
One important but less tangible impact of the KPCS is that it has created a 
clear distinction between the illegal and legal markets for rough diamonds. As all 
reputable traders purchase only legitimate rough diamonds, with accompanying 
Kimberley Process Certificates, the result is that the market for illicit diamonds 
has decreased. Accordingly the market price of illicit diamonds has fallen, relative 
to the cost of legitimate diamonds, while the risks of being involved in trading 
illicit diamonds have greatly increased. Introduction of a requirement to certify 
diamonds by a KP Certificate legitimized the sales of rough diamonds. 
Cases of KPCS Infringement and 
Responses by Participant Authorities 
The effectiveness of the KPCS may also be measured in terms of the 
number of reported cases of KPCS infringement or violation in relation to how 
many of these cases are pursued through the judicial channels of respective 
Participants. This provides evidence that the KPCS is being enforced in 
Participant countries. 
With respect to the KP Review Questionnaires, nearly half of all KP 
Participants reported that they have not had any cases of KPCS infringement.12 
Among the KP Participants that did report instances of KPCS infringement 
on their Questionnaires, the number of cases ranged most commonly from one to 
five. For example, since the implementation of national legislation (to abide by 
the KPCS) in January 2003, Canada has recorded five cases of infringement 
resulting in: one conviction; two forfeitures; and two cases that are still under 
investigation. All five cases were investigated in accordance with Canada’s 
legislative and judicial provisions. 
China, India, Israel, Japan, the Russian Federation, and the United States did not report cases 
of infringement on their KP Review Questionnaires, despite having mentioned such cases in their 
2003 and/or 2004 Annual Reports. For example, the US authorities seized four rough diamond 
shipments in 2004. Brazil and Venezuela did not submit a response to the KP Review 
Questionnaires. 
21 
12
Only three KP Participants reported more than five cases of KPCS 
infringement on their Questionnaires: Australia recorded 8, Sierra Leone 
recorded 16, and the EC recorded 26. In each country, the cases were 
investigated in conjunction with customs officials and in accordance with national 
legislative provisions and judicial means. For example, the Australian Customs 
Service has seized a total of 339.264 carats of rough diamonds.13 Sierra Leone 
has seized a total of 340.5 carats worth approximately US$ 19,029. The EC has 
seized more than 12,000 carats worth approximately US$ 1.5 million.14 
The response of the KP Participants to instances of KPCS infringement 
varied from case to case. The vast majority of cases led to the seizure of the 
parcel or shipment of rough diamonds in question. Some parcels of rough 
diamonds were returned to the exporting country while others were forwarded to 
the intended recipient pending receipt of proper documentation. Several cases 
led to the imposition of fines and the commencement of criminal proceedings 
following a police investigation and other judicial instruments. 
At present, reporting seizures and cases of infringements or violations of 
the KPCS is not mandatory for KP Participants, although it is recommended and 
can be included in Annual Reports. However, detailed information on KPCS 
infringements would be useful to the authorities of KP Participants both at home 
and abroad in efforts to identify the actors involved, the origin of the diamond 
shipments, and the routes taken as part of the overall effort to increase the 
effectiveness of the KPCS. 
As part of their Annual Reports, KP Participants should be required 
to provide more detailed information on cases of infringement of the KPCS, 
which they are able to share within the provisions of their national 
legislation. Where possible they should include the number of seizures of 
rough diamond shipments along with details on the weight, value, exporter, 
importer, and country of origin of the parcel, as well as other details 
concerning the prosecution and outcome of each case. Also KP 
Participants should be encouraged to share this information with one 
another on an ad hoc basis. 
13 Two of the seized shipments did not have a declared value; thus, a precise total value cannot 
be computed.
14 In the European Union, EC authorities have pursued additional cases (even when diamond 
shipments were not seized) based on suspect documentation on re-exports from the EU. 
22 
The KP and Peace and Security 
The KPCS has made a very significant contribution to tackling one of the 
issues fuelling some of the most devastating conflicts Africa has seen in recent 
decades. Cutting the link between illicit diamond production and trade and the 
financing of armed groups is crucial to the long-term stability of the countries 
affected by conflict diamonds in the past. 
Illicit diamond mining and trading has become a less viable option for 
rebel groups than in the past. As more diamond revenues are captured by 
government channels, it is hoped that this will provide the financial resources to 
promote post-conflict reconstruction and more stable governance in diamond 
producing countries. 
High priority should be given to following through on the 9-points 
contained in the KP Resolution of 17 November 2005 on illicit diamond 
production in Côte d’Ivoire. 
In the case of the DRC, for example, according to the DRC’s KP statistics, 
the value of official diamond exports rose from US $ 395m in 2002 to US$ 771m 
in 2004 and to US$ 896m in the first half of 2005 alone. DRC in its response to 
the review questionnaire pronounces itself ‘totally satisfied’ with the creation of 
the KPCS and points to these export statistics as one proof of the success of the 
KP in combating the illicit production and trade in diamonds in countries 
previously affected by conflict diamonds. 
A direct result of the KPCS it is worth highlighting in this context: the 
exclusion of the Republic of Congo from the KPCS in July 2004. It excluded the 
RoC from exporting legally to any major diamond-trading centre, and that action 
by itself appears to have contributed to a dramatic increase in legal exports from 
the DRC, since illegal routes were no longer available. 
In the case of Sierra Leone, the KP review visit found that that the 
certification system had facilitated greater control over the diamond industry and 
reduced smuggling through the monitoring and control of diamond exports. The 
review visit estimated that the official system is now capturing up to 80% of 
production. According to Sierra Leone’s official export statistics, the total value of 
exports increased from US$ 26m in 2001 to US$ 155m in 2004 and US$ 142m in 
2005. As in the DRC, it can be assumed that the implementation of the KPCS 
has contributed significantly to this increase. In its response to the review 
questionnaire, Sierra Leone comments that the Kimberley Process makes it 
possible for countries to realize more from the export of diamonds. These funds 
are used for poverty alleviation and for the provision of services to mining 
communities, thus addressing causes of friction and conflict. 
23 
In the Republic of Angola, the KPCS has also seen a dramatic increase in 
legal exports of diamonds. 
KP statistics show that the value of diamonds 
exported by Angola was $739 m in 2003, $773 m in 2004, rising to $1,089 m in 
2005. In its response to the review questionnaire Angola states that it considers 
the KP ‘efficient’ and that the end of local conflict and the implementation of the 
KPCS has enabled it to greatly increase its control of its diamond production and 
trade thereby increasing state fiscal revenue and discouraging the activities of 
rebel groups. 
Peace in and around the former conflict diamond countries of Sierra 
Leone, Angola, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Liberia remains fragile. 
The border regions within these countries and their neighbors are particularly 
porous and tend to be near diamond mining areas. These border regions are 
also home to former rebels, militias, and other armed groups. However, the worth 
of the KP is seen in the fact that the KP is at the forefront of international efforts 
to address the continuing conflict diamond problem in Côte d’Ivoire and is 
contributing greatly to the comprehensive implementation of UN diamond 
embargoes against both Côte d’Ivoire and Liberia. 
To this end, the KP should also closely monitor the situation in the 
Democratic Republic of Congo. The eastern part of the country is still home to 
sporadic fighting among armed groups. A variety of natural resources, including 
diamonds, fuel this fighting.15 
While the KP makes illicit rough diamonds less attractive as a means of 
financial support for rebel groups, it is not, of course, an iron-clad deterrent. The 
Democratic Republic of the Congo should be encouraged to invite a second KP 
review visit, which would allow the KP to closely monitor the local situation. The 
eastern part of the country is still home to sporadic fighting among armed groups. 
A variety of natural resources, including diamonds, fuel this fighting. 
Through the Chair, the KP should continue to work closely with the 
UN as well as its various branches, agencies, ‘Expert Panels’ and other 
appropriate international agencies to improve information exchange and to 
broaden the reach of the KP. In order to ensure maximum public 
transparency, detailed summaries of review visit reports, following the 
standard template developed by the Working Group on Monitoring, should 
be prepared in all cases and posted in the public area of the KP web site, 
consistent with KPCS data publication standards. 
15 Sources: United Nations Mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo (MONUC): Submission 
for the 2006 Review of the KPCS (March 2006); and Global Witness: Submission for the 2006 
Review of the KPCS (March 2006). 
24 
SECTION C
 TECHNICAL PROVISIONS 
OF THE SCHEME 
Technical Provisions, Problems and 
Operations of the Scheme 
Introduction
 The 31 review visits, two review missions and three expert missions 
carried out by the KP since the inception of the KPCS, as of July 2006, as well as 
the annual reports submitted by Participants on their implementation of the 
Scheme in 2003, 2004, and 2005, and Participants responses to the review 
questionnaire, have generated a great deal of information regarding the 
implementation of the technical requirements of the Scheme. As well, this 
information indicates that the minimum requirements of the KPCS are being 
implemented in the Participant countries at the level of legislation or other acts 
and regulations, as was to be expected following the screening of all Participants’ 
legislation and regulations carried out by the Participation Committee in July 
2003 (and subsequently for all new Applicants). 
A review of this material shows that on the whole, the requirements of the 
KPCS are well understood by Participants. 
Technical Provisions 
These are generally workable and effective in contributing to the aims of 
the scheme and this can be attributed to close collaboration between the different 
stakeholders (governments, industry and civil society) and intense consultations 
with other regulators during the negotiations that led to the KPCS. That being 
said, it is clear from the responses to the KPCS Review Questionnaire that 
several technical provisions and operating procedures still pose problems and 
challenges to implement. 
The Working Group of Diamond Experts was created early in 2003 to 
address these implementation difficulties and to suggest improvements to 
existing working methods and administrative procedures, and to provide diamond 
expert opinion and technical assistance to all participating countries and KPCS 
Working Groups in order to be able to fully implement the KPCS, or to improve 
the data collection and reporting capabilities of the importing/exporting national 
authorities. 
25 
The Working Group consists of representatives of Australia, Botswana, 
Canada, the P.R. China, the European Community, India, Israel, the Russian 
Federation, South Africa and the World Diamond Council. It is chaired by the 
World Diamond Council and assisted by South Africa.  
A very positive response to the inevitable emergence of technical 
problems was the establishment by the Working Group of Diamond Experts 
(WGDE) of a series of technical guidelines (TG). These were created to “patch” 
problems that required immediate solutions, and were adopted after extensive 
consultations. 
At first, the WGDE was concerned about instances where the legitimate 
trade in rough diamonds was hindered because of discussions on the 
whereabouts of the KPC in respect to the shipment, opening of the sealed 
container by airport security services, the territories covered by participants and 
other pressing issues. Later, the attention shifted to more complicated matters 
such as HS classification difficulties and value discrepancies. A great deal of 
work and energy went into this and partial solutions where obtained amongst 
others, by suggesting changes to the Explanatory Notes of the HS Classification 
that have been adopted by the WCO HS Committee in May 2004. Some issues 
remain, however, and retain WGDE’s attention. Classification difficulties between 
rough and polished diamonds are being investigated and a possible way forward 
may be to illustrate these by collecting and disseminating a dedicated 
photographic library. An important part of the work of the WGDE has been 
centered on the ‘Harmonisation of Valuation Methodologies”, and this item has 
been discussed at different Plenary meetings. The work on this topic is ongoing 
and will, ideally, result in a hierarchic order of valuation methods, the 
identification of what constitutes an ‘unacceptable value discrepancy’, and 
remedial procedures to be followed in case of such an occurrence. 
An issue that has remained in WGDE’s “workshop” is the issue of 
Samples and scientific shipments for which no workable solutions have been 
proposed to date. Especially concerning Samples, already a lot of preparatory 
work has taken place, and one “Best Practice” has been identified regarding the 
shipment of diamondiferous core and bulk samples to specialised laboratories. 
Remaining is the current impossibility to send extracted rough diamonds to 
countries from which they have been derived, but that are not yet Participants of 
the KPCS. Similarly, scientific samples of rough diamonds cannot be exchanged 
with research institutes located in non- Participants. Without opening loopholes to 
unscrupulous dealers, the KPCS may wish to explore avenues on how to 
overcome these difficulties in full respect of its goals and mandate. 
As already briefly introduced during the Moscow Plenary, the WGDE will engage 
in a discussion with trans-national companies such as banks, insurance and 
especially international courier companies, in order to investigate potential 
loopholes that may exist on this trans-national level and consequently to suggest 
remedies.] 
26 
1. Diversity in National Laws and Practice
Implementation of the KPCS relies on national laws, procedures and 
personnel of Participants, as mandated by the UNGA 55/56(2000) Resolution. A 
consequence of this ‘individualized’ approach is the absence of harmonization in 
the implementation, as Participants have interpreted the KPCS ‘working 
document’ in different ways. However, it is not certain that an ‘international, 
harmonized’ approach would have yielded fewer discrepancies when translated 
into national law. An example of this variance in national legislations is 
demonstrated by the translation of the minimum requirement that a valid and 
validated KP Certificate must accompany every rough diamond shipment. Some 
Participants have concluded that this requirement is met when the KP Certificate 
is packed inside the sealed tamper-resistant container. Other Participants have 
concluded that no verification of the legitimacy of the shipment is possible while 
in transit and consequently some attach the KPC outside the container while 
others add the KPC to the commercial documents accompanying the shipment. 
Another consequence of differences under national legislations is that 
there may be a ‘legislative’ gap between the moment when the rough diamond 
shipment leaves the exporting Participant and when it arrives at its destination, 
depending on the scope of jurisdiction under the two legislative systems 
concerned. This problem was addressed at the Moscow Plenary where trans­
national courier companies were invited to participate in the discussion on this 
issue that is continuing within the WGDE. 
2. Definitions
The definitions listed in Section 1 of the KPCS document sometimes 
conflict with definitions used by other authorities, notably Customs. This is 
particularly true of the terms import, export, transit and country of origin. In the 
judgement of the Chair of the WGDE this conflict “may weaken the 
implementation of the Scheme or even jeopardise the legitimate rough diamond 
trade.” 
Transit: The KPCS considers transit as the physical passing of a 
shipment of rough diamonds through the geographical territory of a Participant on 
its way from the exporter to an importer. The definition that most customs 
services apply is slightly different. When an importer refuses to accept a 
shipment before customs clearance, customs will simply return the shipment to 
the sender and will consider this a transit shipment. 
However, when a shipment contains rough diamonds, this may be 
considered by some Participants to be problematic, as the returned shipment is 
not now accompanied by a new KP Certificate. Some Participants interpret 
import literally, as stated in KPCS Definitions, as the physical entry into the 
geographical territory of a Participant. This interpretation requires that when the 
27 
goods are returned, they should be covered as an export by a new KP Certificate 
issued by the Participant that is returning the goods. Obviously a pragmatic 
approach is most cost efficient in these cases, nevertheless, some Participants 
have systematically blocked returned shipments accompanied only by the KP 
Certificates that they themselves have issued. 
The WGDE suggests that a possible “way forward could consist of 
adapting the Definitions of the Scheme to match the terms that have been 
defined by customs (WCO/WTO), or, alternatively, to keep the definitions of the 
Scheme intact but change their names to avoid confusion with currently used 
customs definitions.” 
There has been some progress made in clarifying other definitions: 
Country of Origin: The use of the term ‘country of origin’, but with a 
different meaning to the same term defined by WTO/WCO/Customs, is a 
guarantee of confusion. To patch this problem, the WGDE issued Technical 
Guidelines 7,12 and 15 to address different consequences of the issue. TG 15 
recommends that KP Certificates use ‘country of origin (mining)’. A non-diamond-
producing Participant should, therefore, never be recorded as country of origin 
(mining), only as country of provenance. The term ‘country of origin’ as specified 
in Section I-Definitions is really about the country of mining. TG 12 has been 
issued to recommend filling the space after country of origin (mining) with 
asterisks when the country of mining of the diamonds is unknown, or when the 
diamonds are from different mining countries. 
Import/Export: There is no definition of ‘exporter’ or ‘importer’ in the 
KPCS but TG11 does state that the Exporter listed on the KP Certificate should 
have an address in the geographical territory of the Participant that issues the KP 
Certificate. Also an address in the geographical territory of the importing 
Participant should be provided on the KP Certificate. It is unacceptable to state 
on a KP Certificate ‘By Passenger’ or similar notation where an individual exports 
a shipment on his person; an address within the geographical territory of a 
Participant must be provided to enable follow-up on missing import confirmations 
and avoid KPCS loopholes such as ‘deviations’. 
There is also a possibility of confusion caused by missing definitions. 
Terms required on the KP Certificate are importer, exporter, number of 
parcels, deviations (the last occurs when shipments of rough diamonds 
accompanied by a KP Certificate end up in a different Participant than the one 
mentioned as Importer on the KP Certificate). None of these terms are defined in 
Section 1-Definitions of the Scheme (import/export is clarified by TG11 – see 
above). In the case of the term ‘number of parcels’, the issue was identified and 
addressed at the Gatineau Plenary (2004) where a ‘best practise’ was adopted. 
28 
The matter of conflicting definitions and missing definitions is 
important and is one that must be addressed by the WGDE. 
3. Value
From the inception of the KPCS, the issue of value-disagreements has 
been and continues to be one of the most difficult problems on which the WGDE 
has had to advise. It has been discussed at every Plenary Meeting. Not 
surprisingly then, it was repeatedly raised by Participants in responses to the 
Review Questionnaire, who pointed out that valuation methodologies have not 
been standardized. 
 Technical Guideline (TG) 6 states that “the value in $US on the KP 
Certificate remains a vital parameter for the successful implementation of the 
KPCS and therefore reiterates that the mention of the value in $US on the KP 
Certificate IS a minimum requirement of the KPCS”.  Accordingly, it is very 
important to resolve this issue. The WGDE is seized of this outstanding technical 
problem and is currently engaged in an ongoing discussion on ‘Harmonization of 
Methodologies’. 
4. Classification (HS codes)
The apparent lack of consistency within the Scheme to classify rough 
diamonds using the HS codes has been problematic for some Participants. This 
may be a consequence of the KPCS being enacted through respective national 
legislations with a reliance on the KP authorities' interpretation of the HS System. 
For almost all Participants, the agency responsible for commodity classification 
issues is customs, which base their classification within the HS System 
(WCO/WTO). 
In cases where classification is at issue any resulting action such as 
detaining shipments has implications for the relevant Authorities and industry. 
In the judgement of the Chair of the WGDE "the value and classification 
disagreements have become increasingly problematic and are hampering trade." 
Despite the issuance of TG5 and despite amending the explanatory notes of the 
HS classification 7102 in May 2004, problems still remain. The WGDE is of the 
opinion that the way forward lies in collecting and making available a 
photographic library that documents and visualises the distinction between the 
different HS codes following the amended Explanatory Notes. 
Disagreements over value and classification codes are increasingly 
problematic and result in hampering the trade in rough diamonds; it is 
recommended that the highest priority be given to resolving this issue, 
within the terms of reference of the WGDE. 
29 
5. The Kimberley Process Certificate
Section II of the KPCS document sets out the requirements for KP 
certificates, which must conform to the minimum standards provided in Annex I of 
the document. Technical guidelines 4, 8 and 9 provide additional requirements, 
and an Administrative Decision requires a maximum validity of 60 days.  The 
Participation Committee is responsible for assessing the conformity of KP 
certificates of applicants with these requirements. Participants are in accordance 
with Section II of the KPCS document responsible for ensuring that their 
certificates meet the minimum standards of Annex I and for notifying other 
Participants of the features of their certificates for the purposes of validation. 
There are many variations in type, style and duration of validity of KP 
Certificates, particularly in the area of security features. The KP Certificates of 
some Participants show minimal security features, whereas other Participants 
have invested in having a secure, tamper-resistant document with sets of 
security features. Variations have often led to confusion among authorities 
attempting to authenticate certificates, have led to delays while additional 
information was sought, and in some cases have led to the seizure of shipments 
when KP Certificates differed from the specimens which were on file. 
It is recommended that, as an urgent priority, all KP Certificates 
should meet existing standards. These standards stipulate, among other 
requirements, that the KP Certificate be valid for a maximum of 60 days. 
This requirement will be implemented by the Participation Committee in the 
case of new members and overseen by the WGM for existing members. 
Use of the KP Certificate: TG10 
Although it is not required, Participants are encouraged to break down 
shipments with more than one HS code by carat weight/$US value per HS code 
classification. As a follow-up to the Moscow Plenary Resolution on Cote d’Ivoire, 
diamond producing Participants, especially those with artisanal, alluvial 
productions, should be encouraged to list the quality characteristics of the rough 
diamonds in the shipment on the reverse of their KP Certificates; this procedure 
is recommended in Part B, Optional Certificate Elements in Annex I of the KPCS 
document, as it makes identification of the shipment more certain, and permits 
more rigorous analysis of data. 
Errors in filing in KP certificates 
There are some recurrent errors in filling in KP Certificates. Participants 
sometimes leave blank the ‘country of origin (mining)’ for shipments that are 
30 
mixed origin/unknown origin (mining); instead, they should be filling the space 
with asterisks. 
The consequences of errors in KP Certificates deserve attention, 
particularly in deciding when it is appropriate to reject a shipment and when it is 
not. According to TG 10, Participants should not impose undue burdens on other 
Participants, which can arise if Participants return shipments unnecessarily, 
raising the question of who should pay the resulting costs. Shipments should not 
be blocked because there is no advance notification (or other optional features 
on the KP Certificate are absent). Only KP Certificates that do not comply with 
KPCS requirements should be rejected. 
6. Mandatory Import Confirmation
Import confirmation is mandatory. What is optional is the manner in which 
it is confirmed; accordingly Annex I, para B suggests that the KP Certificate might 
include a section that could be detached and returned to the exporter to confirm 
the import. The alternative – or additional – method is by email. 
Reports from review visits make it clear that import confirmation is taking 
place more and more systematically. In order to build on this trend, further 
consideration could be given to systematising import confirmation. 
The information required on the Import Confirmation is: 1. the KP 
Certificate number; 2. the name of the participant confirming the import; and 
3.the date. 
Compliance with the mandatory requirement of import confirmation 
should be strengthened. Accordingly it is recommended that the WGM 
monitor compliance with this requirement, and if non compliance 
continues, the matter should be referred to the Participation committee. 
a. Who should confirm?
Most Participants delegate this responsibility to their KP Authority or 
possibly customs. Review visits have discovered that detachable import 
confirmation parts of issued KP Certificates are returned sometimes bearing only 
the stamp and signature of private (diamond) companies. This is not adequate. 
The confirmation notice requires an endorsement by an importing Authority of a 
Participant to legalize/authenticate the confirmation. 
This procedure would become routine if the number of import/export 
points in a country were limited, thus enabling staff at those control points to 
become familiar with the required procedures. 
31 
b. Advance notice of shipment 
Annex II recommendation 21 of the KPCS Document suggests advance 
notice of shipment be sent. For security reasons this notice should be encrypted, 
as outlined in TG 10. However, if import confirmation becomes a routine practice, 
as required, there is less reason for advance notification. 
Another approach to mandatory confirmation of imports is to investigate 
the feasibility of having an interactive website/database into which all 
Participants would enter details of exports, and confirm details of imports. Some 
members of the WGDE support this approach. Representatives of the industry, 
on the contrary, are sceptical of this proposal, as it would bring together, in real 
time, highly sensitive, commercially valuable, confidential information that could 
become an impediment to the legitimate rough diamond trade. 
Such a website/data base would be effective only if it were easy to use, 
and kept absolutely up-to-date. These requirements would draw on resources 
that are currently not available to all Participants. In addition, some Participants 
have difficulty in gaining reliable Internet access and in accessing the already 
established KPCS websites. These two problems combined militate against the 
possibility of creating an interactive website/data base in the immediate future. 
7. Distinction between Rough Diamonds and Powder: TG 13
No consensus could be reached (within the WGDE) in discriminating 
between ‘stones’ belonging to the HS Classification Codes 7102.10 – 7102.21 or 
7102.31 and ‘dust and powder of diamonds’ belonging to HS Classification Code 
7105.10. The WGDE has since tried to patch the difficulty by adopting TG13 
limiting the scope of the KPCS to rough diamonds >1mm. unfortunately, this 
‘solution’ did not yield the results that were expected. The WGDE is currently 
reviewing the situation. 
Accessibility of Technical Guidelines and other Technical Reference 
Material 
There is a repeated and widespread call for a consolidation of all technical 
guidelines and technical advice in one easily accessible place. This could be in 
an Annex to the Compilation of Kimberley Process Documents (see 
recommendation 53). 
The consolidated Annex or location on the KP website could include all 
formal technical guidance – Technical Guidelines, Best Practices, Technical 
Recommendations in the KPCS document, Administrative Decisions and links to 
the HS Explanatory Notes, the WTO Valuation Agreement, the WCO and maybe 
also ISO and perhaps a new section of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) and 
32 
photographic examples of HS classifications. This technical information should 
be available in all KP languages. 
It is recommended that a consolidated technical guidance annex be 
created and form part of the Compilation of Kimberley Process Documents. 
Operational Problems 
Review visits have provided important information as to the efficacy of 
Participants’ systems in place. An assessment of internal controls has been a 
central concern of all review visits to date. Review visit reports highlight both that 
the kind of controls required vary greatly between Participants (e.g. between 
producers, traders and polishers), and that different mechanisms are being 
applied by different Participants. 
Review visits have highlighted also that the nature and extent of internal 
controls remains a major challenge for the KP, for Participants engaged in 
artisanal-alluvial diamond mining. 
Other observations in review visit reports relate more generally to 
implementation of other KPCS requirements. 
1. Lack of Import Procedures 
Some diamond producing Participants with very limited imports of rough 
diamonds have been found not to have proper procedures in place for 
processing imports of rough diamonds. It is essential that all Participants have 
both proper import and export procedures in place, regardless of the 
volume of imports they deal with. 
2. Illegal Shipments
A small number of Participants, on identifying irregular shipments at import 
(e.g. incoming shipments without certificates), systematically return these to the 
sender or country of origin, rather than seizing the diamonds. 
A discussion of possible procedures designed to deal with illegal 
shipments consistent with national legislation in recipient countries, failed to 
reach consensus. 
33 
3. Inadequate Annual Reporting on Internal Controls 
Some Participants that have not yet received review visits fail to provide 
adequate information in their annual reports on the internal controls in place to 
prevent conflict diamonds from entering the pipeline. Notably they do not provide 
details on the evidence required for the issuance of a KP certificate. The WGM 
has requested additional details in the process of its analysis of annual reports, 
and review visits are another important tool to enable the KP to assess the 
adequacy of their internal controls. 
4. Conflict-diamond-affected Countries 
In all these countries substantial challenges remain with regard to 
implementation of the KPCS minimum requirements including organization of 
diamond export certification, organization of internal control system, gathering of 
corresponding statistical data, as well as the traceability of rough diamond 
production from mine to export. 
In many respects these problems stem from the incapacity of some 
governments to fully control their territories, including diamond mining areas, as 
well as a lack necessary material and personnel resources. 
Weak monitoring of cross-border flows of rough diamonds remain a 
problem. Capacity constraints on the part of customs and law enforcement, 
economic (tax) incentives for smuggling and the physical length and porosity of 
borders remain substantial challenges for curbing smuggling. 
Ease of Operation of the KPCS 
Most Participants responded that they consider the KPCS to be simple 
and workable. Some Participants believe that difficulties lie not in the complexity 
of the procedures but in the lack of capacity of governments, particularly at the 
provincial level, to implement them. This is especially true when the remit of the 
government does not cover the entire country.16 
Participants note that some definitions of terms used in the KP differ from 
those used in other contexts, such as customs agreements. Others point out that 
the KPCS has made great efforts to ensure consistency with international 
standards and has contributed to changing those standards, as exampled by 
amending the explanatory notes to the HS Classification 7102. 
Need for Better Communication 
16 Response to KP Questionaire from World Bank and DRC (MONUC). 
34 
It is rare that Participants are unwilling to try to resolve issues concerning 
the KPCS with other Participants. More frequent, however, are complaints about 
questions that receive only late answers or no answer at all. After investigation, it 
appears that many of these cases are caused by difficulties in communicating 
with the respondent’s KP contact point. This can occur where there are linguistic 
differences, where there is limited internet access capability, where an official 
moves on without notifying the KP of their successor, where government 
departments are reorganised or for other day-to-day reasons. 
Participants are encouraged to use the whole range of communication 
methods to communicate with each other, including by e-mail, fax, telephone and 
mail. 
It is essential to maintain an up-to-date register of KP focal contacts, 
as well as alternates. This register should continue to be available on the 
KP web site and could also be circulated annually with the compilation of 
KP documents. Participants should inform the KP Chair promptly of any 
change in contacts. 
Peer Review Monitoring Mechanism: 
An Assessment 
There is widespread agreement among Participants and Observers 
(governments, civil society and industry) that the peer review monitoring 
mechanism has been a great success, although civil society is concerned that it 
is not penetrating enough, and that timely follow up is often lacking. Over and 
above the examination of legal instruments and other documentary evidence of 
implementation, the use of review visits has allowed the KPCS to be sure its 
requirements are being met effectively. Thus it has functioned as a crucial 
‘confidence building’ tool of the KPCS. 
Covering the System 
When it was established in November 2003, the objective (as stated by 
the Plenary decision adopted at Sun City) was for “the largest number of 
Participants possible to volunteer to receive a review visit” by the time of the 
KPCS three-year review. Review visits would be voluntary and carried out with 
the agreement of the host Participant. It is clear that this objective has been 
achieved. 
• Between January 2004 and September 2006, review visits had been 
carried out to 32 Participants17; in addition, two non-Participants (Liberia, 
17 United Arab Emirates; Israel; Botswana; Mauritius; Zimbabwe; South Africa; Lesotho; Canada; 
Democratic Republic of Congo; European Community; Switzerland; India; Sri Lanka; Sierra Leone; 
Guinea; Russian Federation; United States; Angola; Namibia; Ukraine; Belarus; Armenia; Ghana; Togo; 
People’s Republic of China; Brazil, Guyana; Lebanon; Vietnam; Malaysia; Singapore; Tanzania. 
35 
and Lebanon prior to its joining the KP) had received special expert 
missions, and two review missions had been carried out (to the Central 
African Republic and to the Republic of Congo). 
• A further nine Participants18 have invited review visits (implementation of 
which is scheduled for 2006), and one Participant19 has invited a follow-up 
review visit. 42 out of 45 Participants (or 93 per cent) have thus received 
or invited review visits or review missions. 
As of 30 October, 2006, 12 Participants have not yet received review visits: 
Of those, nine have invited review visits but three have not: 
Croatia, 
Indonesia, 
and 
Venezuela20. 
Those three Participants should be 
encouraged as strongly as possible to invite review visits, and to do so as 
soon as possible. 
The Chair of the WGM confirms that these Participants have been 
approached and are all considering inviting a review visit. 
• All previously conflict diamond affected countries have received review 
visits; and almost all countries reporting diamond production or trade have 
had review visits. 
Expanding the mandate 
In some very specific circumstances, it may be useful for the peer review 
system to examine patterns of rough diamond trade in or through Participants 
and non-Participants, where this has a direct bearing on the ability of Participants 
to implement the provisions of the KPCS. Thus, in specific circumstances, it 
may be useful to mandate review visits (or, where applicants are 
concerned, in conjunction with the approval of the Participation 
Committee, ad-hoc expert missions) explicitly to integrate a regional 
dimension into review visit activities. 
In cooperation with the Participation Committee, expert missions 
(carried out on the basis of the standard terms of reference for review 
visits) could, in principle, be deployed on an ad hoc basis, on a 
recommendation from the Participation Committee that circumstances 
make such a mission necessary or desirable for applicants applying for 
participation in the KPCS. 
Effectiveness of Review Visits 
18 Norway; Japan; Romania; Australia; Republic of Korea; Thailand; Central African Republic, Bulgaria  
and Laos. The review visits to Japan and Republic of Korea are scheduled for October 2006. 
19 Guinea. 
20 One Participant has not been counted in this list, Côte d’Ivoire, which has been the subject of specific  
and ongoing monitoring measures since 2004.  
36 
Effectiveness was demonstrated in two ways: by considering, first, 
whether the system had detected the main implementation problems as and 
where they arose; and second, whether the peer review system had contributed 
to bringing about tangible improvements with regard to problems identified. 
Review visits were able to establish a complete overview of the practices 
of individual Participants for KPCS implementation. Thailand suggested that the 
peer review mechanism could detect serious implementation problems only if the 
Participant being reviewed reported them, but Thailand has not yet had a review. 
Participants that have been reviewed, as diverse as Sierra Leone and the 
EC, have received review visits with openness and provided access to their 
documentation and the whole range of activities linked to certification. This has 
made it possible for some review visits to identify implementation issues that 
would not otherwise have been apparent (in some cases) even to the Participant 
under review. 
That being said, the thoroughness of review visits has varied. Some have 
gone to great lengths to examine a Participant’s ability to verify exports against 
mining capacity. Others have not. Accordingly, it is recommended that the 
report for each review visit state that the team has reviewed internal 
controls for effective compliance with all KPCS minimum standards, as set 
out in the KPCS documents, recognizing some procedures may be security 
sensitive. 
Review visits have played an important role in drawing to the attention of 
Participants under review the requirements adopted in the KP after its initial 
implementation (such as technical guidelines and administrative decisions, e.g. 
on the use of KPC-based data for statistical purposes). Review teams should 
continue to identify participant country needs for technical assistance and 
training, in order to help Participants implement effective internal controls. 
In many cases the constructive interaction between visiting teams and 
Participants’ authorities has helped rectify or improve specific implementation 
practices. Examples include: 
• The adoption of proper import procedures by some (producing) 
Participants that did not have import procedures in place; 
• The training of diamond valuators to enable them to carry out a 
review visit’s recommendation that all imports into a Participant be 
subjected to a regime of physical inspection; 
• The initiation of an investigation by a Participant into suspicious 
trading activities pursuant to the findings of a review visit. 
37 
Compliance 
Review visits can support compliance and reinforce the credibility of the 
KPCS as a whole by responding to emerging reports or information regarding 
alleged gaps in the internal controls of KP Participant countries. 
In such 
instances, a timely review visit or in cases of more serious allegations, specific 
missions can be crafted to support and encourage compliance. 
The case of Brazil provides a good example in this regard.  In 2005, 
Partnership Africa Canada published a report detailing instances of fraud relating 
to illicit diamond production and exports within Brazil’s diamond industry.21 This 
led Brazil’s Federal Police to launch an investigation into the country’s diamond 
industry and Brazilian authorities to suspend diamond exports. A May 2006 KP 
review visit to Brazil (which was scheduled before the release of the second PAC 
report22 and the subsequent Police investigations) found the country to be in non­
compliance of the KPCS. In brief, the KP review visit found shortcomings in the 
way in which the KPCS is implemented in Brazil, ranging from a lack of training 
and experience among staff and customs officers to flaws in Brazil’s KP 
Certificate. 
It should be noted that Brazil has handled the revelation of irregularities 
well. On its own accord, Brazil suspended all diamond exports for 2006 well in 
advance of the KP review visit. The Brazilian authorities were transparent and 
eager to assist the KP review visit team. Furthermore, they informally stated their 
21 The Failure of Good Intentions: Fraud, Theft and Murder in the Brazilian Diamond Industry 
(Ottawa: Partnership Africa Canada, May 2005).
22 Fugitives and Phantoms: The Diamond Exporters of Brazil (Ottawa: Partnership Africa Canada, 
March 2006); Triple Jeopardy – Triplicate Forms and Triple Borders: Controlling Diamond Exports 
from Guyana (Ottawa: Partnership Africa Canada, April 2006); and The Failure of Good 
Intentions: Fraud, Theft and Murder in the Brazilian Diamond Industry (Ottawa: Partnership Africa 
Canada, May 2005). 
38 
intention to implement the recommendations contained in the forthcoming 
Kimberley Process Review Visit to Brazil Report and are looking forward to 
receiving technical assistance as part of the overall effort to become KPCS-
compliant. The review visit which took place in the wake of the emergence of the 
allegations of fraud was scheduled prior to the publication of the second PAC 
report, Brazil has invited a follow-up review visit, likely to take place in early 
2007. 
Composition of Teams 
The formula for review visits adopted at the Sun City Plenary provided for 
a roster of experts to be drawn up by the Chair on a recommendation from the 
(WGM). The Administrative Decision on Peer Review (ADPR) further provides 
that in deciding on the composition of review visit teams, the Chair “would seek 
to ensure geographical balance and adequate balance between Participants that 
are primarily engaged in (i) production, (ii) trading and (iii) processing of rough 
diamonds”. 
Since then, a substantial number of Participants and Observers have 
nominated experts for inclusion in the roster, which as of July 2006 comprised 97 
experts representing Participants, industry and civil society. On the basis of this 
very positive response, it was possible in all cases for teams to be appointed 
corresponding to the required criteria. To date, experts from 17 different 
Participants, and from all major geographical regions represented in the KPCS, 
have participated in review visits. 
Thanks in part to the generous funding by Partnership Africa Canada, one 
of the civil society groups represented in the KP, it has been possible for a 
number of experts from developing, artisanal-alluvial producer Participants to 
participate in review visits and review missions23. Participation by experts from 
developing country Participants, and particularly artisanal-alluvial producing 
Participants, is of great importance because of the crucial role of review visits in 
disseminating best practices between Participants and in teaching participating 
experts. However, civil society groups do not have the capacity to continue to 
fund government and civil society experts to participate in every review visit. The 
participation of experts from artisanal-alluvial producer Participants in as 
many review visits as possible should be continued and if possible further 
developed, above all in review visits to artisanal-alluvial producer 
Participants. 
As regards leadership, representatives of eight different Participants 
(including, for the first time in June 2006, an alluvial producer Participant, Sierra 
23 Specifically, experts from the Central African Republic, Angola, Sierra Leone, the DRC, Guinea, Ghana 
have participated in a total of 16 review visits. 
39 
Leone) have so far led review visits. In order to involve as many Participants as 
possible, (and bearing in mind the need for adequate expertise), the KP should 
seek to further diversify the leadership of review visits. 
The ADPR stipulates that review visits should carry out their work in an 
“analytical, expert and impartial manner.” In order to further strengthen these 
safeguards, the criteria in the Administrative Decision on Peer Review 
should be expanded to include a provision that experts are required to be 
impartial and highly professional and should further require members to 
disclose any potential conflict of interests. 
Follow-up to Review Visits 
The Administrative Decision on Peer Review contains only limited 
provisions for follow-up to a review visit’s findings but makes provision for 
sending a follow-up review visit where this is deemed “necessary and 
appropriate”. 
The provisions of the ADPR are useful; however, they are likely to be used 
only in specific cases, notably where there are serious concerns about a 
Participant’s compliance. The WGM has therefore considered additional 
mechanisms for ensuring adequate follow-up, and (with the endorsement of the 
Plenary) these are now being implemented: 
As of the 2005 annual reporting exercise, Participants have systematically 
been requested to provide information in their annual reports on steps taken to 
follow up on review visit recommendations; most Participants that received 
review visits in 2004 did provide substantial information on their follow-up to 
review visit recommendations. 
Participants were invited to report orally to a special session of the 2005 
Plenary meeting on measures taken to implement review visit recommendations, 
and a large number of Participants did so. At the time, a small number of 
Participants did not provide reports to Plenary, and indicated in their annual 
reports only that the recommendations of review visits were under consideration. 
For Participants that have received review visits, the KP has actively 
encouraged them to meet with other interested Participants, and relevant 
international donors, to promote proper follow-through on technical assistance in 
priority areas identified by the visit. Such a process is currently under way in the 
DRC. 
Participants identified by review teams as needing technical assistance or 
training should communicate their needs to international donors and the 
coordinator for technical assistance. 
40 
It is important that the KP undertake enhanced efforts to ensure that 
recommendations on improving capacity (particularly in developing-country 
Participants) actually feed through into the delivery of technical assistance. Until 
now, this has not generally been the case, although in the DRC, a substantial 
technical assistance programme for the diamond sector is being developed by a 
major donor as a direct result of the review visit. While review visits have 
undoubtedly raised the profile of KP issues with donors, there is need for more 
focused follow-up with donors on priority areas identified by review visits. At the 
Moscow Plenary meeting a coordinating mechanism for technical assistance 
related to KP implementation was created. This mechanism should play a central 
role in ensuring that where technical assistance needs are identified, every effort 
is made by the KP to promote effective follow-up by donors. 
Donor countries are encouraged to provide technical assistance and 
training to meet the needs of Participants to implement effective internal 
controls, as identified by review teams. The Working Group on Peer Review 
considered issues relating to the resources available for peer review and 
notably for the participation of experts in recent review visits, on the basis 
of a submission received from Partnership Africa Canada and Global 
Witness. The WG agreed in this regard to examine, jointly with the KP 
coordinator for technical assistance, the possibilities for individual donors 
to contribute to the travel expenses of experts who would not otherwise be 
able to participate in review visits. 
Review visit teams and Participants hosting review visits are reminded of 
the existing deadlines for reporting and commenting on review visit 
findings (30 days after the completion of the visit and 30 days after receipt 
of the draft report respectively) and are urged to allocate adequate time to 
that effect. Review visit teams may wish to consider adding one or two 
days to review visits for preparation of reports. The leader or a designated 
member of review visit teams should be tasked explicitly with verifying the 
state of implementation of a review visits recommendations. Any such 
reports on verification should be maintained in a central register by the 
WGM which would then become an up-to-date overview of the state of 
implementation of the review visit recommendations. 
Annual reports are an essential tool of the KP for providing information on 
the state of implementation of the KPCS in a Participant. Accordingly the 
requirement to submit an annual report should be maintained, as should 
the requirement to provide feedback in the report on follow-up to review 
visits. 
The recommendations listed above under “Follow-up to review 
visits” should be integrated into the Administrative Decision on Peer 
Review. 
41 
Transparency of Review Visits 
At present, the full reports of review visits are placed on the restricted 
‘Participants Only’ section of the KP website, as set out in the ADPR. 
It may be useful to actively draw the attention of Participants and 
Observers to the reports of visits once they have been agreed. This could be 
done by the Chair circulating a message to all Participants and Observers 
informing them whenever a report has been completed, with a link to the full 
report on the website. 
It would be useful to collate the main elements relating to the review of 
individual Participants in their ‘Participants Only’ section on the KP website; this 
could include not only, as at present, review visit and annual reports, but a 
summary of review visit recommendations, information on follow-up, and the 
assessment of Participants’ annual reports. 
It is recommended that the Chair circulate a message to all 
Participants and Observers informing them whenever a report has been 
completed, with a link to the full report on the website. 
Access of review visit reports by parties outside the KP 
At present summaries of review visit reports are supposed to be publicly 
available and are supposed to be placed on the public section of the KP website. 
Consideration has been given to making the full report public. Some 
Participants believe the confidentiality of review visit reports has been crucial in 
ensuring full cooperation with review visit teams and transparency on the part of 
Participants under review. Others argue that review visit reports should be made 
publicly available, and that this would bolster the effectiveness of review visits 
and the overall credibility of the KPCS. 
Two pragmatic steps forward are possible that would address some of the 
concerns about transparency while also taking into account the view that full 
publication might be detrimental to the willingness of Participants to share 
information. First, it has already been agreed that detailed summaries of review 
visit reports, following a standard template developed by the Working Group on 
Monitoring, should be placed on the KP’s public website. This should be done 
consistently for all review visit reports. Second, review visit reports should be 
made available much more consistently to other international organizations with 
an interest in diamond sector governance; - see recommendation three. 
42 
The Future of the Peer Review Mechanism 
Since its creation in November 2003, the peer review mechanism has 
emerged as one of the foundations of the overall effectiveness and credibility 
of the KPCS. In addition to providing a comprehensive overview of the overall 
state of implementation of the Scheme, it has enabled the KP to: 
• Detect and address some major compliance issues; 
• Work with Participants to remedy a range of practical implementation 
issues; and 
• Highlight areas where capacity-building assistance is required. 
The Administrative Decision on Peer Review refers to the date of 
implementation of the 3-year review, as the target date by which the largest 
number possible of Participants should have invited review visits. Implicitly, 
therefore, it calls for a decision by the KP on whether, and in what form, the 
system of review visits is to be continued beyond that date. 
In the context of the Third Year Review, Participants must decide whether 
a second round of review visits to all Participants (in line with the approach of the 
existing system) is desirable, or whether further review visits should take place 
only to some Participants identified (e.g. by the Chair, on the recommendation of 
the Working Group) as requiring particular scrutiny. 
The ad-hoc Working Group – drawing on advice from the Working Group 
on Monitoring – believes the best way forward would be for the existing system to 
be renewed, albeit with some adjustments to ensure that further review visits 
focus on the issues that require real follow-up in every Participant. 
Specifically, the formula used in Sun City – providing that review visits 
should be invited by the largest number of Participants (which in practice has led 
to near-universal coverage by the peer review system) – should be renewed. As 
with the first round of review visits, there should continue to be encouragement 
from the Chair of the KP, and ‘peer pressure’ from other Participants, for all 
Participants to invite a further review visit. At the same time, the duration of visits, 
size of review visit teams and mandate of review visits could be handled with 
greater flexibility during the second round than during the first round. Moreover, a 
more generous timeframe could be allowed for meeting the target of covering all 
Participants with review visits (for example, by aiming for all second-round visits 
to have taken place within a four-year period rather than within a three-year 
period as had been the case in the first round). Finally, further review visits 
should focus more consistently on identifying needs for technical assistance on 
the part of host Participants. 
On the basis of the assessment set out above it is recommended that: 
43 
The system of peer review, with its main components as established 
in 2003, should be maintained, recognizing that the resource concerns of 
some Participants and Observers will need to be addressed. 
The system of review visits to Participants should be continued. 
Relevant provisions in section II of the Administrative Decision on Peer 
Review should be amended, specifying that in further review visits, 
attention should be focused on follow-up to issues identified in the first 
visit. 
In case of repeated review visits, the visits should be flexible in size 
and duration, to ensure scarce resources are used efficiently and are 
focused where there are substantial implementation issues. 
The recommendations listed in this assessment of the Peer Review 
Monitoring System should be incorporated into a revised Administrative 
Decision on Peer Review. 
Statistical Underpinning of the KPCS: 
an Assessment 
Background 
Since the inception of the KPCS there has been a keen understanding of 
the importance statistics would play in the scheme. Annex III of the Kimberley 
Process Certification Scheme document outlines the need for statistical 
information with the statement “that reliable and comparable data on the 
production and the international trade in rough diamonds are an essential tool for 
the effective implementation of the Certification Scheme, and particularly for 
identifying any irregularities or anomalies which could indicate that conflict 
diamonds are entering the legitimate trade”. 
The complexity and difficulties involved in creating and managing a KPCS 
statistical date base, as well as providing a way forward with the analysis of the 
data, were enormous and were certainly underestimated at the outset. However 
huge strides have been made in creating the system and the statistics web site. 
Much of the credit for this improvement must go to the Government of Canada, 
which has chaired the Working Group on Statistics (WGS) since March of 2003. 
The Current Status of the Work of the WGS 
1. The working methods of the WGS have been organized and processes 
developed and increasingly documented. 
Participants are offered various 
options that may be used to submit their requisite statistical information, including 
direct on-line entry into the database through the internet, via the KP Rough 
44 
Diamond Statistics web site. Participants can review and edit their reported data 
on-line. As well, they can view the verified data submitted by all Participants. 
Processes are in place for providing assistance to Participants and to address 
any concerns brought forward by Participants. Canada is offering training on use 
of the statistics website, and delivered the first workshop at the Gaborone 
intercessional in June 2006. It is also developing a user manual which will be 
available in English and French, to build on the existing training CD. Formal and 
informal follow-up processes are invoked where necessary. Reports and updates 
are made to the Chair and to the Participation Committee on a systematic basis. 
2. Multi-purpose tabulations of the statistical information gathered are 
regularly returned to Participants and are available on the KP Rough Diamond 
Statistics web site. These tabulations, updated regularly, are also being provided 
annually to the Monitoring Working Group to be integrated with each Participant’s 
annual report. 
3. The web site itself has matured into an effective tool in the collection 
and dissemination of statistics. 
4. Statistical reviews and analyses are prepared by the WGS on an 
ongoing basis for all review visits. They provide opportunities to address and 
resolve statistical issues and assist in addressing any associated technical 
issues. Identification of situations potentially involving conflict diamonds can be 
clarified with associated statistical information. 
5. The working group makes an annual report to Plenary describing its
progress and current issues. As well, the WGS has brought forward a succession 
of administrative decisions, the latest as adopted by Plenary, recommending the 
use of trade statistics derived from the KP Certificates as the standard for 
submission of these data to the KPCS. 
6. Effective relations with the KPCS Chair, the Secretariat to the Chair, 
and other working groups and committees have been established. Open lines of 
communication have facilitated ongoing cooperation between the groups. In the 
immediate future the WGS intends to develop stronger working arrangements 
with the Technical Experts Group. 
7. To test the analysis methodology, a comprehensive analysis of the 
statistical data for 2004 was completed and an analysis of data for 2005 is 
underway. It is anticipated that this analysis will be completed in time to be 
presented to the 2006 Plenary in Botswana. 
45 
Challenges 
Analysis 
1. General Analyses
To complete a comprehensive analysis of the statistical database that will 
identify the presence of conflict diamonds or implementation issues is a task of 
over-riding concern. The WGS carried out one such analysis of 2004 data on a 
pilot basis on the basis of an agreed methodology, and building on this, has 
carried out a fuller analysis of 2005 data. 
As the Chair of the WGS outlines the 
problem, “Not only must we complete the analysis but we must regularize it so 
that it is accomplished at least once a year. We must evolve the methodology of 
the analysis to focus on the issues at hand and we must present a report on the 
overall analysis to the Chair and Plenary in a timely and meaningful way. This 
remains the greatest challenge for the working group. There is widespread 
agreement among Participants that this is the principal challenge with the 
statistical underpinning of the KPCS. 
The inability of the WGS to complete a comprehensive analysis of the 
statistical data base until recently (May 2006) has been a cause for concern 
among Participants. Indeed it has led some Participants to call for the KPCS to 
create or fund a body or bodies to carry out analysis, monitor and follow-up on 
statistical non-compliance, manage the statistics web site and report back to the 
WGS and the Chair of the Kimberley Process - not all of these functions need be 
carried out by the same body. Others argue that Participants should be realistic 
about the KPCS’s collective capacity to analyze and to act upon results of 
analysis, given that there are finite human and financial resources. They believe 
that statistical analysis should focus on situations where there is considered a 
clear risk of conflict diamonds and where there is a clear unwillingness or inability 
to comply with minimum standards, including referring the situation to the 
Participation Committee. 
A possible compromise was made by the Chair of the WGS who 
suggested that some analyses of statistics could be undertaken or led by a body 
outside the office of the working group.  Under this scenario, members of the 
WGS would review and perhaps contribute to these analyses, and would retain 
the responsibility for preparing other directed analyses such as, for example, the 
review visit statistical summaries. Clearly, if an outside organization is tasked to 
do analytical work, funding needs to be identified to pay for this activity. This 
proposed solution would considerably lessen the workload of the WGS, which 
could then concentrate on addressing other remaining statistical challenges. 
Despite detailed discussion on this issue, no consensus was reached. 
46 
As the work of statistical analysis progresses and on an on-going basis, 
the WGS will review strengths, weaknesses and lessons learned and consider a 
range of options to enhance the KPCS capacity to prepare statistical analyses. 
2. Country Specific Statistical Analyses
The WGS prepares country specific, statistical analyses for review visits, 
which provide review teams with vital information before and during the visits. 
There is general agreement that these reports are a very useful tool for the 
purposes of the review visits. However, at times, the specific country analysis 
has been completed too late for useful discussion by the review team and 
Participant. 
It is important that the WGS be involved in preparing for review visits, 
particularly where statistical issues are known to exist and follow-up is required. 
The timeliness of these reports depends, to some extent, on sufficient notice 
being provided of upcoming review visits. 
It is recommended that the WGS continue to prepare Participant 
specific analyses for review visits. The WGS should be notified of any 
upcoming visits four weeks before it is to begin. Subject to that 
notification, the analyses should be prepared and circulated to the review 
team at least two weeks before the review visit commences, to allow for 
discussion among the review team and the Participant. 
3. Involvement in Review Visits
A number of WGS members are on the roster of experts for review visits 
and have participated in review visits, and not only when there are known 
statistical issues. The practice should continue. 
Members of the WGS should participate in review visits particularly 
when there are known issues with the statistics of the Participant to be 
reviewed. 
Statistical Issues 
1. Timely submission of Statistics. 
At times Participants have failed to submit timely and complete data to the 
KPCS, despite the system of notifications and reminders now in place. To 
address this issue the WGS and the Participation Committee have established a 
documented process (as of the Moscow Plenary in November 2005) that clearly 
outlines the procedure and associated timelines used to remind Participants of 
their responsibility to submit statistical information. 
47 
The increasing involvement of the Participation Committee in addressing 
non-submission issues has lead to an improvement in the completeness of the 
statistical database and in the timeliness of submissions. 
2. Data Quality and Accuracy
The quality and accuracy of information provided by Participants on their 
data submitted and their use of trade data based on KP Certificates must 
constantly be monitored and, where necessary, questioned. Further, the 
appropriate use of the date of issuance to define the quarter in which trade 
occurs must be verified. 
In an effort to improve accuracy, within one week after the due date, the 
WGS publishes preliminary comprehensive tables for all Participants. 
Each 
Participant is requested to review its own data and to verify its submissions; to 
engage in preliminary discussions with their trading partners, as necessary, to 
resolve apparent discrepancies; and, as a result, to make any necessary 
corrections. Based on this exercise, final tables are updated and posted on the 
web site. 
3. Valuation Parameter
The statistics on value of production, which are required by Technical 
Guideline (TG) 6, should continue to be reported. They provide an important 
indicator of the quality of the diamonds being traded, as well as transactional 
levels and of orders of magnitude of the sales of rough diamonds. 
Communications 
Elsewhere in this report, recommendations are made to address the issue 
of contact with appropriate officials, which hamper reconciliation of trading 
statistics and efforts to ensure timely submission. 
Technical Assistance 
The website, Kimberley Process Rough Diamond Statistics, was 
developed to allow direct input of KPCS statistics directly onto the website. The 
site also allows Participants to confirm the data submitted, to correct their data 
when warranted, to view verified data for all Participants and to view statistical 
tabulations for all Participants from 2003 onward. When problems or errors using 
the website occur, the office of the Chair of the Working Group on Statistics is 
available for advice and, if required, to provide remedial action. 
48 
Copies of the website-tutorial CD may be obtained from the Office of the 
Chair of the Working Group on Statistics. It provides instruction on how to access 
the database, statistical tables, and global tables on the web site. Accordingly it 
is now possible for all Participants to view and use KPCS statistics, both in raw 
and aggregated form. There is also a ‘help’ feature on the web site and 
Participants are offered technical assistance at every plenary. 
A user manual on how to navigate and use the KP Rough Diamond 
Statistics web site is being prepared and will be published and distributed in the 
near future. 
Transparency and Publication 
The Moscow Plenary directed the WGS to study various options for the 
publication of statistics. Work is progressing on this issue and, building on 
discussions at the 2006 Intersessional meeting, recommendations will be put to 
the Plenary in Botswana. Resolution of this issue will depend on balancing the 
need for transparency with the requirement to respect the commercially sensitive 
nature of certain data collected. 
Meanwhile, the WGS recommends that, once steps necessary to protect 
commercially sensitive data are introduced, all data proven to be of satisfactory 
quality be published. 
The KPCS should enhance transparency through publication 
of KPCS 
data 
wherever 
appropriate. Building 
on findings to 
be 
presented by the WGS at the 2006 plenary, it is recommended that the 
WGS devise a formula for the release of basic data as soon as possible.  It 
is also recommended that the current debate about the current quality of 
KP statistics should not affect the formula for the release of statistical data 
but rather should be redirected into the ongoing effort to address important 
quality issues appearing in the published (and unpublished) statistical 
summaries. 
Web Site 
Although it seems attractive to investigate the feasibility of developing an 
‘internet portal’ web site data base for the communication and interchange of 
transaction information and/or KP certificate information between Participants, at 
this point it appears impossible to deal satisfactorily with several major concerns, 
including: 
•      the current limited capability, technical infrastructure and capacity of 
some Participants; 
49 
• 
the requirement to have up-to-date, compatible computer software and 
technical expertise to use and maintain such a web site; 
• 
the very sensitive issues of security for commercial data; 
• 
the thorny question of financial and human resources to create, 
maintain and fund such a web site. 
If such a web site is created, the WGS would recommend that it NOT be 
placed under its aegis but be independently funded. 
The current web site Kimberley Process Rough Diamond Statistics should 
be maintained outside the WGS and preferably in concert with the main 
Kimberley Process site. These recommendations by the WGS are based largely 
on resource constraints. 
Resources 
The financial and human resources required to run a working group of the 
importance of the WGS are considerable and have exceeded all expectations. 
When Canada steps down as Chair of this working group, the identification of a 
new chair willing to undertake this role and the subsequent transfer of 
responsibilities may prove to be a challenge. However, the allocation of certain 
functions to other organizations independent of the office of the chair of the 
working group may reduce resource requirements and may ultimately facilitate 
the acceptance of the role of Chair by another Participant. 
Some Participants argue that thought should be given to creating a 
permanent body or bodies outside of the KPCS to manage functions such as the 
maintenance of the website and the analysis of statistics.  Although Canada has 
assumed these responsibilities at present, the Chair of the WGS is of the opinion 
that the option to explore re-allocation of the preparation of certain statistical 
analyses will need to be re-visited in the future.  This position should be 
examined more thoroughly as the work of statistical analysis progresses. 
Similarly, the statistics web site (containing confidential information) is 
maintained by the Chair of the WGS; an arrangement that may be unsustainable 
in the long term. 
The WGS should study and clarify the issue of maintenance of the 
KP Rough Diamond Statistics web site. 
50 
Internal Controls 
While the main KPCS document requires Participants to ‘establish a 
system of internal controls designed to eliminate the presence of conflict 
diamonds from shipments of rough diamonds imported into and exported from its 
territory’, and includes certain recommendations in its Annex II, there is little 
detail in the document on standards of effective internal controls.  For alluvial 
artisanal producers, the Moscow declaration on improving internal controls has 
gone a considerable way towards elucidating standards. However, there is as 
yet no recommendation or decision on what effective controls in other types of 
producers, trading or polishing/cutting Participants could look like. 
Definition of standards and controls is only one part of the challenge. The bigger 
concern is how to ensure effective implementation of those controls on the 
ground. There is consensus among Participants and observers that this is a 
major challenge for the KPCS. 
There is no doubt that internal controls go to the 
very heart of the KPCS - the pledge of provenance that appears on the KP 
Certificate itself requires traceability. Others point out that the effective 
functioning of the scheme relies upon proper implementation in producing 
countries; it is the control over production activities (whether industrial or 
artisanal), as well as the first export that are decisive for ensuring a conflict free 
diamond trade. 
Internal controls are crucial in all Participants if conflict diamonds, like 
those in Cote d’Ivoire, are to be prevented from entering the legitimate trade 
beyond the producing country. 
Speaking on behalf of the industry, the World 
Diamond Council said, “the key to success of the KPCS is in the very important 
movement of rough diamonds to the point of first export. It is in this area that the 
work of the KPCS must be concentrated in the period going forward. No more 
important area of improvement can be identified.” As well, some Participants 
believe it is necessary to enhance the effectiveness of internal controls in the 
trading centres. 
The assessment of internal controls established by Participants, in line 
with the requirements of the KPCS, has been a central concern of all review 
visits carried out to date. The reports of these visits thus yield a significant 
amount of information regarding the effectiveness or otherwise of internal 
controls. 
The reasons for weak or non-existent controls are not new and are well 
known. They include lack of capacity, technical shortcomings and poor 
governance. Some governments lack political will. Borders are porous, and there 
is little regional cooperation to stop illicit, cross-border trading. Controls in trading 
centres are spotty, providing possible opportunities for conflict diamonds to be 
inserted into the legal trade. 
51 
The real issue facing the KPCS is how to develop appropriate, workable 
standards in greater detail than is currently found in the KPCS document, and 
how best to ensure their effective implementation by Participants. 
Artisanal-Alluvial Producers 
Peer review visits have highlighted that the nature and extent of internal 
controls in artisanal-alluvial producing Participants remains a major challenge for 
the KP as a whole. Poor or badly enforced internal controls are most evident in 
countries where alluvial diamonds are produced by artisanal miners, outside the 
formal sector. Countries vulnerable to conflict diamonds in the first place are 
often the least able to adopt and enforce strong control measures. Many studies 
and reports of the KP sub-groups on artisanal-alluvial production have shown this 
to be the case. 
The 2004 Gatineau Plenary Meeting of the KP mandated the WGM to 
establish an ad hoc sub-group to address the challenges facing artisanal-alluvial 
producers and to promote the exchange of best practices. That sub-group 
submitted a detailed report to the Moscow Plenary of 2005, which outlined the 
challenges facing artisanal-alluvial producers, presented an overview of best 
practices implemented by a variety of alluvial producers and set out concrete 
ways in which further progress could be made towards tracing alluvial diamond 
production. 
For Participants with artisanal-alluvial production the report included 
recommendations on: ensuring traceability of production from mine to export; 
regulating artisanal diamond mining and the trade in artisanal-alluvial diamonds; 
tackling illicit cross border trade; and encouraging artisanal miners to move into 
the formal economy. It also included recommendations for other Participants and 
Donors to assist in the implementation of systems and training for artisanal 
production. In response to this report, the Moscow Plenary meeting adopted a 
Declaration on enhancing internal controls in artisanal-alluvial producers, which 
sets out as recommendations many of the best practices identified in the report 
of the sub—group. 
In parallel with the Review of the KPCS an additional list of internal 
control standards for all Participants will be prepared complementary to 
the recommendations contained in Annex II to the basic KPCS document. 
Key recommendations from the Moscow declaration on improving internal 
controls over artisanal-alluvial diamond mining should be integrated into 
this list. Implementation of the measures set out in it should be promoted 
as part of the peer review system. Review visits should be mandated in a 
revised Administrative Decision on Peer Review to assess specifically 
whether Participants have effective measures in place, on the basis of the 
52 
measures set out in such an additional list of internal controls. Applicants 
for participation in the KPCS should be invited to take into account, while 
designing national internal control measures, both the mandatory and the 
optional KPCS requirements indicated in Annex II and in the additional list 
of internal controls. 
Review visits to artisanal-alluvial producer Participants have highlighted 
the importance of providing technical assistance to enable Participants to 
develop effective internal controls. Donors should provide information on 
assistance efforts to the coordinator on technical assistance, in order to 
share expertise and prevent duplication of effort. 
To ensure follow-up of these recommendations, the Moscow Plenary 
tasked the sub-group, through the Chair of the WGM, to report to the 2006 
Plenary on the implementation of the Moscow Declaration and, in the meantime, 
to provide four-monthly interim reports. It also called for Participants to include in 
their annual reports details of the steps they had taken voluntarily to implement 
the Declaration. 
The report of the sub-group on alluvial production and the Moscow 
Declaration on alluvial production have proved the sub-group’s usefulness as a 
forum for the exchange of information and best practices among artisanal-alluvial 
producers. It should be strongly encouraged to play an active role in promoting 
implementation of the recommendations of its report. 
The sub-group on alluvial production should be strongly encouraged 
to play an active role in promoting and monitoring the implementation of 
the recommendations of the declaration. 
Some Participants that are trading, polishing and manufacturing centers 
have relied on ‘chain of warranties’ and ‘best practice principles’ as internal 
controls; they are now calling for internal controls to be standardized among all 
Participants depending on their category. Other Participants that are latecomers 
to the KPCS are looking for direction in establishing their internal controls. 
Industry Self Regulation 
A number of Participants believe that industry self-regulation is making a 
significant contribution to the establishment of effective internal controls. Others 
argue that government monitoring and verification of industry compliance should 
be made an explicit minimum requirement of the scheme and treated equally to 
other obligations such as statistical submission. They call for the peer monitoring 
system to incorporate as an integral part of its review an evaluation of how a 
Participant government is monitoring and verifying industry compliance. They cite 
the recent arrests in Brazil, following the exposure by Partnership Africa Canada 
of lack of internal controls, as an example of the need for effective government 
vigilance. 
53 
The EC has an extensive system of industry self-regulation in place based 
on industry self-regulating bodies that have been recognized by the EC 
authorities. The system is based on regular audits by independent auditors of 
members of each self-regulating body, and operates under the ultimate 
responsibility of the public authorities. This system is subject to spot checks by 
the Community authorities. In return for compliance with these requirements, 
members of self-regulation bodies benefit from ‘fast track’ access to KP 
certificates. 
Other Participants, particularly those with major diamond trading centers, 
might consider a similar system of self-regulation as a way of enhancing internal 
controls. 
In the Russian Federation a complex monitoring and recording system of 
operations with rough diamonds is carried out within the framework of state 
control. This is done both in mining and in sales at the external and internal 
markets, and also in processing and sale of polished diamonds. This system 
guarantees full compliance with the requirements of the KPCS. 
Participant governments retain responsibility for overall implementation of 
industry self-regulation within their territories – and government oversight 
consistent with national legislation is one way to ensure ‘teeth’ for such schemes. 
There are some examples of how governments can monitor and verify industry 
compliance with the self-regulation provisions of the Kimberley Process. Also, 
Participants are moving increasingly to ensure that industry self-regulation is 
maintained under the auspices of government, where appropriate and consistent 
with national law. Botswana’s 2003 Diamond Cutting Act is an example of how 
governments can effectively expand oversight and increase transparency. The 
law stipulates monthly submission of records regarding purchases of rough 
gems, and, using agreed-upon parameters of loss, requires reconciliation of 
figures with sales and residuals. The results can be readily used by auditors to 
check KPCS compliance. 
The compilation of internal controls will make recommendations on 
effective implementation of industry self-regulation schemes within Participants. 
Controls on trading, cutting and polishing 
When the KPCS was initiated, the primary emphasis was on the 
international trade in conflict diamonds. No thought was given to the possibility 
that conflict diamonds might be concealed within a producer country by moving 
them straight from the mine to a polishing factory, thus avoiding all formal KPCS 
54 
internal control requirements. The new compendium of internal controls should 
address this problem. 
The WGM should identify any loopholes in the implementation of the 
KPCS in trading, cutting and polishing centres and make recommendations 
to address them as needed, in accordance with its mandate. 
Standards and Guidance for implementation of effective controls 
In the original KPCS Document, Section IV ‘Internal Controls’, clause (f), 
Participants seeking guidance on additional internal controls are referred to 
Annex II of the same document, where “further options and recommendations for 
internal controls” are elaborated. 
A number of Participants are of the opinion that the recommendations set 
out in Annex II, which were compiled in 2002, no longer reflect current best 
practices as regards internal controls and can be added to. Given that the 
strengthening of internal controls has emerged as a crucial issue for the review, it 
would therefore be useful to draw up a new compendium of internal control 
measures. This could draw on a variety of sources – such as the Moscow 
Declaration on internal controls in artisanal-alluvial producers; and any additional 
best practices put forward by Participants and Observers or identified by the ad-
hoc Working Group. 
Every effort should be made by the KP to ensure that such an additional 
list of internal control measures is progressively implemented by Participants. To 
this end, further review visits could be tasked specifically with assessing whether 
a given Participant is implementing key measures identified in the additional list 
of internal controls. 
55 
SECTION D 
ORGANIZATION AND WORKING METHODS 
Structures and Operational Methods 
Implementation of KPCS requirements is carried out by Participants under 
national law. The duties of the Chair, and the working bodies of the Kimberley 
Process, have been allocated by consensual decisions of Plenary to Participants 
and Observers volunteering for such roles. 
Working Methods 
In addressing the effectiveness and efficiency of the overall working 
methods of the Kimberley Process, the benefits and drawbacks of flexibility and 
responsiveness must be weighed against those of firm, well-understood rules 
and guidelines. The ad-hoc elements of the working methods of the KP and 
among its Participants, Observers, and Working Groups have, on occasion, 
resulted in hastily drafted administrative decisions during the Plenary meetings; 
however, they have provided the necessary speed to deal with issues as they 
arise. 
With that said, it is important to consolidate the decisions of past KP 
Plenary meetings. Participants and Observers have noted that it has become 
increasingly difficult to keep track of and find documents relating to the KPCS. 
The basic KPCS document and all past KPCS administrative 
decisions technical guidelines, best practices, and other decisions of 
Plenary and other addenda should be incorporated into a ‘Compilation of 
Kimberley Process Documents’. The consolidated technical guidance 
annex recommended elsewhere in this Review, should be included in this 
compilation. It should be a clear and concise reference guide, with a Table 
of Contents at the beginning and an Index at the end. This Compilation 
should be maintained on the public web site. 
Work on the ‘Compilation of Kimberley Process Documents’ should 
begin immediately after the conclusion of the Botswana Plenary and 
include the KP administrative decisions and other addenda from the 2006 
meetings.24 In subsequent years, the Compilation should be updated 
immediately after the KP Plenary, with a completion date of December 31 of 
that year.25 
24 The first ‘Compilation of Kimberley Process Documents’ should be completed by 31 December 
2006. 
25 For example, the first ‘Compilation of Kimberley Process Documents’ would be known as the 
‘2006 version’, the following year’s edition would be known as the ‘2007 version’, and so on. 
56 
The Chair of the Kimberley Process 
The position of Chair of the KP is essential to its operation. The Chair26 
(which rotates each year among KP Participant countries) oversees the various 
operations of the KP. The Chair’s duties are extensive (and may be expanded as 
requested), and range: from hosting, organizing, and preparing the agenda for 
the annual Intersessional and Plenary meetings; to communicating regularly with 
Participants, Observers, Chairs of the Working Groups, prospective participants, 
and others on KP matters; to retaining and circulating KP documents and 
addenda. 
Thus far, the KP has enjoyed active and effective Chairs. The Chair’s term 
was not formalized until the 2003 Plenary, when it was agreed at one year. 
There has been discussion ever since on the appropriate length of the term of 
the Chair position. Currently, there is little appetite for expanding the Chair’s 
term and it is recognized that chairing the KP requires a substantial financial and 
political commitment27. It has been suggested that an extended tenure could 
promote overall continuity in the operative capacity of the Chair, allowing each 
Chair a longer period of effective functioning before they had to allocate valuable 
time and resources to transferring the Chair. An extended term would also give 
the Vice-Chair more time to familiarize itself with the duties and responsibilities of 
chairing the KP. This issue was discussed, but no consensus was reached. 
Currently, the KP Chair is also responsible for the administration of the KP 
secretariat during its term of office. This principally involves organization of the 
intersessions and Plenary meetings; circulation of documents; correspondence; 
and maintenance of the KP website. Recommendations made elsewhere in this 
report address improvements to the website, the dissemination and maintenance 
of KPCS documents and contact points in Participants. There is broad support 
for this continued flexible arrangement which enables burden sharing among 
Participants and allows focus on the KPCS’ primary objectives. 
As the KP grows, possibly becoming more detailed and increasingly 
complex, the position of Chair may require additional operational and 
administrative support. It has also been mentioned by some Participants and 
Observers that the KP requires a central repository for key documents and files. 
26 The Chair’s administrative functions are carried out by a non-permanent Secretariat that is 
staffed by the Chair’s government.
27 When a prospective Participant puts its name forward for possible nomination as KP Chair, it 
should realize that the financial cost to Canada was more than US$ 250,000 to fund the Chair 
position for the 2004 term -- a sum that does not include the allocation of full time staff (of three in 
this case) that are paid by the chairing country. 
57 
Some Participants have expressed interest in a dedicated, funded, 
administrative body to work in close collaboration with the KP Chair to support 
the implementation of the KPCS. Other Participants and Observers are either 
wary of the creation of a large, formal international organization that would 
replace the KP, or are satisfied with the status quo. International organizations 
tend to be highly bureaucratic, which hinders the ability to react swiftly to 
problems and issues as they arise. Also, it is unclear how such bodies would be 
funded. 
The Kimberley Process Plenary 
The annual KP Plenary meetings have been effective and efficient, which 
reflects the dedication and initiative of each Chair and staff. 
Although the KP ‘Rules of Procedure’ states clearly that the KP Chair must 
circulate the provisional agenda for the Plenary at least four weeks in advance, 
and that documentation concerning any agenda item must be circulated at least 
three weeks in advance to all Participants and Observers, this has not always 
been observed in practice. 
The deadlines for the circulation of the provisional agenda for the KP 
Plenary and the documentation for agenda items from Working Groups 
should be rigorously maintained. This would allow Participants and 
Observers adequate time to prepare for the Plenary. 
The KP Working Groups 
In general, the Working Groups have enjoyed effective working relations 
among themselves, with successive Chairs and between working groups. They 
have resulted in diversified leadership of the KP and burden sharing, and 
enabled the KP to draw on the different talents and expertise of the working 
group members. It can be difficult for those who are not working group members 
to be aware of all the activities of the Working Groups – Chairs should be 
reminded of the need to place minutes of teleconferences and meetings on the 
KPCS website. All decisions of the KPCS are of course taken by Plenary not by 
Working Groups and the suggested compilation of KPCS decisions should go a 
long way towards making it easier to follow recommendations and requirements. 
Some Participants, often representing major diamond producing, trading or 
polishing countries, are members of several or all the working groups whilst 
many Participants are only represented in the sub-group on alluvial production, 
or not at all. 
58 
Within each Working Group28, it has become apparent that some 
members are relatively inactive. As a result, the more active members of each 
Group expend a disproportionate amount of time and resources. This is 
burdensome for the more active members, and particularly the Chair. 
It is expected that each member of a Working Group will ‘pull its weight’ in 
sharing the operational workload. At the request of the Working Group Chair, 
each member should provide a rough estimate of their contribution to the 
operation of their group. The estimate may include financial contributions, 
personnel 
hours, 
participation 
on 
the 
drafting 
of 
various 
documents, 
administrative functions, and other outputs. 
In the context of the Third Year Review, some Participants have proposed 
a system of rotating Participant members in and out of each Working Group on a 
regular basis. Specifically, two members of each Working Group would rotate out 
and two Participants would rotate in, either on an annual or a biennial basis. 
There would be advantages to diversifying the composition of the Working 
Groups and relieving some of the burden on current members. At least one 
Participant has expressed frustration at being ‘left off’ the present set of Working 
Group rosters, where the major KP decisions are prepared. 
Although the present roster of Working Group Chairs has done an 
admirable job, it would be desirable to have rotation too. Some respondents have 
proposed the creation of an Assistant Chair position for those Working Groups 
which do not have one, who could share some of the WG Chair’s workload.  
The sub-group on Alluvial Production was set up under the aegis of the 
Working Group on Monitoring to consider the challenges facing artisanal-alluvial 
producers. The sub-group has proved its usefulness but further thought should 
be given to its future and modalities to mainstream the outcomes of the sub-
group’s work into the work of existing working groups. 
The Committee on Rules and Procedures is requested to examine 
proposals for improving procedures relating to membership and 
chairmanship of working groups and committees and to present proposals 
to Plenary 2007. The Committee should consult with all other KPCS 
standing bodies in this regard and is encouraged to consider, inter alia, 
procedures for electing or designating the KP and WG Chairs, proposals 
 The four main Kimberley Process Working Groups are: Working Group on Statistics, Working 
Group of Diamond Experts, Working Group on Monitoring, and the Participation Committee The 
focus of this section is on these four main Working Groups with only tangential reference to other 
working bodies (e.g., Sub-Group on Alluvial Production of the Working Group on Monitoring, the 
ad hoc Working Group on the Review of the KPCS, the Working Group on Rules and Procedures 
and the Selection Committee.. 
59 
28
for rotating membership, the position of WG Assistant Chair, the future of 
the sub-group on Alluvial Production and modalities to mainstream the 
outcomes of the sub-group’s work into the work of existing working 
groups. 
The committee is further instructed to explore limiting KP 
participants to chairing only one such body between KP Plenary meetings. 
Physical meetings twice-per-year (e.g., Intersessional and Plenary), 
electronic communications, and teleconferences have served the Working 
Groups and Committees well as cost-effective and rapid means of fulfilling 
respective mandates. However, some Participants have failed to provide up-to-
date contact information following administrative, legislative, and/or personnel 
changes within their government agencies. These omissions hinder effective 
communication. This is addressed by recommendation 10. 
Some members of the various Working Groups have noted that time-zone 
differences have made some teleconferences difficult to plan and execute. This 
is a valid concern, which is difficult to remedy. Teleconferencing has proven to be 
an inexpensive and efficient means of operating within the KP. 
A Global, Inclusive Membership 
The KPCS has remained open on a global, non-discriminatory basis to all 
countries and regional economic integration organizations willing and able to fulfil 
its requirements. 
Membership now stands at some 46 Participants, or 70 
countries (the 25 EU Member States being represented by the EC as a 
Participant). These comprise the vast majority of all states interested in the trade 
in rough diamonds, including small and larger alluvial producers, industrial 
producers and trading and polishing/cutting centres. As well, in the role of active 
observers, the diamond trade is represented by the World Diamond Council 
(WDC) and civil society by Global Witness and Partnership Africa Canada (PAC). 
A variety of international organizations participate on an ad hoc basis. 
Participation Committee 
The Participation Committee was established in the early days of the 
KPCS at the Johannesburg Plenary of 2003. It is responsible for assessing 
whether or not a Participant is in compliance with the minimum standards of the 
KPCS. As such it is the body that decides who can join the KPCS, and who 
should be expelled for non-compliance. Its terms of reference detail its 
importance to the Scheme. They were revised at the Gatineau Plenary of 2004, 
and amplified again at the Moscow Plenary of 2005. 
The Participation Committee itself is broadly representative, and includes 
both civil society and industry Observers, and is required by its terms of 
60 
reference to have appropriate geographical balance and the necessary expertise. 
It is Chaired for a one year term by the former KP Chair. Its membership includes 
the Vice Chair of the KP. Unlike other Working Groups, it does not hold regular 
teleconferences, but rather acts through teleconference and email when it is 
seized of issues, whether new applications, referrals from the WGS for statistical 
non-submission, or other matters. 
Application
 Application for membership in the KPCS is the purview of the 
Participation Committee (PC). 
The Terms of Reference of the PC require that it consider applications for 
membership in an expeditious manner (within 30 days), and this has generally 
been followed. There is often a considerable period of informal dialogue with 
applicants. At that time the PC should set out clearly the basis on which further 
inquiry is to be made, such as through expert missions or provision of additional 
information or studies. Also this period of dialogue should be used to make the 
applicant aware of the developments in KPCS rules and practices since the 
original KPCS document (eg relevant Administrative Decisions; Technical 
Guidelines; Best Practices; as well as the nuts and bolts of statistical 
submissions). As has been recommended elsewhere in this Review, this can be 
achieved simply by ensuring that these are all available on the public section of 
the KPCS website. The terms of reference of the PC and its internal guidelines 
for statistical non-submission should also be posted with these documents. 
In addition, an important task of the Participation Committee is to engage, 
as widely as possible, with countries which deal with rough diamonds, in an effort 
to convince them to join the KP. In this area the Participation Committee’s 
responsibilities are proactive, initiating correspondence with potential Participants 
and clarifying the Certification Scheme requirements to them. 
The ad hoc working group believes that assessment of new members’ 
applications should be made not only on the basis of documents, but also on the 
findings of expert missions, as was the case for Lebanon. These expert missions 
should assess the applicant’s capacity to effectively implement the KPCS and, 
where appropriate, review the established systems of internal control and 
production capacity, particularly for countries at risk of conflict diamond trading. 
Also it is suggested that the past history of new applicants be closely 
scrutinized to ensure that there has been no previous involvement with conflict 
diamonds and, if there were, that appropriate measures are in place to avoid a 
recurrence. 
Applications for membership in the KPCS should be judged not only 
on paper credentials but also on the reports of expert missions sent 
61 
specifically to assess an applicant’s capacity to implement the KPCS 
minimum requirements, where appropriate. 
Also applicants should be made aware of the developments in KPCS 
rules and practices since the original KPCS document. 
Compliance Issues 
Compliance means that Participants adhere to the minimum standards of 
the KPCS29. 
The Participation Committee, in accordance with its terms of reference, 
must consider any relevant information submitted to it by the Working Group on 
Monitoring regarding compliance by a Participant. It then determines whether, in 
its view, the Participant in question remains able and willing to meet the minimum 
requirements of the KPCS. If the Participation Committee finds that the 
Participant in question continues to meet the minimum requirements of the 
KPCS, then it has to inform the KP Chair, the WG on Monitoring, and the 
Participant of that decision. If the Participation Committee finds that the 
Participant no longer meets the minimum requirements, it must notify the KP 
Chair in writing of the reasons for its conclusion (and may include a set of 
recommendations). 
In order to assist the Participation Committee further in its assessment of 
an applicant’s ability to meet the KPCS compliance standards, the Participation 
Committee should draw up a list of questions on the objectives of the 
applicant in joining the KPCS, as well as listing the tasks required and 
mandatory documents and data to be submitted. 
Assessment of Work of Participation Committee 
By 2002, 58 countries had stated a desire to become KP Participants. It 
was understood, following the November 2002 Interlaken meeting, that in order 
for these countries to become full-fledged Participants, they would have to meet 
the minimum standards as set out in the KPCS by January 2003. 
At the beginning of 2003, however, it became apparent that many 
countries had yet to meet these minimum standards. A tolerance period was 
enacted, allowing prospective members an additional six months to comply. By 
31 July 2003, 20 prospective members had yet to meet the prescribed set of 
KPCS minimum standards and were therefore removed from the list of KP 30 
Participants. 
29 KPCS minimum standards are defined in Sections II, III, IV, and V, and Annexes I, II, and III to 
the KPCS document. 
62 
This early round of expulsions from the KP provided the first example of 
the ‘teeth’ of the KPCS. Several countries from this initial round of expulsions 
were subsequently re-admitted to the KPCS, including Brazil, Czech Republic31, 
Ghana, Malaysia, Norway, Togo, and Vietnam. 
Lebanon became a full-fledged Participant along with 38 other countries in 
July 2003. However, Lebanon’s legislative changes that would enable it to 
adhere to the KPCS had not actually been signed into law. The KP Secretariat 
did not discover this oversight for several months. In April 2004, Lebanon was 
finally removed for non-compliance. It was then re-admitted in September 2005 
once its national legislation was signed into law, thereby coming into compliance 
with KPCS provisions. 
Another early test of KPCS compliance was the case of the Central 
African Republic. Following an unconstitutional change of government in March 
2003, the Central African Republic invited the KP to send a review mission to the 
country to investigate its adherence to the KPCS. The KP Chair decided to 
temporarily suspend the Central African Republic and consider its invitation 
during the April 2003 Johannesburg Plenary meetings. At that meeting it was 
decided that the country would be reviewed and a KP review mission would be 
sent to the Central African Republic in June of that year. The KP review mission 
found that the Central African Republic was adhering to the minimum standards 
of the KPCS, which led to the country’s re-instatement as a Participant shortly 
thereafter. 
Once again, in 2004 the credibility of the KPCS was challenged by the 
improper issuance of Kimberley Process certificates by the Republic of Congo. 
The issuance of these certificates, which covered the export of 5.2 million carats 
of rough diamonds in the absence of visible production capacity, undermined the 
credibility of the Scheme, as it was a compliance shortcoming in a conflict 
affected region. In particular, this situation affected the integrity of the Kimberley 
Process certificate itself, which is the keystone of the KPCS. A KP review 
mission confirmed this and found that the Republic of Congo was in major non­
compliance of the KPCS. A month later, on 9 July 2004, the Republic of Congo 
was removed from the list of Participants. 
The removal of the Republic of Congo from the list of Participants 
received broad attention and served to enhance the reputation of the scheme by 
demonstrating its ability to recognize problems and address them in a 
transparent and decisive manner. Moreover, removing this problem served to 
reduce incentives for smuggling and enhance the ability of the neighbouring 
30 Four Participants have since ceased being individual members of the KPCS due to their 
accession to the European Union. 
31 Czech Republic is one of the aforementioned four former Participants that ceased being an 
individual member of the KPCS due to its accession to the European Union. 
63 
Democratic Republic of Congo to control the exports of rough diamonds 
produced on its territory. 
Statistical Non-Compliance 
The collection and analysis of statistics is an important tool in KP efforts to 
uncover sources and flows of conflict diamonds and illicit diamonds. 
Nonetheless, the issue of statistical non-compliance has been particularly 
challenging for the KP, as discussed above 
Although much progress on the issue of statistical non-compliance has 
been made since 2003, several Participants continue to submit their statistical 
reports well past the established due dates, often after much prodding by the KP 
Chair and the Chair of the Working Group on Statistics. As a result, the KPCS 
has taken steps to clarify what it means for a Participant to be in ‘statistical non­
compliance’. The Participation Committee developed specific guidelines together 
with the Working Group on Statistics to deal with the issue of statistical non-
reporting, in recognition of the importance of the collection and analysis of 
statistics as a tool in KP efforts to uncover sources and flows of conflict diamonds 
and illicit diamonds. These procedures were agreed at the Moscow Plenary since 
then the timeliness of statistical reporting has been much improved. 
Dispute Resolution and Compliance Issues 
In the course of organizational interaction, disputes are inevitable. It is 
therefore important to have a fair and transparent mechanism through which 
disputes may be resolved in an equitable manner. 
According to Section VI, Paragraph 16, disputes are to be communicated 
to the KP Chair, “who is to inform all Participants without delay about the said 
concern and enter into dialogue on how to address it”. The KP Chair also informs 
relevant Observers about the dispute or concern, and Participants and Observers 
are expected to treat the matter with strict confidentiality. The KP Chair is 
responsible for mediating disputes, whether procedural or substantive in nature. 
There has so far been one occasion on which the formal provisions of the KP for 
dispute resolution have been invoked. These led ultimately to the removal of a 
Participant. By general consensus, this instance is perceived to have 
strengthened the KPCS by showing it has teeth. To date, all other disputes have 
been handled informally by the Chair or by KP working groups within the terms of 
their mandate. 
Exclusion from the Scheme should only be considered in the most serious 
cases of non-compliance, where the maintenance of a Participant inside the 
KPCS would seriously jeopardize the integrity of the Scheme itself. If possible, 
the KP should avoid a scenario whereby a significant proportion of production or 
64 
trade is excluded from the KPCS and a ‘parallel trading circuit’ is established 
outside the KPCS. This, unfortunately, may be the situation in the case of the 
Brazil, discussed below. 
The requirement for a fully delineated suspension mechanism which 
applied to all Participants and which included criteria and procedures for 
readmission was discussed. No consensus was achieved on this issue. 
Transparency 
The Kimberley Process strives to be transparent. However, it is concerned 
to balance transparency with necessary confidentiality, as for example, security 
requirements required when dealing with politically sensitive and/or commercially 
valuable information relating to the trade in rough diamonds, or information that is 
sub-judice. In its outreach to the public, the KP’s principal communication tool is 
its general KP web site, where it seeks to balance these concerns. 
Web sites 
The KP has two web sites: the first, the KP Rough Diamonds Statistics 
website and the second, the Kimberley Process general web site. 
The KP Rough Diamond Statistics web site 
This web site is an internal tool for the collection of statistics and other 
related information relating to the trade in rough diamonds. It is operated, 
maintained and paid for by the Chair of the Working Group on Statistics 
(Canada). It is for internal KP use only and has access by password. But the 
home page has an active “contact us” outlet. It is accessed through the general 
KP web site 
Elsewhere in this Review, in the section dealing with the KP’s statistical 
underpinning, two recommendations relate to increased transparency: 
• 
the first recommends that Participants which are late in submitting the 
required statistics should be listed on the KP web site. This action is 
intended to embarrass Participants into a more timely submission of 
required information. It also provides greater information within the 
Scheme on the performance of other members of the KPCS; 
• 
the second recommendation calls for the publication of all KPCS 
tabulations of satisfactory quality, once steps to protect commercially 
sensitive data are introduced. This information could be published on 
the Statistics web site in an area to be accessed by the public, or 
made available through a link to the general KP web site. 
65 
The Kimberley Process web site. 
The responsibility to operate and maintain this site moves from KP Chair 
to KP Chair. 
The site has both a members’ only section and a public section. The 
public section includes information on the background of the KP, its structure, 
and selected documents. Critics claim, correctly, that it does not include all key 
KP documents, such as national legislation relating to the KP, or annual reports 
or the full peer review reports, only summaries of those reports; that documents 
are not posted consistently or in a timely fashion; and that there is no obvious 
point of contact listed to request further information. They have suggested also 
that the website could benefit from some reorganization, listing information in 
reverse chronological order so that information on most recent developments 
appears first. 
Some of these concerns are dealt with by recommendations in other 
sections of this Review: 
• 
in several sections it is recommended that lists of contacts and 
officials in Participants and in working groups be posted publicly; 
• 
in the section dealing with KPCS working methods, it is recommended 
that the basic documents of the KPCS be compiled and posted 
publicly; 
• 
the section on Monitoring includes a recommendation which suggests 
a broader distribution of the peer review visits to include international 
organizations with an interest in the diamond sector; 
• 
as well, the Monitoring section recommends that, in order to ensure a 
maximum of public transparency of the peer review process, detailed 
summaries of review visit reports, following the standard template 
developed by the Working Group on Monitoring, should be prepared in 
all cases. 
As well, the KPCS should make available on the public site all 
documents concerning the Scheme that do not have confidentiality 
implications. 
In addition, the “contact us” function should link the public to contacts who 
can provide additional information on a range of KPCS material. 
A search function should also be added to the website 
Future information posted to the website should be listed in reverse 
chronological order. 
The three technical points above are drawn to the attention of the 
Manager of the Kimberley Process web site. 
66 
Role of Observers 
In the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme document, observers are 
defined as “a representative of civil society, the diamond industry, international 
organizations and non-participating governments invited to take part in Plenary 
meetings”. In fact, representatives of the diamond industry and of civil society 
play an essential role in the day-to-day operation of the KPCS. 
The Diamond Industry – Self-Regulation 
In October 2002, when the Kimberley Process was in its infancy, the 
International Diamond Manufacturers Association (IDMA) and the World 
Federation of Diamond Bourses (WFDB) created a voluntary system of self-
regulation which required its members to sign on to a System of Warranties and 
a Code of Conduct. 
While the system is voluntary, it required the expulsion of members who 
violated the system, and publication of their names. It also required members to 
work with governments to publicize various information in support of the 
Kimberley Process and to “assist and provide technical support regarding 
government regulations and trade resolutions restricting the trade in conflict 
diamonds to all legitimate parties in need of such information or expertise.” 
The World Diamond Council (WDC), which was established by the 
industry to represent its interests in the Kimberley Process, led industry efforts to 
spread the use within the trade of the system of warranties to support and 
strengthen the Scheme. The system of warranties is supposed to guarantee the 
provenance of diamonds and certify that the diamonds sold are conflict free. 
The WDC spread the use of the system by undertaking an education 
program, in association with other trade organizations like the WFDB and IDMA. 
The program included holding numerous seminars, publishing information 
material, issuing a poster for use by the trade to train employees in 
manufacturing and retail businesses and drawing up a ‘Self-Assessment 
Checklist” to assist company’s to self-monitor their compliance with the System  
of Warranties. 
Future plans for continuing education within the trade include a program to 
be undertaken by a newly created WDC committee on public relations. The 
committee will raise the profile of the System of Warranties and further promote 
the system’s use by establishing a presence at prominent international trade 
shows. An interactive web site – www.diamondfacts,org – has been instituted by 
the WDC at its own expense providing information about diamond producing 
nations, the good that diamonds can do for producing nations, and more. 
67 
The WDC is encouraged to continue its work of educating the trade 
in the functioning of the KPCS and in the trade’s responsibility to ensure 
its effective operation. 
As another measure of self-regulation, the World Federation of Diamond 
Bourses is introducing a WFDB Mark to provide reassurance of integrity and 
reliability. The mark will be made available to members of the WDFB affiliated 
bourses that adhere to the WDFB’s code of principles and confirm the 
Federation’s ethical practices. Members who fall short of these standards will be 
deprived of the right to use the Mark and will be subject to sanctions by his or her 
bourse’s judicial system. 
It has been suggested that industry self-regulation could be strengthened 
through more rigorous monitoring and enforcement of implementation. The code 
of conduct and system of warranties could be developed into a mechanism to 
further support government efforts to track rough diamond transactions. 
In accordance with its original 2002 declaration to provide technical 
support and expertise in support of the Kimberley Process, representatives of the 
diamond industry play an integral role in the functioning of the KPCS. They 
provide the Chair of the Working Group of Diamond Experts, who draws on 
various areas of the trade for expert technical advice essential to the proper 
functioning of the KPCS; they provide expertise on other Working Groups, they 
participate in peer review visits as members of visiting teams and assist with 
analysis of resulting reports. This assistance is fully funded by the industry. All in 
all, they are an integral part of the KPCS and essential to its functioning. 
The Role of Civil Society 
The seminal reports of two representative NGOs, Global Witness and 
Partnership Africa Canada, “A Rough Trade” and “The Heart of the Matter”, 
played a vital role in the creation of the Kimberley Process, as they publicized 
conflict diamonds and drew international attention to the human rights atrocities 
that were occurring as a result of conflict diamonds. (www.globalwitness.com) 
Since the origin of the Process at Kimberley in 2000, civil society 
representatives have played an essential role in motivating the Process, in 
negotiating its establishment and in its operation. 
As active Observers of the Process, they continue to keep in the public 
eye the issue of conflict diamonds. They do this by their user friendly, up-to-date 
web sites, and by issuing important reports such as Global Witness’ report 
“Making it Work” and their brochure “Are You Looking for the Perfect Diamond”; 
68 
and PAC’s monthly newsletter “Other Facets” and their report “Fugitives and 
Phantoms: The Diamond Exporters of Brazil”. 
They continue to champion other diamond-related activities such as the 
Diamond Development Initiative (DDI), which held an international convening 
meeting in Accra, Ghana in October 2005 and included prominent diamond 
organizations and companies; it should be noted that the diamond company De 
Beers was a founding member of the DDI initiative and attended the Accra 
meeting in that capacity. 
Their role in the operation of the KPCS is equally important. They conduct 
independent NGO reviews of Participants to assess how the KPCS is 
functioning, and publicize their findings; these can be key to bringing problems to 
the attention of the Kimberley Process, as shown by their important press release 
on the current situation in Brazil and their recent report on diamond smuggling in 
Guyana, entitled “Triple Jeopardy”. These NGO investigations show that they can 
play an effective watchdog role, monitoring systems in place and working with 
local authorities to ensure proper implementation and proper functioning. 
The KP should cooperate with representatives of civil society, 
including at local levels, to promote effective KPCS implementation, 
especially in those countries that have weak systems, limited capacity 
and/or have been affected by conflict diamonds. 
Civil 
society, 
supported 
by 
government 
grants, 
has 
funded 
the 
participation in review missions and review visits of experts from developing, 
artisanal-alluvial producer Participants, They point out, however, that funding for 
broader civil society participation, government participation in review visits, and 
research work cannot sustainably be borne by them and that alternative funding 
must be considered. Civil Society representatives participate in these reviews 
themselves as team members and they sit as full members on the KPCS 
Working Groups. They have conducted training sessions for government and civil 
society observers participating in peer review visits. And by their creative and 
active involvement the operation of the KPCS, they ably play a full and essential 
role in the operations of the KPCS. 
More information is available at 
www.globalwitness.com 
Links with International Organizations 
The Kimberley Process’ involvement with international organizations dates 
from its earliest days, back to the UN General Assembly resolution 55/56 of 
December 2000, when UNGA endorsed the Kimberley Process and urged the 
implementation of its certification scheme as soon as possible. Since that time, 
links with international organizations have been maintained, as shown by the 
participation in this Review by the World Bank, the IMF and by UN Missions 
69 
serving in the DRC (MONUC), Sierra Leone (UNAMSIL), Côte d’Ivoire (UNOCI) 
and Liberia (UNMIL). The World Bank and IMF have attended KP Plenary 
meetings. As well, the 2005 and 2006 KP Chairs have worked with the UNSC 
Sanctions Committee on Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire. 
Increasingly, however, Participants are calling for a closer working 
relationship with international organizations which have activities that are 
relevant to diamond production and trade. These would include the UNDP, 
international financial institutions like the World Bank and other multilateral 
development banks, and the UN Secretariat. They should be consistently invited 
to KPCS Plenary meetings as Observers, and kept informed of KP decisions and 
reports. This would improve the exchange of information and would broaden the 
reach of the KP. 
70 
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
SECTION B 
IMPACT OF THE KPCS 
Cases of KPCS Infringement and Responses by Participant 
Authorities 
1. As part of their Annual Reports, KP Participants should be required to provide 
more detailed information on cases of infringement of the KPCS which they are 
able to share within the provisions of their national legislation. Where possible 
they should include the number of seizures of rough diamond shipments along 
with details on the weight, value, exporter, importer, and country of origin of the 
parcel, as well as other details concerning the prosecution and outcome of each 
case. Also KP Participants should be encouraged to share this information with 
one another on an ad hoc basis 
The KP and Peace and Security 
2. High priority should be given to following through on the nine points contained 
in the KP Resolution of 17 November 2005 on illicit diamond production in Côte 
d’Ivoire. 
3. Through the Chair, the KP should continue to work closely with the UN as well 
as its various branches, agencies, ‘Expert Panels’ and other appropriate 
international agencies to improve information exchange and to broaden the reach 
of the KP. In order to ensure maximum public transparency, detailed summaries 
of review visit reports, following the standard template developed by the Working 
Group on Monitoring, should be prepared in all cases and posted in the public 
area of the KP web site, consistent with KPCS data publication standards. 
71 
SECTION C 
TECHNICAL PROVISIONS OF THE SCHEME 
Definitions 
4. The matter of conflicting definitions and missing definitions is important and is 
one that must be addressed by the WGDE. 
Classification (HS codes) 
5. Disagreements over value and classification codes are increasingly 
problematic and result in hampering the trade in rough diamonds; it is 
recommended that the highest priority be given to resolving this issue within the 
terms of reference of the WGDE. 
The Kimberley Process Certificate 
6. It is recommended that, as an urgent priority, all KP Certificates should meet 
existing standards. These standards stipulate, among other requirements, that 
the KP Certificate be valid for a maximum of 60 days. This requirement will be 
implemented by the Participation Committee in the case of new members and 
overseen by the WGM for existing members. 
Mandatory Import Confirmation 
7. Compliance with the mandatory requirement of import confirmation should be 
strengthened. Accordingly it is recommended that the WGM monitor compliance 
with this requirement, and if non compliance continues, the matter should be 
referred to the Participation committee. 
(See also ‘Issues not attracting 
consensus’.) 
8. It is recommended that a consolidated technical guidance annex be created 
and form part of the Compilation of Kimberley Process Documents. 
Operational Problems 
Lack of Import Procedures 
9. It is essential that all Participants have both proper import and export 
procedures in place, regardless of the volume of imports they deal with. 
72 
Need for Better Communication 
10. It is essential to maintain an up-to-date register of KP focal contacts, as well 
as alternates. This register should continue to be available on the KP web site 
and could also be circulated annually with the compilation of KP documents. 
Participants should inform the KP Chair promptly of any change in contacts. 
Peer Review Monitoring Mechanism 
Covering the system 
11. As of 10 October 2006, 12 Participants have not yet received review visits. Of 
those, nine have invited review visits but three have not: Croatia, Indonesia, and 
Venezuela. Those three Participants should be encouraged as strongly as 
possible to invite review visits, and to do so as soon as possible. 
12. In specific circumstances, it may be useful to mandate review visits (or,
where applicants are concerned, in conjunction with the approval of the 
Participation Committee, ad-hoc expert missions) explicitly to integrate a regional 
dimension into review visit activities. 
13. In cooperation with the Participation Committee, expert missions (carried out 
on the basis of the standard terms of reference for review visits) could, in 
principle, be deployed on an ad hoc basis, on a recommendation from the 
Participation Committee that circumstances make such a mission necessary or 
desirable for applicants applying for participation in the KPCS. 
14. It is recommended that the report for each review visit state that the team has 
reviewed internal controls for effective compliance with all KPCS minimum 
standards, as set out in the KPCS documents, recognizing that some procedures 
may be security-sensitive. 
15. Review teams should continue to identify participant country needs for 
technical assistance and training, in order to help Participants implement 
effective internal controls. 
Composition of Teams 
16. The participation of experts from artisanal-alluvial producer Participants in as 
many review visits as possible should be continued and if possible further 
developed, above all in review visits to artisanal-alluvial producer Participants. 
17. The KP should seek to further diversify the leadership of review visits. 
73 
18. The criteria in the Administrative Decision on Peer Review should be 
expanded to include a provision that experts are required to be impartial and 
highly professional and should further require members to disclose any potential 
conflicts of interest. 
Follow-up to Review Visits 
19. Participants identified by review teams as needing technical assistance or 
training should communicate their needs to international donors and the 
coordinator for technical assistance. 
20. Donor countries are encouraged to provide technical assistance and training 
to meet the needs of Participants to implement effective internal controls, as 
identified by review teams. The Working Group on Monitoring considered issues 
relating to the resources available for peer review and notably for the 
participation of experts in review visits, on the basis of a submission received 
from Partnership Africa Canada and Global Witness. The WG agreed in this 
regard to examine, jointly with the KP coordinator for technical assistance, the 
possibilities for individual donors to contribute to the travel expenses of experts 
who would not otherwise be able to participate in review visits. 
21. Review visit teams and Participants hosting review visits are reminded of the 
existing deadlines for reporting and commenting on review visit findings (30 days 
after the completion of the visit and 30 days after receipt of the draft report 
respectively) and are urged to allocate adequate time to that effect. Review visit 
teams may wish to consider adding one or two days to review visits for 
preparation of reports. The leader or a designated member of review visit teams 
should be tasked explicitly with verifying the state of implementation of review 
visit’s recommendations. Any such reports on verification should be maintained 
in a central register by the WGM which would then become an up-to-date 
overview of the state of implementation of the review visit recommendations. 
22. The requirement to submit an annual report should be maintained, as should 
the requirement to provide feedback in the report on follow-up to review visits. 
23. The recommendations listed above under ‘Follow-up to review visits’ should 
be integrated into the Administrative Decision on Peer Review. 
Transparency of Review Visits 
24. It is recommended that the Chair circulate a message to all Participants and 
Observers informing them whenever a report has been completed, with a link to 
the full report on the website. 
74 
The Future of the Peer Review Mechanism 
25. The system of peer review, with its main components as established in 2003, 
should be maintained, recognizing that the resource concerns of some 
Participants and Observers will need to be addressed as outlined in 
recommendation 20. 
26. The system of review visits to Participants should be continued. Relevant 
provisions in section II of the Administrative Decision on Peer Review should be 
amended, specifying that in further review visits, attention should be focused on 
follow-up to issues identified in the first visit. 
27. In case of repeated review visits, the visits should be flexible in size and 
duration, to ensure that scarce resources are used efficiently and are focused 
where there are substantial implementation issues. 
28. The recommendations listed in this assessment of the Peer Review 
Monitoring System should be incorporated into a revised Administrative Decision 
on Peer Review. 
Statistical Underpinning of the KPCS 
Country Specific Statistical Analyses 
29. It is recommended that the WGS continue to prepare Participant specific 
analyses for review visits. The WGS should be notified of any upcoming visits 
four weeks before it is to begin. Subject to that notification, the analyses should 
be prepared and circulated to the review team at least two weeks before the 
review visit commences, to allow for discussion between the review team and the 
Participant. 
Involvement in Review Visits 
30. Members of the WGS should participate in review visits, particularly when
there are known issues with the statistics of the Participant to be reviewed. 
Transparency and Publication 
31. The KPCS should enhance transparency through publication of KPCS data 
wherever appropriate. Building on findings to be presented by the WGS at the 
2006 plenary, it is recommended that the WGS devise a formula for the release 
of basic data as soon as possible.  It is also recommended that the debate about 
the current quality of KP statistics should not affect the formula for the release of 
statistical data but rather should be redirected into the ongoing effort to address 
75 
important quality issues appearing in the published (and unpublished) statistical 
summaries. 
32. The WGS should study and clarify the issue of maintenance of the KP Rough 
Diamond Statistical web site. 
Internal Controls 
Artisanal-Alluvial Production 
33. In parallel with the Review of the KPCS, a consolidated list of internal control 
standards for all Participants will be prepared complementary to the 
recommendations contained in Annex II to the basic KPCS document. Key 
recommendations from the Moscow declaration on improving internal controls 
over artisanal-alluvial diamond mining should be integrated into this list. 
Implementation of the measures set out in it should be promoted as part of the 
peer review system. Review visits should be mandated in a revised 
Administrative Decision on Peer Review to assess specifically whether 
Participants have effective measures in place, on the basis of the measures set 
out in such an additional list of internal controls. Applicants for participation in 
the KPCS should be invited to use the indicated additional list of standards of 
internal controls while designing national internal control measures. 
Technical Assistance to Artisanal-Alluvial Producing Participants 
34. Donors should provide information on assistance efforts to the coordinator on 
technical assistance, in order to share expertise and prevent duplication of effort. 
Implementation of Effective Internal Controls 
35. The sub-group on alluvial production should be strongly encouraged to play 
an active role in promoting and monitoring the implementation of the 
recommendations of the declaration. 
More General Problems 
Trading, Cutting and Polishing Centres 
36. The WGM should identify any loopholes in the implementation of the KPCS in 
trading, cutting and polishing centres and make recommendations to address 
them as needed, in accordance with its mandate. 
76 
SECTION D 
ORGANIZATION AND WORKING METHODS 
Working Methods 
37. The basic KPCS document and all past KPCS administrative decisions, 
technical guidelines, best practices, and other decisions of Plenary and other 
addenda should be incorporated into a ‘Compilation of Kimberley Process 
Documents’. The consolidated technical guidance annex, recommended 
elsewhere in this Review, should be included in this compilation. It should be a 
clear and concise reference guide, with a Table of Contents at the beginning and 
an Index at the end. This Compilation should be maintained on the public web 
site. 
38. Work on the ‘Compilation of Kimberley Process Documents’ should begin 
immediately after the conclusion of the Botswana Plenary and include the KP 
administrative decisions and other addenda from the 2006 meetings. In 
subsequent years, the Compilation should be updated immediately after the KP 
Plenary, with a completion date of December 31 of that year. 
The Kimberley Process Plenary 
39. The deadlines for the circulation of the provisional agenda for the KP Plenary 
and the documentation for agenda items from Working Groups should be 
rigorously maintained. This would allow Participants and Observers adequate 
time to prepare for the Plenary. 
The KP Working Groups 
40. The Committee on Rules and Procedures is requested to examine proposals 
for improving procedures relating to membership and chairmanship of working 
groups and committees and to present proposals to Plenary 2007. The 
Committee should consult with all other KPCS standing bodies in this regard and 
is encouraged to consider, inter alia, procedures for electing or designating the 
KP and WG Chairs, proposals for rotating membership, the position of WG 
Assistant Chair, the future of the sub-group on Alluvial Production and modalities 
to mainstream the outcomes of the sub-group’s work into the work of existing 
working groups. 
The committee is further instructed to explore limiting 
participants to chairing only one such body between KP Plenary meetings. 
77 
A Global Inclusive Membership 
Terms of Application 
41. Applications for membership in the KPCS should be judged not only on paper 
credentials but also on the reports of expert missions sent specifically to assess 
an applicant’s capacity to implement the KPCS minimum requirements, where 
appropriate. 
42. Also applicants should be made aware of the developments in KPCS rules 
and practices since the original KPCS document. 
New Applications 
43. The Participation Committee should draw up a list of questions on the 
objectives of the applicant in joining the KPCS, as well as listing the tasks 
required and mandatory documents and data to be submitted. 
Transparency 
The Kimberley Process Web Site 
44. The KPCS should make available on the public site all documents concerning 
the Scheme that do not have confidentiality implications. 
Role of Observers 
The Diamond Industry – Self Regulation 
45. The WDC is encouraged to continue its work of educating the trade in the 
functioning of the KPCS and in the trade’s responsibility to ensure its effective 
operation. 
The Role of Civil Society 
46. The KP should cooperate with representatives of civil society, including at 
local levels, to promote effective KPCS implementation, especially in those 
countries that have weak systems, limited capacity and/or have been affected by 
conflict diamonds. 
78 
SUMMARY OF ISSUES ON WHICH NO CONSENSUS WAS  
REACHED 
1.
 No agreement was reached on a proposal to the effect that, on a trial 
basis, the position of Chair of the KP and Vice-Chair of the KP should both be 
extended to two-year terms, beginning in 2008. 
2.
 No agreement was reached on proposals to the effect that, on a trial 
basis, a central, permanent and professional Secretariat be created with a small 
yet skilled staff that would work in concert with the KP Chair, Participants, 
Observers, and Working Groups 
3.
 No agreement was reached on proposals to establish a high-level ad hoc 
committee on financing that would consider the financial requirements of a 
permanent Secretariat and requirements of a larger and more complex KP. 
4. No agreement was reached on proposals to mandate to a body outside the KP 
part of the functions of statistical analysis and maintenance of the Kimberley 
Process Rough Diamond web site. 
5. No agreement was reached on a proposal to publish the names of Participants 
who habitually fail to meet KPCS requirements for submission of statistics. 
6. No agreement was reached regarding the issue of possible changes to the 
Kimberley Process Certificate so as to require a tear-off import confirmation 
portion on each KP Certificate. 
7. No agreement was reached regarding a proposal to require participants to 
demonstrate effective industry oversight, including the establishment of spot 
checks or third party audits on companies, or to require companies to include 
KPCS compliance as part of their financial auditing process. 
8. No agreement was reached on how to address the evolving funding and
resource requirements resulting from participation in the KPCS. 
9. No agreement was reached on a proposal urging that illegal shipments be 
seized and not returned to the original exporter. 
10. No agreement was reached on the establishment of a suspension 
mechanism for those in significant non-compliance. 
79 
2006 REVIEW ANNEX 1 
KIMBERLEY PROCESS CERTIFICATION SCHEME 
QUESTIONNAIRE FOR THE REVIEW OF 
THE SCHEME 
INSTRUCTIONS 
• Please provide responses in electronic format 
• Please submit replies to the questionnaire by this email address: 
Kimberley.process@international.gc.ca as soon as possible and in any 
event by 31 January 2006. 
• Please feel free to attach any additional supporting documentation to your 
replies as appropriate. 
• Please leave blank any questions on which you have no views. 
The responses will be made public on a special section of the Kimberley Process 
website 
(http://www.kimberleyprocess.com) 
unless 
you 
request 
otherwise 
(please indicate so in you reply if this is the case). 
INFORMATION ABOUT RESPONDENT 
Please provide contact details in case of follow-up questions: 
SECTION A: IMPACT OF THE KPCS 
1. 
In your view, how effectively has the Kimberley Process responded to the 
mandate given by the relevant UN General Assembly Resolutions32 to 
combat the threat of conflict diamonds? 
2. 
Have there been cases of infringements of the provisions of the KPCS in 
your jurisdiction? What action has been taken in these cases with regard 
to the companies or individuals involved? Please provide information on 
the volume and value of the diamonds involved, if appropriate. 
32 General Assembly resolution 55/56 of December 2000 (A/RES/55/56), available at 
http://www.kimberleyprocess.com:8080/site/www_docs/related_docs1/unga_final_text.pdf. 
80 
3. 
In your view, how effective is the Kimberley Process in curbing the illicit 
production of and trade in diamonds in countries affected by conflict 
diamonds? 
(Supplementary question for Participants affected by conflict diamonds in 
the past: What percentage of your diamond production and trade is now 
captured by the KPCS? Has the proportion of diamonds traded legally 
increased since implementation of the KPCS, and what contribution has 
the KPCS made to this?) 
4. 
In your view, what is the contribution of the KP to maintaining the peace in 
diamond producing countries which have suffered from conflict, and how 
effective is the KP in preventing rough diamonds from fuelling conflict 
elsewhere? 
SECTION B: TECHNICAL PROVISIONS OF THE SCHEME,ORGANIZATION 
AND WORKING METHODS 
5.  
How effective and appropriate are the technical provisions of the scheme, 
including the Kimberley Process Certificate? In your view, are there 
provisions in the scheme that have proved to be ineffective or 
superfluous? Is there a need to include new technical provisions in the 
scheme (or certificate) and if so, can you provide examples? In replying to 
this question, you may wish to focus inter alia on 
• Import and export procedures 
• Provisions for internal controls 
• Cooperation with other Participants in implementing the provisions 
of the KPCS (e.g. with regard to confirmation of shipments) 
• The use of KP certificates 
6. 
How effectively has the KPCS dealt with technical problems as and when 
they have arisen? In replying to this question, you may wish to focus inter 
alia on 
• The adoption of and implementation of technical guidelines 
• Settlement of implementation issues with other Participants 
7. 
In your view, how inclusive is the Kimberley Process in bringing together 
concerned stake holders, namely producing, exporting and importing 
81 
states and regional economic integration organizations, the diamond 
industry and civil society? 
8. 
Has the operation of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme been 
simple and workable and based on internationally agreed minimum 
standards? (In replying to this question, you may wish to focus inter alia 
on 
• Consistency with customs procedures and any other 
relevant international standards (WTO, WCO) 
• Any areas where the operations of the KPCS could be 
simplified 
9. 
How effective are the internal controls established by Participants to 
eliminate the presence of conflict diamonds in the chain of producing, 
exporting and importing of rough diamonds within their own territories? 
How effective has the Kimberley Process been in bringing about change 
where there are problems? In replying to this question, you may wish to 
focus on 
• Any issues encountered in implementing the internal controls 
required by the KPCS 
• The ability of the KPCS to bring about improvements in 
internal controls where required, and its ability to mobilize 
assistance where necessary 
10. 
How effective is the peer review monitoring mechanism within the 
Kimberley Process? In replying to this question, you may wish to comment 
inter alia on 
• The degree of coverage of Participants in the KPCS by the 
peer review mechanism (notably review visits and annual 
reports) 
• The ability of the peer review mechanism to detect 
implementation issues and, where necessary, encourage 
Participants to take corrective action 
• The ability of the peer review mechanism (including the 
Working 
Group 
on 
Monitoring) 
to 
detect 
serious 
implementation problems as and when they arise 
• The practical implementation of the system of review visits 
and review missions, including with reference to any review 
visit or review mission which you may have received or 
participated in 
82 
11. 
Has the Kimberley Process provided the level of transparency envisaged 
in the peer review mechanism? In replying to this question, you may wish 
to comment in particular on 
• Whether the contents of annual reports, the assessment of 
annual reports, and the findings of review visits and review 
missions are sufficiently accessible to Participants and 
Observers within the KP 
• Whether the level of publicity given to the findings of review 
visits (publication of summaries on the public KP website) is 
sufficient. 
12.  
How effective has the Kimberley Process been in collating and analyzing 
statistical reports on the production and trade in rough diamonds to 
identify the risk of conflict diamonds entering the legitimate market? In 
replying to this question you may wish to comment on 
• The work of the Working Group in Statistics 
• The KP statistics website 
• Any statistical issues raised in review visits 
• The 
role 
of 
statistics 
generally 
in 
monitoring 
the 
implementation of the KPCS 
• The pilot study of 2004 data 
• Any difficulties you have encountered in compiling and 
submitting statistical data, and in resolving discrepancies, 
including through exchange of import confirmation data 
13. 
How effective is the scheme in resolving disputes and addressing 
compliance issues relating to implementation (Section V of the KPCS 
document)? 
14. 
Has the scheme remained open on a global, non-discriminatory basis to 
all Applicants willing and able to fulfill its requirements? In this context, 
how effective is the Scheme’s mechanism for admitting new Participants? 
(You may wish to comment in particular on the work of the Participation 
Committee, and its handling both of new applications and removal of 
Participants judged no longer able and willing to comply with the minimum 
requirements of the KPCS) 
15.  
How 
effectively 
has 
industry 
self-regulation 
contributed 
to 
the 
implementation of the certification scheme? In replying to this question, 
you may wish to provide information and comment on 
• Whether a system of industry self-regulation is being applied 
in your jurisdiction 
83 
• Whether such systems, where they exist, are able to deal 
effectively with problem cases 
• Whether Participant governments are maintaining  ultimate 
responsibility for implementation where industry plays a role 
• Whether government-industry relations are satisfactory 
16. 
To what extent do Participants, particularly those with alluvial diamond 
mining, have the capacity to implement the scheme, and how can their 
needs be met? In replying to this question, you may wish to focus in 
particular on 
• Any specific difficulties faced by Participants in maintaining 
internal controls over alluvial production 
• The response by the KP to these challenges, inter alia 
through the sub-group on alluvial production 
• Possibilities for enhancing the KP’s ability to detect needs for 
technical 
assistance 
and 
encourage 
the 
delivery 
of 
assistance where necessary 
17. 
How effective and efficient are the overall working methods of the 
Kimberley Process, including Plenary and its Working Groups? In replying 
to this question, you may wish to focus inter alia on 
• The timing, duration, working methods and organization of 
annual Plenary meetings 
• The working methods of the Working Groups (in particular as 
regards the use of electronic communications; timing of 
teleconferences; and use of languages) 
• The forms of communication and consultation used by the 
Chair and Working Groups of the KP (including the extensive 
use of electronic communications) 
• The content, format and accessibility of the KP website 
SECTION C: FOR PARTICIPANTS ONLY 
18. 
How well does the KPCS meet your requirements as (as applicable): 
• a producing and trading Participant 
• a trading only Participant? 
84 
2006 KPCS REVIEW ANNEX 3 
List of Respondents: 
2006 KPCS Review Questionnaires and Inputs 
Kimberley Process Participants 
Angola 
22 Mar 2006 
Armenia
 2 Feb 2006 
Australia 
17 Feb 2006 
Belarus 
13 Feb 2006 
Botswana 
14 Feb 2006 
Bulgaria 
2 Feb 2006 
Canada
 2 Feb 2006 
China 
2 Feb 2006 
European Commission 
14 Feb 2006 
Côte d’Ivoire
 7 Mar 2006 
Democratic Republic of the Congo 
6 June, 2006 
Ghana 
27 Jan 2006 
Guinea
 7 Mar 2006 
Guyana 
17 Mar 2006 
India
 2 Feb 2006 
Indonesia 
10 Mar 2006 
Israel
 2 Feb 2006 
Japan 
16 Mar 2006 
Korea 
22 Feb 2006 
Lebanon 
16 Feb 2006 
Lesotho
 2 Feb 2006 
Mauritius 
25 Jan 2006 
Namibia 
15 Mar 2006 
Norway
 7 Mar 2006 
Romania 
20 Feb 2006 
Russian Federation 
20 Jan 2006 
Sierra Leone 
2 Feb 2006 
Singapore 
25 Jan 2006 
South Africa 
24 Feb 2006 
Sri Lanka
 2 Feb 2006 
Switzerland
 2 Feb 2006 
Tanzania
 7 Mar 2006 
Thailand 
14 Feb 2006 
Togo 
10 Mar 2006 
United Arab Emirates 
30 Jan 2006 
Ukraine 
30 Jan 2006 
United States of America 
14 Feb 2006 
Vietnam 
15 Mar 2006 
Zimbabwe 
13 Mar 2006 
85 
Kimberley Process Observers 
Global Witness 
Partnership Africa Canada 
World Diamond Council 
Kimberley Process Bodies 
Former KP Chair Tim Martin 
Participation Committee 
Working Group on Diamond Experts 
Working Group on Monitoring 
Working Group on Statistics 
5 Apr 2006 
23 Feb 2006 
17 Mar 2006 
27 Mar 2006 
17 Mar 2006 
8 Mar 2006 
15 Feb 2006 
30 Jan 2006 
United Nations Bodies and other International Organizations 
International Monetary Fund 
MONUC DR Congo 
UNIOSIL Sierra Leone 
UNMIL Liberia 
UNOCI Côte d’Ivoire 
UN Sanctions Committee on Liberia 
World Bank 
Other Submissions 
ALROSA 
Chinese Taipei33 
Wexler Report34 
Did Not Respond 
Brazil 
Central African Republic 
Croatia 
Laos 
Malaysia 
Venezuela 
5 Apr 2006 
13 Mar 2006 
13 Mar 2006 
13 Mar 2006 
13 Mar 2006 
12 Apr 2006 
13 Feb 2006 
30 Dec 2005 
24 Feb 2006 
1 Mar 2006 
33 The rough diamond-trading entity of Chinese Taipei meets the minimum requirements of the 
KPCS. 
34 An independent review commissioned by Global Witness and endorsed by several NGOs. 
86 
