Wednesday,
April 9, 2003
Part III
Department of Labor
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration 
29 CFR Part 2510 and 2570
Employee Retirement Income Security Act 
of 1974; Procedures for Administrative 
Hearings Regarding Plans Established or 
Maintained Under or Pursuant to 
Collective Bargaining Agreements Under 
Section 3(40)(A) of ERISA; Final Rule
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
15:31 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00001
Fmt 4717
Sfmt 4717
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17472
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration 
29 CFR Part 2510
RIN 1210–AA48
Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act of 1974; Plans Established or 
Maintained Under or Pursuant to 
Collective Bargaining Agreements 
Under Section 3(40)(A) of ERISA
AGENCY: Employee Benefits Security 
Administration, Labor.
ACTION: Final rule.
SUMMARY: This document contains a 
regulation under the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 
as amended, (ERISA or the Act) setting 
forth specific criteria that, if met and if 
certain other factors set forth in the 
regulation are not present, constitute a 
finding by the Secretary of Labor (the 
Secretary) that a plan is established or 
maintained under or pursuant to one or 
more collective bargaining agreements 
for purposes of section 3(40) of ERISA. 
Employee welfare benefit plans, such as 
health care plans, that meet the 
requirements of the regulation are 
excluded from the definition of 
‘‘multiple employer welfare 
arrangements’’ under section 3(40) of 
ERISA and consequently are not subject 
to state regulation of multiple employer 
welfare arrangements as provided for by 
the Act. Regulations published 
elsewhere in this issue of the Federal 
Register set forth a procedure for 
obtaining a determination by the 
Secretary as to whether a particular 
employee welfare benefit plan is 
established or maintained under or 
pursuant to one or more agreements that 
are collective bargaining agreements for 
purposes of section 3(40) of ERISA. The 
procedure is available only in situations 
where the jurisdiction or law of a state 
has been asserted against an entity that 
contends it meets the exception for 
plans established or maintained under 
or pursuant to one or more collective 
bargaining agreements. This regulation 
is intended to assist labor organizations, 
plan sponsors and state insurance 
departments in determining whether a 
plan is a ‘‘multiple employer welfare 
arrangement’’ within the meaning of 
section 3(40) of ERISA.
EFFECTIVE DATE: June 9, 2003.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: 
Elizabeth A. Goodman, Office of 
Regulations and Interpretations, 
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration, U.S. Department of 
Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., 
Room N–5669, Washington, DC 20210, 
(202) 693–8510. This is not a toll-free 
number.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
A. Background 
The Statute 
Section 3(40) of ERISA defines the 
term multiple employer welfare 
arrangement (MEWA), in pertinent part, 
as an employee welfare benefit plan, or 
any other arrangement (other than an 
employee welfare benefit plan), which 
is established or maintained for the 
purpose of offering or providing any 
benefit described in paragraph (1) of 
section 3 of the Act to the employees of 
two or more employers (including one 
or more self-employed individuals), or 
to their beneficiaries, except that such 
term does not include any such plan or 
other arrangement which is established 
or maintained under or pursuant to one 
or more agreements which the Secretary 
finds to be collective bargaining 
agreements. 
This definition was added to ERISA 
by the Multiple Employer Welfare 
Arrangement Act of 1983, Sec. 302(b), 
Pub. L. 97–473, 96 Stat. 2611, 2612 (29 
U.S.C. 1002(40)) (the MEWA 
amendments), which also amended 
section 514(b) of ERISA to narrow the 
scope of federal preemption of state 
laws applicable to MEWAs. The 
purpose of the MEWA amendments 
generally was to permit states to 
regulate employee welfare benefit plans 
that are MEWAs; the extent of the states’ 
jurisdiction over such entities under the 
MEWA amendments depends on 
whether or not the MEWA is fully 
insured. Sec. 302(b), Pub.L. 97–473, 96 
Stat. 2611, 2613 (29 U.S.C. 1144(b)(6)). 
The Multiple Employer Welfare 
Arrangement Act of 1983, which was 
introduced to counter what the 
Congressional drafters termed abuse by 
the ‘‘operators of bogus ‘insurance’ 
trusts,’’ see 128 Cong. Rec. E2407 (1982) 
(Statement of Congressman Erlenborn), 
significantly enhanced the states’ ability 
to regulate MEWAs. Nevertheless, 
problems in this area persist. Among 
other things, the exception for 
collectively bargained plans contained 
in section 3(40) has been exploited by 
some MEWA operators who, through 
the use of sham unions and collective 
bargaining agreements, market 
fraudulent insurance schemes under the 
guise of collectively bargained welfare 
plans exempt from state insurance 
regulation. Another problem in this area 
involves the use of collectively 
bargained plans as vehicles for 
marketing health care coverage to 
individuals and employers with no 
relationship to the bargaining process or 
the underlying bargaining agreement. 
The definition of a MEWA in section 
3(40) was drafted to exclude certain 
types of plans. As pertains to this 
rulemaking, section 3(40)(A)(i) of ERISA 
provides that employee welfare benefit 
plans that are found by the Secretary of 
Labor (the Secretary) to be established 
or maintained under or pursuant to one 
or more collective bargaining 
agreements are not MEWAs for purposes 
of ERISA. Such collectively bargained 
plans, as a result, were not made subject 
to the regulatory jurisdiction of the 
states pursuant to the MEWA 
amendments. 
The Department of Labor (the 
Department) notes that also appearing in 
today’s Federal Register are final 
regulations relating to filing the Form 
M–1 and Civil Monetary Penalties for 
failure or refusal to file the Form M–1. 
For information on the Form M–1 and 
related civil monetary penalties, contact 
Deborah S. Hobbs or Amy J. Turner, 
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration, U.S. Department of 
Labor, Room C–5331, 200 Constitution 
Ave., NW., Washington, DC 20210 
(telephone (202) 693–8335) (this is not 
a toll-free number). 
The Proposed Regulations
On October 27, 2000, the Department 
published a notice in the Federal 
Register (65 FR 64482) containing a 
proposed regulation (the criteria 
regulation) setting forth specific criteria 
that, if met in the case of a specific plan, 
and provided that certain other factors 
set forth in the proposed regulation are 
not present, would constitute a finding 
by the Secretary pursuant to section 
3(40)(A)(i) of ERISA that a plan is 
established or maintained under or 
pursuant to one or more collective 
bargaining agreements for purposes of 
section 3(40) of ERISA. The Department 
also simultaneously published in the 
Federal Register (65 FR 64498) 
proposed regulations (the procedural 
regulations) that set forth an 
administrative procedure for obtaining, 
under certain limited circumstances, an 
individualized determination by the 
Secretary as to whether a particular 
employee welfare benefit plan is 
established or maintained under or 
pursuant to one or more agreements that 
are collective bargaining agreements for 
purposes of section 3(40) of ERISA. 
The proposed regulations followed 
the recommendations of the ERISA 
section 3(40) Negotiated Rulemaking 
Advisory Committee (the Committee). 
The Committee was convened under the 
Negotiated Rulemaking Act (the NRA)
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
17:14 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00002
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17473
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
and the Federal Advisory Committee 
Act (the FACA), 5 U.S.C. App. 2, to 
assist the Department in developing 
proposed regulations to implement 
section 3(40)(A)(i) of ERISA, 29 U.S.C. 
1002(40)(A)(i). 
The criteria regulation set forth 
standards that, if satisfied, would 
constitute a finding by the Secretary that 
a plan is established or maintained 
under or pursuant to one or more 
collective bargaining agreements for 
purposes of section 3(40). 
The proposed regulation established 
four general criteria for a finding that a 
plan was established or maintained 
under or pursuant to collective 
bargaining for purposes of section 
3(40)(A)(i). First, the entity in question 
had to be an employee welfare benefit 
plan within the meaning of ERISA 
section 3(1). Second, the preponderance 
of those participants covered by the 
plan (at least 80%) had to have a nexus 
to the bargaining relationships under or 
pursuant to which the plan was 
established or maintained (referred to as 
the ‘‘nexus’’ group or test). Third, the 
agreements under or pursuant to which 
the plan is established or maintained 
had to have certain characteristics that 
indicate that they were, for purposes of 
section 3(40) of ERISA only, collective 
bargaining agreements, including that 
the agreements were the product of a 
‘‘bona fide collective bargaining 
relationship.’’ Fourth, the proposed 
regulation listed eight specific ‘‘factors’’ 
deemed to indicate the existence, for 
purposes of section 3(40) only, of a bona 
fide collective bargaining relationship. If 
at least four of those specified factors 
were present, the regulation indicated 
that a bona fide collective bargaining 
relationship underlying the agreements 
under or pursuant to which the plan is 
established or maintained could be 
presumed to exist. 
The proposed criteria regulation 
included a ninth non-specific ‘‘factor’’ 
in the list. The ninth factor indicated 
that the Secretary would consider, in 
making a finding, whether ‘‘other 
objective or subjective indicia of actual 
collective bargaining and 
representation’’ were present. The 
inclusion of this ‘‘catch-all’’ factor 
recognized that, in any particular case, 
other facts might need to be taken into 
account to determine whether a bona 
fide collective bargaining relationship 
existed, especially where the entity did 
not meet at least four of the eight 
specific factors, or where, despite 
meeting four of the eight factors, there 
were other facts indicating that a bona 
fide collective bargaining relationship 
did not exist. 
The proposed criteria regulation also 
specified circumstances that, if present, 
would lead to a conclusion that an 
employee welfare benefit plan is not 
established or maintained under or 
pursuant to one or more agreements that 
the Secretary finds to be collective 
bargaining agreements. The regulation 
stated that, for any plan year in which 
the specified circumstances were 
present, a plan that otherwise met the 
criteria of the regulation should not be 
deemed to be excluded from the MEWA 
definition by virtue of section 
3(40)(A)(i). 
The proposed regulation provided 
that, under certain limited 
circumstances, an entity would be 
permitted to petition the Secretary for 
an individual finding. The ability to 
petition, however, would arise under 
the proposed regulation only if a state’s 
law or jurisdiction had been asserted 
against the entity in an administrative or 
judicial proceeding. The procedural 
regulations set forth specific processes 
for petitioning for an individual finding. 
Public Comments 
Subsequent to publication of the 
proposed regulations, the Department 
received seven public comments. The 
Department reconvened the Committee 
and held a public meeting on March 1, 
2002, to obtain the Committee’s views 
on the public comments. Minutes of this 
meeting, as well as other meetings, of 
the Committee are available for 
inspection by the public in the 
Department’s Public Disclosure Room, 
200 Constitution Avenue, NW., N1513, 
Washington, DC 20210. 
The following discussion summarizes 
the issues raised by the public 
comments, the Committee’s discussion 
of those issues at the public meeting, 
and the Department’s decisions, which 
are reflected in the final regulations. 
1. Whether the Factors Set Forth in the 
Proposed Criteria Regulation as 
Presumptive of Bona Fide Collective 
Bargaining Should Be Expanded or 
Modified 
Two commenters suggested that the 
Department should expand the list of 
factors indicative of a bona fide 
collective bargaining relationship. One 
commenter argued that such an 
expansion is necessary to make sure that 
small employers and employers in 
manufacturing, warehousing, service 
and other non-construction related 
industries could easily meet this 
criterion. The commenter further 
suggested that government certification 
of a union, as a collective bargaining 
agent should be a stand-alone safe 
harbor factor. The other commenter 
noted that newly established unions, 
particularly those organizing in the 
health care field, might have difficulty 
meeting four of the eight factors. That 
commenter suggested that an additional 
factor—that the welfare plan was being 
administered along sound actuarial 
principles—be added to the list of 
factors. The commenter also suggested 
that the examples set out as part of the 
non-specific ninth factor be listed 
individually as separate factors that 
could be counted towards meeting the 
‘‘safe harbor.’’
In discussing these comments, the 
Committee noted that these issues were 
not new and had been considered by the 
Committee in its initial deliberations. It 
was noted that the language of the 
proposed regulation went as far as 
possible to be inclusive of various types 
of collective bargaining relationships. 
The purpose of the ninth ‘‘catch-all’’ 
factor is to take into account that the 
eight specific factors may not 
encompass all bona fide collective 
bargaining relationships. Concerns were 
also expressed about lowering the 
threshold for what constitutes a bona 
fide collective bargaining relationship. 
Bona fide collectively bargained 
arrangements are not likely to be 
challenged under the regulation by the 
states. The consensus of the Committee 
was that the eight factors should not be 
expanded or modified. 
After consideration of the comments 
and the Committee’s discussion, the 
Department has decided not to expand 
or modify the factors presumptive of a 
bona fide collective bargaining 
relationship. The final regulation 
therefore retains, in section 2510.3–
40(b)(4)(i)–(viii), the factors as originally 
proposed. In the view of the 
Department, the regulation carefully 
distinguishes between the specific 
factors that generally evidence a bona 
fide collective bargaining relationship 
and the types of activities and fact 
patterns that are common to sham 
MEWA operators. Expanding or 
modifying the factors to include less 
well-established or less common 
situations, or making any single factor a 
stand-alone safe-harbor, may make it 
easier for sham MEWA operators to 
mimic the regulation’s factors 
presumptive of a bona fide collective 
bargaining relationship. 
The Department also declines to add 
to the factors, as suggested by one 
commenter, the fact that the plan is 
maintained on sound actuarial 
principles. Although maintaining a plan 
on sound actuarial principles is 
important in other regards, that a plan 
is actuarially sound does not necessarily
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
17:14 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00003
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17474
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
evidence the existence of a bona fide 
collective bargaining relationship. 
The Department notes, however, that 
the final regulations are structured to 
take into account the possibility that a 
bona fide collective bargaining 
relationship might, in some case, fail to 
meet the ‘‘safe harbor’’ factors. In 
addition to including the ninth catch-all 
factor, the regulations permit entities 
that assert they are in fact established or 
maintained under or pursuant to bona 
fide collective bargaining, and against 
which state law or jurisdiction is 
asserted, to petition for an 
individualized finding from the 
Department as to their status. 
2. Whether the Definition of Collective 
Bargaining Agreement Should Be 
Modified 
The Department received one 
comment suggesting that the definition 
of collective bargaining agreement in 
section 2510.3–(40)(b)(3) needed to be 
modified to correct a technical defect. 
As proposed, the regulation required 
that a plan be ‘‘incorporated or 
referenced in a written agreement 
between two or more employers and one 
or more employee organizations.’’ The 
commenter argued that the requirement 
of a minimum of two employers, rather 
than one, was unnecessarily narrow, 
since there may be situations where a 
plan that originally was established or 
maintained under or pursuant to a 
collective bargaining agreement signed 
by two or more employers, is now 
maintained only by one due to a 
dwindling number of participating 
employers, although the plan still 
covers the employees of more than one 
employer. 
The Committee, in discussing this 
issue, considered whether, in addition 
to the reasons articulated by the 
commenter, the language of paragraph 
2510.3–40(b)(3) should be changed to 
make clear that the regulation applies to 
plans established or maintained under 
or pursuant to collective bargaining by 
a single employer but covering the 
employees of other employers who do 
not bind themselves to the collective 
bargaining agreement. It was noted that 
such entities are MEWAs. The 
Committee’s discussion focused on the 
fact that it is important for the 
regulation to make clear that such 
entities are subject to evaluation under 
the regulation to see whether in fact 
they meet the exception under section 
3(40) for plans established or 
maintained under or pursuant to 
collective bargaining. 
On the basis of the public comment 
and the Committee’s discussion, the 
Department has determined to amend 
2510.3–40 to provide that the conditions 
of (b)(3) will be met if the written 
agreement referencing the plan is 
between one or more employers, rather 
than two or more employers, and one or 
more employee organizations. 
3. Whether the Nexus Group Categories 
Should Be Expanded or Modified 
As part of the process for determining 
whether a preponderance of the 
participants covered by the plan have a 
nexus to the bargaining relationships 
under or pursuant to which the plan is 
established or maintained, the proposed 
criteria regulation defined a ‘‘nexus 
group’’ of categories of participants who 
could be counted towards the 80% 
coverage level set in the proposed 
regulation as demonstrating such a 
preponderance. One commenter 
requested that the nexus group 
categories be expanded to include 
employees of an employer trade 
association that has negotiated any of 
the multiemployer agreements under or 
pursuant to which a plan is established 
or maintained. The commenter noted 
that the proposed regulation included, 
as part of the nexus group, employees of 
employee organizations that sponsor or 
jointly sponsor a plan, or are 
represented on the committee, joint 
board of trustees, or other similar group 
of representatives of the parties who 
sponsor the plan. The commenter noted 
that employees of employer associations 
might have a similar connection to the 
collective bargaining process. The 
commenter asserted that employer trade 
associations often are involved in 
negotiating collective bargaining 
agreements on behalf of many 
employers, and that such employers 
routinely become signatories to, or 
otherwise adopt, agreements that have 
been negotiated by their employer 
associations. The multiemployer plans 
that result from such bargaining often 
cover the employees of the employer 
association as well as the employees of 
the employers represented by the 
association. 
The Committee concluded that, as a 
matter of parity, employees of an 
authorized representative of employers 
in collective bargaining should be 
included in the nexus group, just as are 
employees of the employee 
organization. 
Based on its consideration of the 
comment and the Committee’s 
discussion, the Department has 
determined to amend 2530.3–
40(b)(2)(vi) to include, as a separate 
category, the employees of an 
authorized employer representative that 
actually engaged in the collective 
bargaining that led to the agreement that 
references the plan as described in 
2510.3–40(b)(3)(i).
4. Whether the Regulation Should Be 
Expanded To Include Entities That Are 
Not Collectively Bargained, i.e., Long-
Established MEWAs, Union-Only 
Sponsored Public Sector Benefit Plans 
The Department received two 
comments suggesting that the regulation 
should be expanded to include certain 
types of entities that technically are not 
established or maintained under or 
pursuant to collective bargaining. The 
commenters were concerned that 
issuance of regulations providing clear 
guidance addressing what the Secretary 
finds to be collective bargaining for the 
purposes of the collective bargaining 
exception in 3(40) of ERISA might result 
in more state regulation of entities that 
are not established pursuant to 
collective bargaining than there had 
been in the absence of regulations. 
The first commenter was a long-
established MEWA that contended that 
it should be excluded from the scope of 
the MEWA definition pursuant to a 
‘‘grandfather’’ provision in the 
regulation, allowing it to operate free of 
state regulation even though it is not a 
plan established or maintained under or 
pursuant to collective bargaining, 
because it had been operating on a 
financially sound basis for many years. 
A similar comment had been previously 
submitted to the Committee for 
consideration prior to the issuance of its 
Report to the Secretary. Another 
commenter requested that the preamble 
to the regulation discuss the nature of 
legal defense funds for peace officers, 
which are established by employee 
organizations for the employees of more 
than one employer, but are not actually 
the subject of collective bargaining. 
The Committee reiterated its belief, as 
noted in the preamble to the proposed 
criteria regulation, that the regulation 
should serve only to define what 
constitutes a plan that is established or 
maintained under or pursuant to 
collective bargaining. The Department 
believes that the issues raised by these 
commenters go beyond the scope of the 
regulation and, therefore, has 
determined not to modify the final 
regulation in response to these 
comments. 
5. Whether and How the Procedural 
Regulation Should Be Modified in Order 
To Obviate the Possibility That It May 
Hinder or Impede Timely State 
Enforcement Actions 
One commenter expressed concern 
that the availability of administrative 
proceedings for an individualized 
section 3(40) finding in cases where the 
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
15:31 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00004
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17475
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
jurisdiction or law of a state has been 
asserted may result in delays in state 
enforcement that could substantially 
hinder a state’s ability to take timely 
enforcement actions against sham 
MEWA operators. The commenter stated 
that time is often of the essence in such 
circumstances and that a delay of even 
a few days in a state’s taking effective 
action against a MEWA may seriously 
increase the harm to the participants in 
the MEWA by permitting the amount of 
unpaid medical benefit claims to 
increase, allowing the plan to collect 
additional illegal premiums, and 
impinging or eliminating the states’ 
ability to preserve assets by giving the 
plan operators and opportunity to 
transfer and hide funds. The commenter 
specifically identified the need to be 
able to obtain preliminary and 
permanent injunctive relief and cease 
and desist orders where sham union 
plans are continuing to collect 
premiums or failing to pay claims. The 
commenter asserted that, unless the 
Department made clear that the 
availability of administrative 
proceedings was not meant to provide a 
basis for a stay or delay of state 
enforcement actions, the regulations 
should not be implemented. 
Recognizing the need to ensure that 
the regulations assist, rather than 
hinder, state enforcement efforts against 
sham MEWA operators and that there 
are situations where time is of the 
essence for effective enforcement by the 
states, the Committee recommended 
that the regulatory language be clarified 
to emphasize that the section 3(40) ALJ 
proceedings are not a basis in 
themselves for a stay-of-state 
administrative or judicial proceedings 
against a putative MEWA. 
As proposed, paragraph 2510.3–
40(g)(2) of the criteria regulation 
provided that ‘‘nothing in this section or 
in part 2570, subpart H of this chapter 
is intended to have any effect on 
applicable law relating to stay or delay 
of a state administrative or court 
proceeding or enforcement subpoena.’’ 
In response to the commenter and the 
concerns of the Committee, the 
Department has amended that paragraph 
to state that ‘‘nothing in this section or 
in part 2570, subpart H of this chapter 
is intended to provide the basis for a 
stay or delay of a state administrative or 
court proceeding or enforcement of a 
subpoena.’’ 
Miscellaneous Changes 
In its consideration of a final 
regulation, the Committee questioned 
whether consideration should be given 
to the effect of plan mergers on counting 
years of service for purposes of the 
determining the ‘‘nexus’’ group. In this 
regard, the Committee noted that the 
nexus group in section 2510.3–40(b)(2) 
includes retirees who either participated 
in the welfare benefit plan for at least 
five of the last 10 years preceding their 
retirement or are receiving benefits as 
participants under a multiemployer 
pension benefit plan that is maintained 
under the same agreement referred to in 
paragraph (b)(2)(i), and have at least five 
years of service or the equivalent under 
that pension plan. The Committee 
suggested that participation in the pre-
merger multiemployer plans should also 
be considered in determining whether 
employees meet the requirements of 
these categories of the nexus group. The 
Committee also raised the issue of 
whether employment in the bargaining 
unit under the pre-merger plan should 
be considered for determining whether 
an individual is a bargaining unit 
alumnus under 2510.3–40(b)(2)(vii) 
where the merger was based on a merger 
of unions. The Committee noted that 
Example 2 of the proposed regulation 
addresses how a merger affects the 
evaluation of the factors in (b)(4)(iii) and 
(iv) and suggested that another example 
could be added to the final regulation to 
address the effect of merging unions and 
multiemployer plans on the nexus 
group analysis. After considering the 
issues raised by the Committee, the 
Department has determined that it is 
appropriate to clarify the examples at 
2510.3–40(e) to make clear that, in the 
case of a merger of multiemployer plans, 
participation in a predecessor plan or 
employment with a predecessor union 
may be considered for purposes of 
determining the nexus group 
individuals in section 2510.3–
40(b)(2)(ii) and (vii). In this regard, a 
new paragraph (3) was added to 
Example 2 to clarify that the merger of 
two unions and the related pension and 
health and welfare plans will not affect 
the determinations of who is a ‘‘retiree’’ 
or a ‘‘bargaining unit alumni’’ for 
purposes of determining the nexus 
group under the regulation.
In reviewing the 75% test in 
paragraph (b)(4)(vi) of 2510.3–40, the 
Department decided that the regulation 
should be modified to make clear that 
in determining the amount of premiums 
or contributions to which the 75% test 
applies does not include any amount 
that a participant or beneficiary might 
be required to pay as a co-pay or 
deductible under the provided coverage. 
Accordingly, the Department has 
modified paragraph 2510.3–40(b)(4)(iv) 
to make clear that, in addition to dental 
or vision care and coverage for excepted 
benefits under 29 CFR 2590.732(b), 
amounts payable by participants and 
beneficiaries as co-payments or 
deductibles are disregarded for purposes 
of the 75% test. In so clarifying this 
provision, however, the Department 
notes that if an entity were to establish 
a co-payment or deductible schedule 
designed solely to satisfy the criteria of 
paragraph 2510.3–40(b)(4)(vi), without 
actually requiring substantial employer 
contributions, evidence of such a design 
may be considered in evaluating 
whether for purposes of 2510.3–40(c)(3) 
there is fraud, forgery, or willful 
misrepresentation as to the factors relied 
on to demonstrate that the plan satisfies 
the criteria set forth in paragraph (b) of 
this section. The Department further 
notes that the collective bargaining 
history appropriately may be examined 
in a 3(40) proceeding, including a 
review of those factors in section 
2510.3–40(b)(4). 
Independent of the Committee’s 
review of the regulations, the 
Department considered whether the 
proposed 80% minimum coverage 
requirement for the ‘‘nexus’’ test is too 
low. In the August 1, 1995, proposed 
regulation, the Department proposed 
that no less than 85% of the individuals 
covered by a plan must be within the 
‘‘nexus’’ group. A number of 
commenters on that regulation 
expressed concern that the percentage 
was too high. In developing a new 
proposal, the Committee recommended, 
and the Department proposed, an 80% 
test. In this regard, the preamble to the 
proposal indicated that ‘‘[t]he 
Committee recommended a 20% margin 
for coverage of non-nexus people, even 
though it understood that the percentage 
of participants in collectively bargained 
plans who are not within one of the 
nexus categories is rarely likely to be 
that high.’’ 65 FR 64485 (Oct. 27, 2000). 
While comments were specifically 
invited on the 80% test, no comments 
were received on that provision. 
Moreover, the Department received no 
comments suggesting that changing the 
80% test to an 85% test would present 
a problem for affected plans. The 
Department further notes that H.R. 2563 
of the 107th Congress, the ‘‘Bipartisan 
Patients Protection Act,’’ as passed by 
the U.S. House of Representatives, 
among other things, amends ERISA 
section 3(40)(A)(i) to clarify the 
standards applicable to determining 
whether a plan is established or 
maintained pursuant to collective 
bargaining agreements. See section 423 
of H.R. 2563. Although similar in many 
respects to the regulatory standards 
proposed by the Department, H.R. 2563
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
17:14 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00005
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17476
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
limits the percentage of non-nexus 
group individuals to 15 percent. 
On the basis of the comments, as well 
as the discussions of the Committee, the 
Department does not believe that, in the 
absence of any data to the contrary, 
requiring 85% of the covered 
individuals to be within the ‘‘nexus’’ 
group, rather than 80%, will have any 
significant effect on the status of 
otherwise bona fide collectively 
bargained plans. Increasing the ‘‘nexus’’ 
group percentage to 85% should 
enhance the regulation’s deterrent effect 
on sham MEWA operators who attempt 
to masquerade as collectively bargained 
plans in order to avoid state insurance 
regulation and oversight. In an 
environment where problems with sham 
MEWA operators are growing, the 
Department believes that any action it 
can take to reduce the likelihood of 
health insurance fraud against workers 
and their families is action that should 
be taken. Accordingly, the Department 
determined it appropriate to modify 
paragraph (b)(2) of 2510.3–40 to require 
that at least 85% of the participants in 
the plan be within the ‘‘nexus’’ group 
(described in subparagraphs (i) through 
(x) of 2510.3–40(b)(2)). 
B. Economic Analysis Under Executive 
Order 12866
Under Executive Order 12866, the 
Department must determine whether a 
regulatory action is ‘‘significant’’ and 
therefore subject to the requirements of 
the Executive Order and subject to 
review by the Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB). Under section 3(f), the 
order defines a ‘‘significant regulatory 
action’’ as an action that is likely to 
result in a rule: (1) Having an annual 
effect on the economy of $100 million 
or more, or adversely and materially 
affecting a sector of the economy, 
productivity, competition, jobs, the 
environment, public health or safety, or 
State, local, or tribal governments or 
communities (also referred to as 
‘‘economically significant’’); (2) creating 
serious inconsistency or otherwise 
interfering with an action taken or 
planned by another agency; (3) 
materially altering the budgetary 
impacts of entitlement grants, user fees, 
or loan programs or the rights and 
obligations of recipients thereof; or (4) 
raising novel legal or policy issues 
arising out of legal mandates, the 
President’s priorities, or the principles 
set forth in the Executive Order.
Pursuant to the terms of the Executive 
Order, it has been determined that this 
action is ‘‘significant’’ within the 
meaning of 3(f)(4), and therefore subject 
to review by the Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB). Consistent with the 
Executive Order, the Department has 
undertaken an assessment of the costs 
and benefits of this regulatory action. 
This analysis is detailed below. 
Summary 
Although neither the benefits nor 
costs have been fully quantified, the 
Department believes that the benefits of 
this final regulation more than justify its 
costs. The final regulation yields 
positive benefits by reducing 
uncertainty over which welfare benefit 
plans are excepted from the definition 
of a multiple employer welfare 
arrangement under section 3(40) and are 
therefore not subject to state regulation. 
The Department sought comments from 
the public concerning its analysis of 
benefits and costs of the proposed 
regulation. Having received no 
comments, the Department has relied on 
its initial analysis in concluding that the 
benefits of the final regulation justify its 
costs. 
The regulation’s elements for 
distinguishing collectively bargained 
plans from MEWAs are verifiable 
through documentation that plans or 
their agents generally maintain as part 
of usual business practices. The 
regulation also incorporates elements of 
flexibility, allowing entities to 
demonstrate the existence of a bona fide 
collective bargaining agreement, one of 
the regulatory factors, by satisfying any 
four of eight specified factors. Finally, 
the regulation is both sufficiently broad 
to include all plans established or 
maintained under or pursuant to one or 
more collective bargaining agreements, 
yet is discriminating enough to ensure 
that state law will apply to entities not 
meeting the criteria. Only a very small 
number of entities are likely to be 
treated differently as a result of 
promulgation of this criteria regulation. 
In the case of the few entities that will 
be determined to be not collectively 
bargained plans, the additional cost 
attributable to state regulation is 
outweighed by the benefit that such 
state regulation will provide by way of 
additional protections for participants 
and beneficiaries. 
Background 
It is the view of the Department that 
the uncertainty created by the lack of 
clear criteria for distinguishing 
collectively bargained plans from 
MEWAs has encouraged unscrupulous 
operators of sham MEWAs in attempts 
to escape or delay state regulatory 
efforts by asserting that states lack 
jurisdiction to regulate such entities 
because they are excluded from the 
definition of MEWA by reason of the 
exception for collectively bargained 
plans. In order to establish their 
authority to regulate, states have had to 
take additional steps, such as initiating 
administrative or legal proceedings 
contesting the defendant’s status as a 
collectively bargained plan, and have 
been the subject of actions initiated by 
sham MEWA operators, such as suits for 
federal declaratory judgment or removal 
actions. 
Confusion about whether a plan was 
established or maintained under or 
pursuant to an agreement which the 
Secretary finds to be a collective 
bargaining agreement has made it 
difficult for the states to enforce 
appropriate laws. The criteria regulation 
will reduce or eliminate this 
uncertainty. It will provide greater 
clarity for entities and states and reduce 
the time and expense attributable to 
court actions or requests to the 
Department for guidance. 
Benefits of the Regulation—Reducing 
Uncertainty 
Plans and arrangements will benefit 
from greater assurance concerning their 
actual legal status. States, through an 
enhanced ability to regulate based on 
the greater certainty offered by the 
regulation, will be better able to protect 
employers, participants, and 
beneficiaries from unscrupulous MEWA 
operators. Further, the majority of plans 
established or maintained under or 
pursuant to collective bargaining 
agreements currently operate in a 
manner that is consistent with the 
regulation. Most entities will therefore 
not perceive any need to undertake a 
systematic reassessment of their status 
under the regulation. It is possible, 
however, that some will choose to 
undertake such an assessment by 
‘‘comparison testing’’ the plan’s 
operations against the ‘‘safe harbor’’ 
criteria established in the final 
regulation. The Department has 
estimated below the number of entities 
likely to undertake a status assessment 
and the costs likely to be associated 
with those activities. 
Costs of the Regulation 
Entities Potentially Affected. To 
estimate the number of entities 
potentially affected by the final rule, the 
Department examined available data on 
multiemployer welfare plans 
established or maintained under or 
pursuant to collective bargaining 
agreements, and the number of entities 
self-reporting as MEWAs. Under ERISA, 
multiemployer collectively bargained 
plans are required to file an annual 
financial report, the Form 5500. MEWAs 
are required to file the Form M–1 
annually. The 1998 Form 5500 filings by 
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
15:31 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00006
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17477
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
1 This represents a smaller number of plans and 
fewer participants than the numbers projected at 
the time of the proposal. Because the Form M–1 
requirement had not been fully implemented at the 
time of the proposal, actual information on its use 
was not available, and the Department relied on 
survey data regarded as the most comparable at the 
time.
2 Data from the Health Insurance Association of 
America (Source Book of Health Insurance Data, 
1999–2000) suggests that insurance companies’ loss 
ratios for group health insurance policies 
historically ranged from about 85 percent to 90 
percent. The inverse of the loss ratio, or about 10 
percent to 15 percent, generally would include all 
of these costs except those associated with benefit 
mandates and some managed care protections, as 
well as insurance company profits, income taxes, 
and normal administrative overhead. Loss ratios 
tend to be higher (and these costs lower) for larger 
group policies, and MEWAs are likely to be large. 
The cost of benefit mandates and managed care 
protection will very across states depending on 
their extent and across MEWAs depending largely 
on the degree to which they otherwise are included 
voluntarily in the insurance products they provide. 
One study estimated that mandates raise premiums 
by between 4 percent and 13 percent (Gail A. Jensen 
and Michael A. Morrisey, Mandated Benefit Laws 
and Employer-Sponsored Health Insurance 
(Washington, DC: HIAA 1999)).
multiemployer collectively bargained 
plans numbered about 2,000 (with about 
6 million participants). The MEWAs 
that filed Form M–1 for the year 2000, 
pursuant to section 101 of ERISA and 
related interim final rules (65 FR 7152, 
February 11, 2000) numbered about 600 
(with about 2 million participants).1 The 
total number of MEWAs and 
collectively bargained plans, which 
represents the total universe of 
arrangements that might have questions 
about their legal status and ‘‘comparison 
test’’ under this regulation, is estimated 
at about 2,600 (8 million participants).
The Department was unable to 
identify any direct measure of the 
number of entities whose status is 
uncertain or whose status would remain 
uncertain under the regulation. 
Therefore, in order to assess the 
economic impact of reduced uncertainty 
under the regulation, the Department 
examined proxies for the number of 
entities that might be subject to such 
uncertainty. After estimating the total 
number of MEWAs and collectively 
bargained plans at 2,600, the 
Department then tallied the number of 
inquiries to the Department concerning 
MEWAs and the number of MEWA-
related lawsuits to which the 
Department has been party, taking this 
to represent a reasonable indicator of 
the number of entities that have been 
subject to uncertainty in the past.
Department data indicate that in 
recent years, the Department has 
received an average of about nine 
MEWA-related requests for information 
each year from state and federal 
agencies and the private sector. The 
Department also considered the number 
of MEWA-related lawsuits that were 
filed by the Department in recent years. 
An average of about 45 actions have 
been brought each year. For purposes of 
this analysis, it has been assumed that 
each case involved a different MEWA. 
Accordingly, the Department has 
estimated for purposes of this economic 
analysis that approximately 54 entities 
(45 + 9) annually may have reason to be 
uncertain about their legal status with 
respect to section 3(40) of ERISA, or 
about two percent of the estimated total 
number of 2,600 MEWAs and 
collectively bargained plans. 
The Department views this 
approximate number of 54 entities per 
year as a conservatively high estimate of 
the number of entities whose status 
could be made more certain by issuance 
of this regulation. On one hand, because 
some number of entities may confront 
uncertainty without becoming either the 
subject of an inquiry addressed to the 
Department or a lawsuit to which the 
Department is party, this estimate may 
represent only a subset of the entities 
that face uncertainty over their status. 
On the other hand, this estimate may 
overstate the number of entities that face 
uncertainty because it is known that not 
all requests to the Department or court 
actions actually raised issues related 
directly to the collective bargaining 
exception under section 3(40). 
Assessment of Status. The 
Department estimates the cost to the 54 
entities of conducting an assessment of 
their status under the regulation to be 
small. Such cost would be largely 
generated by reviewing records kept by 
third parties or by the entity in the 
ordinary course of business. The 
Department assumes that such a review 
requires 16 hours of an attorney’s or 
comparable professional’s time, plus 5 
hours of clerical staff time. At $72 per 
hour and $21 per hour respectively, the 
total cost would be $1,173 per entity, or 
about $63,342 on aggregate per year for 
54 entities. This cost would be incurred 
only once for a given entity unless its 
circumstances changed substantially 
relative to the standard. The Department 
believes that the cost is more than 
justified by savings to entities that, by 
conducting this assessment, avoid the 
need to engage in litigation or seek 
guidance from the Department in order 
to determine their status. These net 
savings represent a net benefit of this 
regulation. 
Following a self-assessment of status, 
some fraction of these 54 entities might 
nonetheless find themselves in a 
situation leading them to seek an 
administrative determination from the 
Secretary under the procedural 
regulations, incurring attendant costs, 
perhaps because a state’s jurisdiction or 
laws are asserted against the entity. The 
administrative process under the 
procedural regulations is, in the 
Department’s view, an efficient and less 
costly process for resolving such 
disputes than would be available in the 
absence of the procedural regulations. 
The Department has elected to attribute 
the net benefit from these savings not to 
this regulation, but to the accompanying 
procedural regulations. 
Reclassifying Incorrectly Classified 
Entities. Some number of entities, 
generally a subset of the 54 estimated 
annually to face uncertainty over status, 
will be reclassified as a result of 
comparison testing against the 
regulation’s criteria. Entities that 
formerly considered themselves to be 
excluded from the MEWAs definition as 
collectively bargained plans may be 
required under the criteria regulation to 
classify themselves as MEWAs. These 
MEWAs will likely incur costs to 
comply with newly applicable state 
requirements. Such requirements vary 
from state to state, making it difficult to 
estimate the cost of compliance, but it 
is likely that costs might include those 
attributable to audits, funding and 
reserves, reporting, premium taxes and 
assessments, provision of state-
mandated benefits, underwriting and 
rating rules, market conduct standards, 
and managed care patient protection 
rules, among other costs. These costs 
may be higher for those MEWAs that 
conduct business in more than one 
state. 
Relevant literature suggests these 
costs can amount to ten percent of 
premium.2 The cost may be 
substantially more if a state regulates 
premium rates and the entity otherwise 
would have benefited from insuring a 
population whose health costs are far 
lower than average. However, these 
added costs are transfers and not true 
economic costs because they serve as 
cross-subsidies that reduce costs for 
populations that are costlier than 
average.
As noted above, the universe of 2,600 
entities that includes those potentially 
subject to uncertainty covers 8 million 
participants, or about 3,100 participants 
per entity on average. Industry surveys 
put the cost of health coverage at about 
$4,500 per employee and retiree per 
year. Applying these figures to 54 
entities that might face uncertainty over 
status—an upper bound on the number 
likely to be reclassified—produces an 
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
15:31 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00007
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17478
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
3 Recent data from actual Form M–1 filings results 
in a higher estimated number of participants per 
entity than was indicated in the proposal; therefore, 
the estimated cost for the final regulation exceeds 
the $58 million cost estimate for the proposal.
upper-bound estimated cost of about 
$75 million.3
The Department has concluded that 
actual costs will be far lower than this 
and will be outweighed by the benefit 
of the associated protections that will 
flow from clarifying the state’s authority 
to regulate. As noted above, it is likely 
that the true number of entities that are 
reclassified as MEWAs will be a fraction 
of the estimated 54 that annually might 
face uncertainty over status. Among 
those that are reclassified, certain 
entities likely would already have 
elected voluntarily to comply with some 
of the state regulatory requirements and 
therefore would not incur any cost from 
the application of state law. For those 
that would not have complied with 
relevant state law, operation of the 
regulation may impose additional costs, 
such as meeting solvency requirements 
or providing mandated benefits. The 
additional costs are offset and justified 
by increased security for plans and 
improved coverage for participants. 
Thus, the added cost from state 
regulation would be offset by the 
benefits derived from the protections 
that state regulations provide. GAO, in 
1992, identified $124 million in unpaid 
claims owed by sham MEWAs. 
Department enforcement actions 
involving MEWAs in recent years have 
identified monetary violations of 
approximately $121.6 million. With 
state licensing and solvency 
requirements in place, at least some 
incidences of the $124 million in 
unpaid claims cited in the GAO study 
or the $121.6 million in violations 
would most likely not have occurred. 
It is also possible that some entities 
considered to be MEWAs because they 
are not collectively bargained will be 
reclassified under the criteria regulation 
as collectively bargained plans. 
However, this number seems likely to be 
very small because entities that can 
legitimately be treated as collectively 
bargained have an economic incentive 
to do so. Any entities that are so 
classified benefit from the savings of 
having no obligation to comply with 
state regulatory requirements. There is 
no meaningful loss of benefits from the 
absence of state protections in such 
cases because the combination of a 
legitimate collective bargaining 
agreement and the application of ERISA 
provides adequate protections. 
C. Paperwork Reduction Act 
This Notice of Final Rulemaking is 
not subject to the requirements of the 
Paperwork Reduction Act of 1995 (44 
U.S.C. 3501 et seq.) because it does not 
contain a ‘‘collection of information’’ as 
defined in 44 U.S.C. 3502(3). 
D. Regulatory Flexibility Act 
The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 
U.S.C. 601 et seq.) (RFA) imposes 
certain requirements with respect to 
Federal rules that are subject to the 
notice and comment requirements of 
section 553(b) of the Administrative 
Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 551 et seq.) and 
which are likely to have a significant 
economic impact on a substantial 
number of small entities. Unless an 
agency certifies that a rule will not have 
a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities, 
section 604 of the RFA requires that the 
agency present a regulatory flexibility 
analysis at the time of the publication of 
the notice of final rulemaking describing 
the impact of the rule on small entities. 
Small entities include small businesses, 
organizations and governmental 
jurisdictions. 
For purposes of analysis under the 
RFA, the Employee Benefits Security 
Administration (EBSA) continues to 
consider a small entity to be an 
employee benefit plan with fewer than 
100 participants. The basis of this 
definition is found in section 104(a)(2) 
of ERISA, which permits the Secretary 
of Labor to prescribe simplified annual 
reports for pension plans that cover 
fewer than 100 participants. Under 
section 104(a)(3), the Secretary may also 
provide for exemptions or simplified 
annual reporting and disclosure for 
welfare benefit plans. Pursuant to the 
authority of section 104(a)(3), the 
Department has previously issued at 29 
CFR 2520.104–20, 2520.104–21, 
2520.104–41, 2520.104–46, and 
2520.104b–10, certain simplified 
reporting provisions and limited 
exemptions from reporting and 
disclosure requirements for small plans, 
including unfunded or insured welfare 
benefit plans covering fewer than 100 
participants and that satisfy certain 
other requirements. 
Further, while some large employers 
may have small plans, generally, most 
small plans are maintained by small 
employers. Thus, EBSA believes that 
assessing the impact of this rule on 
small plans is an appropriate substitute 
for evaluating the effect on small 
entities. The definition of small entity 
considered appropriate for this purpose 
differs, however, from a definition of 
small business that is based on size 
standards promulgated by the Small 
Business Administration (SBA) (13 CFR 
121.201) pursuant to the Small Business 
Act (15 U.S.C. 631 et seq.). At the time 
of the proposed rule, EBSA requested 
comments on the appropriateness of the 
size standard used in evaluating the 
impact of this rule on small entities; no 
comments were received that would 
cause the Department to reevaluate its 
size standard. 
On this basis, however, EBSA has 
determined that this rule will not have 
a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities. In 
support of this determination, and in an 
effort to provide a sound basis for this 
conclusion, EBSA has prepared the 
following final regulatory flexibility 
analysis. 
(1) Reasons for Action. EBSA is 
proposing this regulation because it 
believes that regulatory guidance 
concerning the definition of a ‘‘plan or 
arrangement which is established or 
maintained under or pursuant to one or 
more agreements which the Secretary 
finds to be collective bargaining 
agreements’’ (ERISA 3(40)(A)(1)) is 
necessary to ensure that state insurance 
regulators have ascertainable guidelines 
to help regulate MEWAs operating in 
their jurisdictions. The guidance will 
also allow sponsors of employee welfare 
benefit plans to determine 
independently whether their entities are 
excepted under section 3(40) of ERISA. 
A more detailed discussion of the 
agency’s reasoning for issuing the 
regulation is found above.
(2) Objective. The objective of the 
regulation is to provide criteria for the 
application of an exception to the 
definition ‘‘multiple employer welfare 
arrangement’’ (MEWA) found in section 
3(40) of ERISA for a ‘‘plan or other 
arrangement which is established or 
maintained—(i) under or pursuant to 
one or more agreements which the 
Secretary finds to be collective 
bargaining agreements.’’ An extensive 
list of authority may be found in the 
Statutory Authority section, below. 
(3) Estimate of Small Entities 
Affected. Form 5500 filings and Form 
M–1 filings indicate that there are about 
2,600 entities that could be classified as 
collectively bargained plans or MEWAs 
and that could be affected by the new 
criteria for defining collectively 
bargained plans. It is expected, 
however, that a very small number of 
these entities will have fewer than 100 
participants. By their nature, the 
affected entities must involve at least 
two employers, which decreases the 
likelihood of their covering fewer than 
100 participants. Also, the underlying 
goals behind the formation of these 
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
15:31 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00008
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17479
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
entities, such as gaining purchasing and 
negotiating power through economies of 
scale, improving administrative 
efficiencies, and gaining access to 
additional benefit design features, are 
not readily accomplished if the group of 
covered lives remains small. 
Available data indicate that about 200 
or eight percent of the 2,600 entities 
have fewer than 100 participants. Based 
on the health coverage reported in the 
Employee Benefits Supplement to the 
1993 Current Population Survey and a 
1993 Small Business Administration 
survey of retirement and other benefit 
coverages in small firms, the 
Department estimates that there are 
more than 2.5 million private group 
health plans with fewer than 100 
participants. Thus, the number of small 
plans and MEWAs potentially affected 
is very small in light of this large 
number of small plans. Even if every 
one of the 2,600 entities at issue had 
fewer than 100 participants, the number 
of entities affected would represent 
approximately one-tenth of one percent 
of all small group health plans. 
Accordingly, the Department has 
determined that this regulation will not 
have a significant economic impact on 
a substantial number of small entities. 
Although relatively few small plans 
and other entities are expected to be 
affected by this proposal, it is known 
that the employers typically involved in 
these entities are often small (that is, 
they have fewer than 500 employees, 
which is generally consistent with the 
definition of small entity found in 
regulations issued by the Small 
Business Administration (13 CFR 
121.201)). At the time of the proposed 
regulation, the Department sought 
comments and data with respect to the 
number of small employers potentially 
impacted by the establishment of a 
standard for determining whether a 
welfare benefit plan is established or 
maintained under or pursuant to one or 
more collective bargaining agreements. 
No comments or data were received in 
response to this request; the Department 
therefore continues to believe that, 
because these plans and arrangements 
involve at least two employers, and 
assuming that each is small, it can be 
estimated that at least 5,200 small 
employers may be affected. 
It is possible that a small employer 
participating in what it thinks is a 
legitimate MEWA may find that it has 
unknowingly participated in a sham 
MEWA and will need to change its 
method of providing welfare benefits to 
its employees. By enabling states to 
regulate fraudulent and financially 
unsound MEWAs, therefore, the 
regulation may limit the sources of 
welfare benefits available to some small 
businesses, requiring them to seek 
alternative coverage for their employees. 
The greater benefit for employers, 
however, is an increased certainty that 
the MEWAs that remain in business will 
meet state regulatory standards and will 
be more certain to provide promised 
health, life, disability or other welfare 
benefits to employees. Consequently, 
employers will receive a net benefit 
from the reduced incidence of fraud and 
insolvency among the pool of MEWAs 
in the marketplace. 
(4) Reporting and Recordkeeping. In 
most cases, the records used to 
determine if a welfare benefit plan is 
established or maintained under or 
pursuant to a collective bargaining 
agreement are routinely prepared and 
held by a collectively bargained 
multiemployer plan in the ordinary 
course of business. For any entities that 
are newly determined to be MEWAs 
under the regulation, there will be an 
economic impact related to the start-up 
costs of compliance with state 
regulations. These costs arise from state 
requirements, however, and not the 
requirements of this regulation. Start-up 
costs under state regulations may 
include expenses of registration, 
licensing, financial reporting, auditing, 
and any other requirement of state 
insurance law. Reporting and filing this 
information with the state would 
require the professional skills of an 
attorney, accountant, or other health 
benefit plan professional; however, post 
start-up, the majority of the 
recordkeeping and reporting could be 
handled by clerical staff. 
(5) Duplication. No federal rules have 
been identified that duplicate, overlap, 
or conflict with the final rule. 
(6) Alternatives. The regulation adopts 
generally the views of the consensus 
report of the Committee that was 
established to provide an alternative to 
the Department’s earlier Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking on Plans 
Established or Maintained Under or 
Pursuant to Collective Bargaining 
Agreements, published in the Federal 
Register (60 FR 39209, Aug. 1, 1995). At 
that time, recognizing that guidance was 
needed to clarify the collective 
bargaining exception to the MEWA 
regulation, the Department had 
proposed certain criteria describing the 
collective bargaining agreement. 
Commenters on the first proposed 
regulation expressed concerns related to 
plan compliance and the issue of state 
regulation. 
Based on the comments received, the 
Department subsequently turned to 
negotiated rulemaking, establishing the 
Committee to assist the Department in 
developing acceptable criteria. The 
Committee included representatives 
from labor unions, multiemployer plans, 
state governments, employer/
management associations, Railway 
Labor Act plans, third-party 
administrators, independent agents and 
brokers of health care products, 
insurance carriers and the federal 
government. Because this rule takes into 
account the Committee’s consensus 
views, and because the Committee 
represented a full cross-section of the 
parties affected by the rule, including 
state, federal, association, and private 
sector health care organizations, the 
Department believes that, as an 
alternative to the 1995 NPRM, this 
regulation accomplishes the stated 
objectives of the Secretary and will have 
a beneficial effect on small employer 
participation in MEWAs.
The Department has concluded that 
the implementation of the regulation 
will be less costly than alternative 
methods of determining compliance 
with section 3(40), such as through case-
by-case analysis by EBSA of each 
employee welfare benefit plan or 
litigation. In addition, if the Department 
elected not to define specific guidelines 
for the application of section 3(40), 
thereby enabling sham MEWAs to 
continue to evade state regulation, costs 
for small businesses would rise in terms 
of loss of coverage and unpaid claims. 
No other significant alternatives that 
would minimize economic impact on 
small entities were identified. 
Further, the Department has 
concluded that it would be 
inappropriate to create a specific 
exemption under the regulation for 
small MEWAs because small MEWAs 
are just as likely as large MEWAs to be 
underfunded or otherwise have 
inadequate reserves to meet the benefit 
claims submitted for payment. 
E. Small Business Regulatory 
Enforcement Fairness Act 
The rule being issued here is subject 
to the Congressional Review Act 
provisions of the Small Business 
Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act of 
1996 (5 U.S.C. 801 et seq.) and has been 
transmitted to Congress and the 
Comptroller General for review. The 
rule is not a ‘‘major rule’’ as that term 
is defined in 5 U.S.C. 804, because it is 
not likely to result in (1) An annual 
effect on the economy of $100 million 
or more; (2) a major increase in costs or 
prices for consumers, individual 
industries, or federal, state, or local 
government agencies, or geographic 
regions; or (3) significant adverse effects 
on competition, employment, 
investment, productivity, innovation, or 
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
15:31 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00009
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17480
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
on the ability of United States-based 
enterprises to compete with foreign-
based enterprises in domestic or export 
markets. 
F. Unfunded Mandates Reform Act 
For purposes of the Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act of 1995 (2 U.S.C. 
1501 et seq.), as well as Executive Order 
12875, this rule does not include any 
Federal mandate that may result in 
expenditures by State, local, or tribal 
governments, or the private sector, 
which may impose an annual burden of 
$100 million. 
G. Executive Order 13132 
When an agency promulgates a 
regulation that has federalism 
implications, Executive Order 13132 (64 
FR 43255, August 10, 1999), requires the 
Agency to provide a federalism 
summary impact statement. Pursuant to 
section 6(c) of the Order, such a 
statement must include a description of 
the extent of the agency’s consultation 
with State and local officials, a 
summary of the nature of their concerns 
and the agency’s position supporting the 
need to issue the regulation, and a 
statement of the extent to which the 
concerns of the State have been met. 
This regulation has federalism 
implications because it sets forth 
standards and procedures for 
determining whether certain entities 
may be regulated under certain state 
laws or whether such state laws are 
preempted with respect to such entities. 
The state laws at issue are those that 
regulate the business of insurance. 
From the inception of the Committee 
through final deliberations on 
comments received on the proposed 
regulation, a representative from the 
National Association of Insurance 
Commissioners (NAIC), representing the 
interests of state governments in the 
regulation of insurance, participated in 
the rulemaking. NAIC raised the 
following concerns at Committee 
meetings: (1) That the rule should allow 
MEWAs to be easily distinguishable 
from collectively bargained plans so that 
MEWAs properly may be subjected to 
state jurisdiction and regulation; (2) that 
the rule should prevent the unlicensed 
sale of health insurance; and (3) that 
losses to individuals in the form of 
unreimbursed and denied medical 
claims should be eliminated. 
The Department’s position is that 
there is a substantial need for this 
regulation. Unscrupulous individuals 
have been able to exploit the lack of 
clear guidance regarding the criteria for 
determining whether an entity is 
established or maintained pursuant to 
collective bargaining agreements to 
create entities that falsely promise 
benefits they are unable to provide. 
These operators, free of state solvency 
and reserve requirements, have 
marketed unlicensed health insurance 
to small employers, often offering health 
insurance at significantly lower rates 
than state-licensed insurance 
companies. Ultimately, these operations 
have often gone bankrupt, leaving 
individuals with significant unpaid 
health claims and without health 
insurance. The lack of clear guidance 
has hampered states in their efforts to 
regulate these entities, and appropriate 
state regulation would reduce or 
eliminate the risk of losses to 
employers, employees and their 
families. 
This regulation provides objective 
criteria for distinguishing collectively 
bargained plans from arrangements 
subject to state insurance law. The 
regulation will facilitate state 
enforcement efforts against 
arrangements attempting to misuse the 
collectively bargained exception in 
section 3(40) of ERISA. In that regard, 
the regulation will reduce the incidence 
of sale of unlicensed insurance under 
the guise of collectively bargained plans 
and will limit the losses to individuals 
in the form of unreimbursed medical 
and other welfare benefit insurance 
claims. 
The Department notes further, as 
discussed more fully above, that one 
commenter expressed concern that the 
availability of administrative 
proceedings for an individualized 
section 3(40) finding in cases where the 
jurisdiction or law of a state has been 
asserted may result in delays in state 
enforcement that could substantially 
hinder a state’s ability to take timely 
enforcement actions against sham 
MEWA operators. Recognizing the need 
to ensure that the regulations assist, 
rather than hinder, state enforcement 
efforts against sham MEWA operators, 
and taking into account the input of the 
Committee, including the NAIC 
representative, the Department has 
amended the regulation to make clear 
that it is not intended to provide the 
basis for a stay or delay of any state 
actions, including administrative or 
court proceedings and enforcement 
subpoenas, where immediate state 
enforcement action is warranted.
List of Subjects in 29 CFR Part 2510 
Collective bargaining, Employee 
benefit plans, Pensions.
I For the reasons set forth in the pre-
amble, 29 CFR part 2510 is amended as 
follows:
PART 2510—[AMENDED] DEFINITION 
OF TERMS USED IN SUBCHAPTERS C, 
D, E, F, AND G OF THIS CHAPTER
I 1. The authority citation for part 2510 
is revised to read as follows:
Authority: 29 U.S.C. 1002(2), 1002(21), 
1002(37), 1002(40), 1031, and 1135; Secretary 
of Labor’s Order 1–2003, 68 FR 5374; Sec. 
2510.3–101 also issued under sec. 102 of 
Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978, 43 FR 
47713, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 332 and E.O. 
12108, 44 FR 1065, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 
275, and 29 U.S.C. 1135 note. Sec. 2510.3–
102 also issued under sec. 102 of 
Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978, 43 FR 
47713, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 332 and E.O. 
12108, 44 FR 1065, 3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 
275.
I 2. Add new section 2510.3–40 to read 
as follows:
§ 2510.3–40
Plans Established or 
Maintained Under or Pursuant to Collective 
Bargaining Agreements Under Section 
3(40)(A) of ERISA. 
(a) Scope and purpose. Section 
3(40)(A) of the Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) 
provides that the term ‘‘multiple 
employer welfare arrangement’’ 
(MEWA) does not include an employee 
welfare benefit plan that is established 
or maintained under or pursuant to one 
or more agreements that the Secretary of 
Labor (the Secretary) finds to be 
collective bargaining agreements. This 
section sets forth criteria that represent 
a finding by the Secretary whether an 
arrangement is an employee welfare 
benefit plan established or maintained 
under or pursuant to one or more 
collective bargaining agreements. A plan 
is established or maintained under or 
pursuant to collective bargaining if it 
meets the criteria in this section. 
However, even if an entity meets the 
criteria in this section, it will not be an 
employee welfare benefit plan 
established or maintained under or 
pursuant to a collective bargaining 
agreement if it comes within the 
exclusions in the section. Nothing in or 
pursuant to this section shall constitute 
a finding for any purpose other than the 
exception for plans established or 
maintained under or pursuant to one or 
more collective bargaining agreements 
under section 3(40) of ERISA. In a 
particular case where there is an attempt 
to assert state jurisdiction or the 
application of state law with respect to 
a plan or other arrangement that 
allegedly is covered under Title I of 
ERISA, the Secretary has set forth a 
procedure for obtaining individualized 
findings at 29 CFR part 2570, subpart H. 
(b) General criteria. The Secretary 
finds, for purposes of section 3(40) of 
ERISA, that an employee welfare benefit 
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
15:31 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00010
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17481
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
plan is ‘‘established or maintained 
under or pursuant to one or more 
agreements which the Secretary finds to 
be collective bargaining agreements’’ for 
any plan year in which the plan meets 
the criteria set forth in paragraphs (b)(1), 
(2), (3), and (4) of this section, and is not 
excluded under paragraph (c) of this 
section. 
(1) The entity is an employee welfare 
benefit plan within the meaning of 
section 3(1) of ERISA. 
(2) At least 85% of the participants in 
the plan are: 
(i) Individuals employed under one or 
more agreements meeting the criteria of 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section, under 
which contributions are made to the 
plan, or pursuant to which coverage 
under the plan is provided; 
(ii) Retirees who either participated in 
the plan at least five of the last 10 years 
preceding their retirement, or 
(A) Are receiving benefits as 
participants under a multiemployer 
pension benefit plan that is maintained 
under the same agreements referred to 
in paragraph (b)(3) of this section, and 
(B) Have at least five years of service 
or the equivalent under that 
multiemployer pension benefit plan; 
(iii) Participants on extended coverage 
under the plan pursuant to the 
requirements of a statute or court or 
administrative agency decision, 
including but not limited to the 
continuation coverage requirements of 
the Consolidated Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1985, sections 
601–609, 29 U.S.C. 1169, the Family 
and Medical Leave Act, 29 U.S.C. 2601 
et seq., the Uniformed Services 
Employment and Reemployment Rights 
Act of 1994, 38 U.S.C. 4301 et seq., or 
the National Labor Relations Act, 29 
U.S.C. 158(a)(5);
(iv) Participants who were active 
participants and whose coverage is 
otherwise extended under the terms of 
the plan, including but not limited to 
extension by reason of self-payment, 
hour bank, long or short-term disability, 
furlough, or temporary unemployment, 
provided that the charge to the 
individual for such extended coverage is 
no more than the applicable premium 
under section 604 of the Act; 
(v) Participants whose coverage under 
the plan is maintained pursuant to a 
reciprocal agreement with one or more 
other employee welfare benefit plans 
that are established or maintained under 
or pursuant to one or more collective 
bargaining agreements and that are 
multiemployer plans; 
(vi) Individuals employed by: 
(A) An employee organization that 
sponsors, jointly sponsors, or is 
represented on the association, 
committee, joint board of trustees, or 
other similar group of representatives of 
the parties who sponsor the plan; 
(B) The plan or associated trust fund; 
(C) Other employee benefit plans or 
trust funds to which contributions are 
made pursuant to the same agreement 
described in paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section; or 
(D) An employer association that is 
the authorized employer representative 
that actually engaged in the collective 
bargaining that led to the agreement that 
references the plan as described in 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section; 
(vii) Individuals who were employed 
under an agreement described in 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section, 
provided that they are employed by one 
or more employers that are parties to an 
agreement described in paragraph (b)(3) 
and are covered under the plan on terms 
that are generally no more favorable 
than those that apply to similarly 
situated individuals described in 
paragraph (b)(2)(i) of this section; 
(viii) Individuals (other than 
individuals described in paragraph 
(b)(2)(i) of this section) who are 
employed by employers that are bound 
by the terms of an agreement described 
in paragraph (b)(3) of this section and 
that employ personnel covered by such 
agreement, and who are covered under 
the plan on terms that are generally no 
more favorable than those that apply to 
such covered personnel. For this 
purpose, such individuals in excess of 
10% of the total population of 
participants in the plan are disregarded; 
(ix) Individuals who are, or were for 
a period of at least three years, 
employed under one or more 
agreements between or among one or 
more ‘‘carriers’’ (including ‘‘carriers by 
air’’) and one or more ‘‘representatives’’ 
of employees for collective bargaining 
purposes and as defined by the Railway 
Labor Act, 45 U.S.C. 151 et seq., 
providing for such individuals’ current 
or subsequent participation in the plan, 
or providing for contributions to be 
made to the plan by such carriers; or 
(x) Individuals who are licensed 
marine pilots operating in United States 
ports as a state-regulated enterprise and 
are covered under an employee welfare 
benefit plan that meets the definition of 
a qualified merchant marine plan, as 
defined in section 415(b)(2)(F) of the 
Internal Revenue Code (26 U.S.C.). 
(3) The plan is incorporated or 
referenced in a written agreement 
between one or more employers and one 
or more employee organizations, which 
agreement, itself or together with other 
agreements among the same parties: 
(i) Is the product of a bona fide 
collective bargaining relationship 
between the employers and the 
employee organization(s); 
(ii) Identifies employers and 
employee organization(s) that are parties 
to and bound by the agreement; 
(iii) Identifies the personnel, job 
classifications, and/or work jurisdiction 
covered by the agreement;
(iv) Provides for terms and conditions 
of employment in addition to coverage 
under, or contributions to, the plan; and 
(v) Is not unilaterally terminable or 
automatically terminated solely for non-
payment of benefits under, or 
contributions to, the plan. 
(4) For purposes of paragraph (b)(3)(i) 
of this section, the following factors, 
among others, are to be considered in 
determining the existence of a bona fide 
collective bargaining relationship. In 
any proceeding initiated under 29 CFR 
part 2570 subpart H, the existence of a 
bona fide collective bargaining 
relationship under paragraph (b)(3)(i) 
shall be presumed where at least four of 
the factors set out in paragraphs (b)(4)(i) 
through (viii) of this section are 
established. In such a proceeding, the 
Secretary may also consider whether 
other objective or subjective indicia of 
actual collective bargaining and 
representation are present as set out in 
paragraph (b)(4)(ix) of this section. 
(i) The agreement referred to in 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section provides 
for contributions to a labor-management 
trust fund structured according to 
section 302(c)(5), (6), (7), (8), or (9) of 
the Taft-Hartley Act, 29 U.S.C. 186(c)(5), 
(6), (7), (8) or (9), or to a plan lawfully 
negotiated under the Railway Labor Act; 
(ii) The agreement referred to in 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section requires 
contributions by substantially all of the 
participating employers to a 
multiemployer pension plan that is 
structured in accordance with section 
401 of the Internal Revenue Code (26 
U.S.C.) and is either structured in 
accordance with section 302(c)(5) of the 
Taft-Hartley Act, 29 U.S.C. 186(c)(5), or 
is lawfully negotiated under the Railway 
Labor Act, and substantially all of the 
active participants covered by the 
employee welfare benefit plan are also 
eligible to become participants in that 
pension plan; 
(iii) The predominant employee 
organization that is a party to the 
agreement referred to in paragraph (b)(3) 
of this section has maintained a series 
of agreements incorporating or 
referencing the plan since before 
January 1, 1983; 
(iv) The predominant employee 
organization that is a party to the 
agreement referred to in paragraph (b)(3) 
of this section has been a national or 
international union, or a federation of 
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
15:31 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00011
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17482
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
national and international unions, or 
has been affiliated with such a union or 
federation, since before January 1, 1983; 
(v) A court, government agency, or 
other third-party adjudicatory tribunal 
has determined, in a contested or 
adversary proceeding, or in a 
government-supervised election, that 
the predominant employee organization 
that is a party to the agreement 
described in paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section is the lawfully recognized or 
designated collective bargaining 
representative with respect to one or 
more bargaining units of personnel 
covered by such agreement; 
(vi) Employers who are parties to the 
agreement described in paragraph (b)(3) 
of this section pay at least 75% of the 
premiums or contributions required for 
the coverage of active participants under 
the plan or, in the case of a retiree-only 
plan, the employers pay at least 75% of 
the premiums or contributions required 
for the coverage of the retirees. For this 
purpose, coverage under the plan for 
dental or vision care, coverage for 
excepted benefits under 29 CFR 
2590.732(b), and amounts paid by 
participants and beneficiaries as co-
payments or deductibles in accordance 
with the terms of the plan are 
disregarded; 
(vii) The predominant employee 
organization that is a party to the 
agreement described in paragraph (b)(3) 
of this section provides, sponsors, or 
jointly sponsors a hiring hall(s) and/or 
a state-certified apprenticeship 
program(s) that provides services that 
are available to substantially all active 
participants covered by the plan; 
(viii) The agreement described in 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section has been 
determined to be a bona fide collective 
bargaining agreement for purposes of 
establishing the prevailing practices 
with respect to wages and supplements 
in a locality, pursuant to a prevailing 
wage statute of any state or the District 
of Columbia. 
(ix) There are other objective or 
subjective indicia of actual collective 
bargaining and representation, such as 
that arm’s-length negotiations occurred 
between the parties to the agreement 
described in paragraph (b)(3) of this 
section; that the predominant employee 
organization that is party to such 
agreement actively represents 
employees covered by such agreement 
with respect to grievances, disputes, or 
other matters involving employment 
terms and conditions other than 
coverage under, or contributions to, the 
employee welfare benefit plan; that 
there is a geographic, occupational, 
trade, organizing, or other rationale for 
the employers and bargaining units 
covered by such agreement; that there is 
a connection between such agreement 
and the participation, if any, of self-
employed individuals in the employee 
welfare benefit plan established or 
maintained under or pursuant to such 
agreement. 
(c) Exclusions. An employee welfare 
benefit plan shall not be deemed to be 
‘‘established or maintained under or 
pursuant to one or more agreements 
which the Secretary finds to be 
collective bargaining agreements’’ for 
any plan year in which: 
(1) The plan is self-funded or partially 
self-funded and is marketed to 
employers or sole proprietors 
(i) By one or more insurance 
producers as defined in paragraph (d) of 
this section; 
(ii) By an individual who is 
disqualified from, or ineligible for, or 
has failed to obtain, a license to serve 
as an insurance producer to the extent 
that the individual engages in an 
activity for which such license is 
required; or 
(iii) By individuals (other than 
individuals described in paragraphs 
(c)(1)(i) and (ii) of this section) who are 
paid on a commission-type basis to 
market the plan. 
(iv) For the purposes of this paragraph 
(c)(1): 
(A) ‘‘Marketing’’ does not include 
administering the plan, consulting with 
plan sponsors, counseling on benefit 
design or coverage, or explaining the 
terms of coverage available under the 
plan to employees or union members; 
(B) ‘‘Marketing’’ does include the 
marketing of union membership that 
carries with it plan participation by 
virtue of such membership, except for 
membership in unions representing 
insurance producers themselves; 
(2) The agreement under which the 
plan is established or maintained is a 
scheme, plan, stratagem, or artifice of 
evasion, a principal intent of which is 
to evade compliance with state law and 
regulations applicable to insurance; or 
(3) There is fraud, forgery, or willful 
misrepresentation as to the factors relied 
on to demonstrate that the plan satisfies 
the criteria set forth in paragraph (b) of 
this section. 
(d) Definitions. (1) Active participant 
means a participant who is not retired 
and who is not on extended coverage 
under paragraphs (b)(2)(iii) or (b)(2)(iv) 
of this section. 
(2) Agreement means the contract 
embodying the terms and conditions 
mutually agreed upon between or 
among the parties to such agreement. 
Where the singular is used in this 
section, the plural is automatically 
included.
(3) Individual employed means any 
natural person who furnishes services to 
another person or entity in the capacity 
of an employee under common law, 
without regard to any specialized 
definitions or interpretations of the 
terms ‘‘employee,’’ ‘‘employer,’’ or 
‘‘employed’’ under federal or state 
statutes other than ERISA. 
(4) Insurance producer means an 
agent, broker, consultant, or producer 
who is an individual, entity, or sole 
proprietor that is licensed under the 
laws of the state to sell, solicit, or 
negotiate insurance. 
(5) Predominant employee 
organization means, where more than 
one employee organization is a party to 
an agreement, either the organization 
representing the plurality of individuals 
employed under such agreement, or 
organizations that in combination 
represent the majority of such 
individuals. 
(e) Examples. The operation of the 
provisions of this section may be 
illustrated by the following examples.
Example 1. Plan A has 500 participants, in 
the following 4 categories of participants 
under paragraph (b)(2) of this section:
Categories of participants 
Total number 
Nexus group 
Non-nexus 
1. Individuals working under CBAs .............................................................................................
335 (67%) 
335 (67%) 
0
2. Retirees ...................................................................................................................................
50 (10%) 
50 (10%) 
0
3. ‘‘Special Class’’—Non-CBA, non-CBA-alumni ........................................................................
100 (20%) 
50 (10%) 
50 (10%) 
4. Non-nexus participants ............................................................................................................
15 (3%) 
0
15 (3%) 
Total ..................................................................................................................................
500 (100%) 
435 (87%) 
65 (13%) 
In determining whether at least 85% of 
Plan A’s participant population is made up 
of individuals with the required nexus to the 
collective bargaining agreement as required 
by paragraph (b)(2) of this section, the Plan 
may count as part of the nexus group only
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
17:14 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00012
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17483
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
50 (10% of the total plan population) of the 
100 individuals described in paragraph 
(b)(2)(viii) of this section. That is because the 
number of individuals meeting the category 
of individuals in paragraph (b)(2)(viii) 
exceeds 10% of the total participant 
population by 50 individuals. The paragraph 
specifies that of those individuals who would 
otherwise be deemed to be nexus individuals 
because they are the type of individuals 
described in paragraph (b)(2)(viii), the 
number in excess of 10% of the total plan 
population may not be counted in the nexus 
group. Here, 50 of the 100 individuals 
employed by signatory employers, but not 
covered by the collective bargaining 
agreement, are counted as nexus individuals 
and 50 are not counted as nexus individuals. 
Nonetheless, the Plan satisfies the 85% 
criterion under paragraph (b)(2) because a 
total of 435 (335 individuals covered by the 
collective bargaining agreement, plus 50 
retirees, plus 50 individuals employed by 
signatory employers), or 87%, of the 500 
participants in Plan A are individuals who 
may be counted as nexus participants under 
paragraph (b)(2). Beneficiaries (e.g., spouses, 
dependent children, etc.) are not counted to 
determine whether the 85% test has been 
met.
Example 2. (i) International Union MG and 
its Local Unions have represented people 
working primarily in a particular industry for 
over 60 years. Since 1950, most of their 
collective bargaining agreements have called 
for those workers to be covered by the 
National MG Health and Welfare Plan. 
During that time, the number of union-
represented workers in the industry, and the 
number of active participants in the National 
MG Health and Welfare Plan, first grew and 
then declined. New Locals were formed and 
later were shut down. Despite these 
fluctuations, the National MG Health and 
Welfare Plan meets the factors described in 
paragraphs (b)(4)(iii) and (iv) of this section, 
as the plan has been in existence pursuant to 
collective bargaining agreements to which 
the International Union and its affiliates have 
been parties since before January 1, 1983. 
(ii) Assume the same facts, except that on 
January 1, 1999, International Union MG 
merged with International Union RE to form 
International Union MRGE. MRGE and its 
Locals now represent the active participants 
in the National MG Health and Welfare Plan 
and in the National RE Health and Welfare 
Plan, which, for 45 years, had been 
maintained under collective bargaining 
agreements negotiated by International Union 
RE and its Locals. Since International Union 
MRGE is the continuation of, and successor 
to, the MG and RE unions, the two plans 
continue to meet the factors in paragraphs 
(b)(4)(iii) and (iv) of this section. This also 
would be true if the two plans were merged.
(iii) Assume the same facts as in 
paragraphs (i) and (ii) of this Example. In 
addition to maintaining the health and 
welfare plans described in those paragraphs, 
International Union MG also maintained the 
National MG Pension Plan and International 
Union RE maintained the National RE 
Pension Plan. When the unions merged and 
the health and welfare plans were merged, 
National MG Pension Plan and National RE 
Pension Plan were merged to form National 
MRGE Pension Plan. When the unions 
merged, the employees and retirees covered 
under the pre-merger plans continued to be 
covered under the post-merger plans 
pursuant to the collective bargaining 
agreements and also were given credit in the 
post-merger plans for their years of service 
and coverage in the pre-merger plans. 
Retirees who originally were covered under 
the pre-merger plans and continue to be 
covered under the post-merger plans based 
on their past service and coverage would be 
considered to be ‘‘retirees’’ for purposes of 
2550.3–40(b)(2)(ii). Likewise, bargaining unit 
alumni who were covered under the pre-
merger plans and continued to be covered 
under the post-merger plans based on their 
past service and coverage and their 
continued employment with employers that 
are parties to an agreement described in 
paragraph (b)(3) of this section would be 
considered to be bargaining unit alumni for 
purposes of 2550.3–40(b)(2)(vii).
Example 3. Assume the same facts as in 
paragraph (ii) of Example 2 with respect to 
International Union MG. However, in 1997, 
one of its Locals and the employers with 
which it negotiates agree to set up a new 
multiemployer health and welfare plan that 
only covers the individuals represented by 
that Local Union. That plan would not meet 
the factor in paragraph (b)(4)(iii) of this 
section, as it has not been incorporated or 
referenced in collective bargaining 
agreements since before January 1, 1983.
Example 4. (i) Pursuant to a collective 
bargaining agreement between various 
employers and Local 2000, the employers 
contribute $2 per hour to the Fund for every 
hour that a covered employee works under 
the agreement. The covered employees are 
automatically entitled to health and 
disability coverage from the Fund for every 
calendar quarter the employees have 300 
hours of additional covered service in the 
preceding quarter. The employees do not 
need to make any additional contributions 
for their own coverage, but must pay $250 
per month if they want health coverage for 
their dependent spouse and children. 
Because the employer payments cover 100% 
of the required contributions for the 
employees’ own coverage, the Local 2000 
Employers Health and Welfare Fund meets 
the ‘‘75% employer payment’’ factor under 
paragraph (b)(4)(vi) of this section. 
(ii) Assume, however, that the negotiated 
employer contribution rate was $1 per hour, 
and the employees could only obtain health 
coverage for themselves if they also elected 
to contribute $1 per hour, paid on a pre-tax 
basis through salary reduction. The Fund 
would not meet the 75% employer payment 
factor, even though the employees’ 
contributions are treated as employer 
contributions for tax purposes. Under ERISA, 
and therefore under this section, elective 
salary reduction contributions are treated as 
employee contributions. The outcome would 
be the same if a uniform employee 
contribution rate applied to all employees, 
whether they had individual or family 
coverage, so that the $1 per hour employee 
contribution qualified an employee for his or 
her own coverage and, if he or she had 
dependents, dependent coverage as well.
Example 5. Arthur is a licensed insurance 
broker, one of whose clients is 
Multiemployer Fund M, a partially self-
funded plan. Arthur takes bids from 
insurance companies on behalf of Fund M for 
the insured portion of its coverage, helps the 
trustees to evaluate the bids, and places the 
Fund’s health insurance coverage with the 
carrier that is selected. Arthur also assists the 
trustees of Fund M in preparing material to 
explain the plan and its benefits to the 
participants, as well as in monitoring the 
insurance company’s performance under the 
contract. At the Trustees’ request, Arthur 
meets with a group of employers with which 
the union is negotiating for their employees’ 
coverage under Fund M, and he explains the 
cost structure and benefits that Fund M 
provides. Arthur is not engaged in marketing 
within the meaning of paragraph (c)(1) of this 
section, so the fact that he provides these 
administrative services and sells insurance to 
the Fund itself does not affect the plan’s 
status as a plan established or maintained 
under or pursuant to a collective bargaining 
agreement. This is the case whether or how 
he is compensated.
Example 6. Assume the same facts as 
Example 5, except that Arthur has a group of 
clients who are unrelated to the employers 
bound by the collective bargaining 
agreement, whose employees would not be 
‘‘nexus group’’ members, and whose 
insurance carrier has withdrawn from the 
market in their locality. He persuades the 
client group to retain him to find them other 
coverage. The client group has no 
relationship with the labor union that 
represents the participants in Fund M. 
However, Arthur offers them coverage under 
Fund M and persuades the Fund’s Trustees 
to allow the client group to join Fund M in 
order to broaden Fund M’s contribution base. 
Arthur’s activities in obtaining coverage for 
the unrelated group under Fund M 
constitutes marketing through an insurance 
producer; Fund M is a MEWA under 
paragraph (c)(1) of this section.
Example 7. Union A represents thousands 
of construction workers in a three-state 
geographic region. For many years, Union A 
has maintained a standard written collective 
bargaining agreement with several hundred 
large and small building contractors, 
covering wages, hours, and other terms and 
conditions of employment for all work 
performed in Union A’s geographic territory. 
The terms of those agreements are negotiated 
every three years between Union A and a 
multiemployer Association, which signs on 
behalf of those employers who have 
delegated their bargaining authority to the 
Association. Hundreds of other employers—
including both local and traveling 
contractors—have chosen to become bound 
to the terms of Union A’s standard area 
agreement for various periods of time and in 
various ways, such as by signing short-form 
binders or ‘‘me too’’ agreements, executing a 
single job or project labor agreement, or 
entering into a subcontracting arrangement 
with a signatory employer. All of these 
employ individuals represented by Union A 
and contribute to Plan A, a self-insured 
multiemployer health and welfare plan 
established and maintained under Union A’s 
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
15:31 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00013
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
17484
Federal Register / Vol. 68, No. 68 / Wednesday, April 9, 2003 / Rules and Regulations 
standard area agreement. During the past 
year, the trustees of Plan A have brought 
lawsuits against several signatory employers 
seeking contributions allegedly owed, but not 
paid to the trust. In defending that litigation, 
a number of employers have sworn that they 
never intended to operate as union 
contractors, that their employees want 
nothing to do with Union A, that Union A 
procured their assent to the collective 
bargaining agreement solely by threats and 
fraudulent misrepresentations, and that 
Union A has failed to file certain reports 
required by the Labor Management Reporting 
and Disclosure Act. In at least one instance, 
a petition for a decertification election has 
been filed with the National Labor Relations 
Board. In this example, Plan A meets the 
criteria for a regulatory finding under this 
section that it is a multiemployer plan 
established and maintained under or 
pursuant to one or more collective bargaining 
agreements, assuming that its participant 
population satisfies the 85% test of 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section and that none 
of the disqualifying factors in paragraph (c) 
of this section is present. Plan A’s status for 
the purpose of this section is not affected by 
the fact that some of the employers who deal 
with Union A have challenged Union A’s 
conduct, or have disputed under labor 
statutes and legal doctrines other than ERISA 
section 3(40) the validity and enforceability 
of their putative contract with Union A, 
regardless of the outcome of those disputes.
Example 8. Assume the same facts as 
Example 7. Plan A’s benefits consultant 
recently entered into an arrangement with 
the Medical Consortium, a newly formed 
organization of health care providers, which 
allows the Plan to offer a broader range of 
health services to Plan A’s participants while 
achieving cost savings to the Plan and to 
participants. Union A, Plan A, and Plan A’s 
consultant each have added a page to their 
Web sites publicizing the new arrangement 
with the Medical Consortium. Concurrently, 
Medical Consortium’s Web site prominently 
publicizes its recent affiliation with Plan A 
and the innovative services it makes 
available to the Plan’s participants. Union A 
has mailed out informational packets to its 
members describing the benefit 
enhancements and encouraging election of 
family coverage. Union A has also begun 
distributing similar material to workers on 
hundreds of non-union construction job sites 
within its geographic territory. In this 
example, Plan A remains a plan established 
and maintained under or pursuant to one or 
more collective bargaining agreements under 
section 3(40) of ERISA. Neither Plan A’s 
relationship with a new organization of 
health care providers, nor the use of various 
media to publicize Plan A’s attractive 
benefits throughout the area served by Union 
A, alters Plan A’s status for purpose of this 
section.
Example 9. Assume the same facts as in 
Example 7. Union A undertakes an area-wide 
organizing campaign among the employees of 
all the health care providers who belong to 
the Medical Consortium. When soliciting 
individual employees to sign up as union 
members, Union A distributes Plan A’s 
information materials and promises to 
bargain for the same coverage. At the same 
time, when appealing to the employers in the 
Medical Consortium for voluntary 
recognition, Union A promises to publicize 
the Consortium’s status as a group of 
unionized health care service providers. 
Union A eventually succeeds in obtaining 
recognition based on its majority status 
among the employees working for Medical 
Consortium employers. The Consortium, 
acting on behalf of its employer members, 
negotiates a collective bargaining agreement 
with Union A that provides terms and 
conditions of employment, including 
coverage under Plan A. In this example, Plan 
A still meets the criteria for a regulatory 
finding that it is collectively bargained under 
section 3(40) of ERISA. Union A’s 
recruitment and representation of a new 
occupational category of workers unrelated to 
the construction trade, its promotion of 
attractive health benefits to achieve 
organizing success, and the Plan’s resultant 
growth, do not take Plan A outside the 
regulatory finding.
Example 10. Assume the same facts as in 
Example 7. The Medical Consortium, a newly 
formed organization, approaches Plan A with 
a proposal to make money for Plan A and 
Union A by enrolling a large group of 
employers, their employees, and self-
employed individuals affiliated with the 
Medical Consortium. The Medical 
Consortium obtains employers’ signatures on 
a generic document bearing Union A’s name, 
labeled ‘‘collective bargaining agreement,’’ 
which provides for health coverage under 
Plan A and compliance with wage and hour 
statutes, as well as other employment laws. 
Employees of signatory employers sign 
enrollment documents for Plan A and are 
issued membership cards in Union A; their 
membership dues are regularly checked off 
along with their monthly payments for health 
coverage. Self-employed individuals 
similarly receive union membership cards 
and make monthly payments, which are 
divided between Plan A and the Union. 
Aside from health coverage matters, these 
new participants have little or no contact 
with Union A. The new participants enrolled 
through the Consortium amount to 18% of 
the population of Plan A during the current 
Plan Year. In this example, Plan A now fails 
to meet the criteria in paragraphs (b)(2) and 
(b)(3) of this section, because more than 15% 
of its participants are individuals who are not 
employed under agreements that are the 
product of a bona fide collective bargaining 
relationship and who do not fall within any 
of the other nexus categories set forth in 
paragraph (b)(2) of this section. Moreover, 
even if the number of additional participants 
enrolled through the Medical Consortium, 
together with any other participants who did 
not fall within any of the nexus categories, 
did not exceed 15% of the total participant 
population under the plan, the circumstances 
in this example would trigger the 
disqualification of paragraph (c)(2) of this 
section, because Plan A now is being 
maintained under a substantial number of 
agreements that are a ‘‘scheme, plan, 
stratagem or artifice of evasion’’ intended 
primarily to evade compliance with state 
laws and regulations pertaining to insurance. 
In either case, the consequence of adding the 
participants through the Medical Consortium 
is that Plan A is now a MEWA for purposes 
of section 3(40) of ERISA and is not exempt 
from state regulation by virtue of ERISA.
(f) Cross-reference. See 29 CFR part 
2570, subpart H for procedural rules 
relating to proceedings seeking an 
Administrative Law Judge finding by 
the Secretary under section 3(40) of 
ERISA. 
(g) Effect of proceeding seeking 
Administrative Law Judge Section 3(40) 
Finding. 
(1) An Administrative Law Judge 
finding issued pursuant to the 
procedures in 29 CFR part 2570, subpart 
H will constitute a finding whether the 
entity in that proceeding is an employee 
welfare benefit plan established or 
maintained under or pursuant to an 
agreement that the Secretary finds to be 
a collective bargaining agreement for 
purposes of section 3(40) of ERISA. 
(2) Nothing in this section or in 29 
CFR part 2570, subpart H is intended to 
provide the basis for a stay or delay of 
a state administrative or court 
proceeding or enforcement of a 
subpoena.
Signed this 31st day of March 2003. 
Ann L. Combs, 
Assistant Secretary, Employee Benefits 
Security Administration.
[FR Doc. 03–8113 Filed 4–7–03; 8:45 am] 
BILLING CODE 4510–29–P
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
Employee Benefits Security 
Administration 
29 CFR Part 2570
RIN 1210–AA48
Procedures for Administrative 
Hearings Regarding Plans Established 
or Maintained Pursuant to Collective 
Bargaining Agreements Under Section 
3(40)(A) of ERISA
AGENCY: Employee Benefits Security 
Administration, Department of Labor.
ACTION: Final rule.
SUMMARY: This document contains 
regulations under the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 
as amended, (ERISA or the Act) 
describing procedures for administrative 
hearings to obtain a determination by 
the Secretary of Labor (Secretary) as to 
whether a particular employee welfare 
benefit plan is established or 
maintained under or pursuant to one or 
more collective bargaining agreements 
for purposes of section 3(40) of ERISA. 
An administrative hearing is available 
VerDate Jan<31>2003 
15:31 Apr 08, 2003
Jkt 200001
PO 00000
Frm 00014
Fmt 4701
Sfmt 4700
E:\FR\FM\09APR3.SGM
09APR3
