43 
MANAGING NON-NATIVE WILDLIFE IN FLORIDA: STATE PERSPECTIVE, POLICY 
AND PRACTICE 
 
SCOTT HARDIN, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, Tallahassee, Florida, USA 
 
Abstract: Florida has more non-native wildlife species than any other state: 439 introduced species of fish, 
wildlife and marine organisms have been observed and at least 123 are established, i.e., highly unlikely to be 
extirpated without human intervention. Florida is an epicenter for non-native species with a long established 
pet industry, major tourist attractions, and major ports, primarily Miami. The large number of established 
species is due to climate match with that of popular tropical pets, habitat disturbance that facilitates invasion, 
and a depauperate vertebrate fauna in tropical and subtropical portions of Florida. The Florida Fish and 
Wildlife Conservation Commission’s approach to managing non-native wildlife is based on (1) encouraging 
responsible pet ownership; (2) a regulated industry is preferable to underground traffic; and (3) most 
introduced species have negligible environmental impacts. Regulations for captive wildlife and non-native 
aquatic species, first established in the 1970s, employ risk-based bio-security for problematic species, and 
prohibition of a limited number of species that posed unacceptable risks to the ecosystem, economy, or human 
health and safety. Effective January 1, 2008, owners of six large reptile species will be required to implant 
passive integrated transponders to identify individual animals. Although anecdotal evidence suggests dealers 
have released inventories to establish source populations, the majority of introductions have resulted from 
release of pets by owners. To close this pathway, a pet surrender network is in the early stages of 
development. Within the past five years, capacity to detect and manage terrestrial and semi-aquatic species 
has improved, including surveillance, rapid assessment and response; examples include the Gambian giant 
pouched rat (Cricetomys gambianus), purple swamphen (Porphyrio porphyrio), and Argentine black and 
white tegu (Tupinambis merianae). 
 
Key Words: Florida, invasive species, pathways, rapid response, regulations, surveillance. 
 
Managing Vertebrate Invasive Species: Proceedings of 
an International Symposium (G. W. Witmer, W. C. Pitt, 
K. A. Fagerstone, Eds). USDA/APHIS/WS, National 
Wildlife Research Center, Fort Collins, CO. 2007. 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Over 400 species of non-indigenous fish, 
wildlife and marine organisms have been observed 
in Florida since its colonization by European 
settlers in the 16th century. The earliest documented 
vertebrate introduction dates to 1538 when 
Hernando de Soto imported European pigs (Sus 
scrofa) as a food source. Apparently, the settlers 
traded pigs to indigenous humans who allowed 
these animals to range free, eventually leading to 
the widespread establishment of one of the more 
notorious exotic species. 
 
During Florida’s long history with non-native 
species, a $300 million captive wildlife industry has 
developed, including importers, breeders, and 
tourist attractions that prominently feature exotic 
animals. In 2005-06, 3982 facilities were permitted 
for captive wildlife. Furthermore, Florida is the 
epicenter of the freshwater tropical fish industry, 
growing 95 percent of the nation’s cultured tropical 
fish on farms primarily in the Tampa Bay area. 
Over 800 varieties of tropical fish are cultured in 
Florida. 
 
In the nascent discipline of invasion biology, 
there is general acceptance of the so-called ‘rule of 
10s’, which posits that roughly 10% of introduced 
species become established, and roughly 10% of 
those become invasive (Williamson 1996, Bomford 
2005). Florida’s experience is consistent with the 
general boundaries of this rule. The Florida Fish 
and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) has 
adopted risk-based regulations that (1) prohibit the 
unauthorized release of any non-native species; (2) 
restrict possession of species that pose substantial 
environmental or economic risks, or harm to human 
health; and (3) permit possession of species not 
deemed to present significant consequences to 
native fish and wildlife. 
 
With the substantial level of pet ownership, as 
well as an existing industry based on captive 
 
44 
wildlife and aquarium specimens, FWC’s approach 
to non-native species, reflected in its regulatory 
framework, is to encourage responsible pet 
ownership. We believe that a regulated pet 
industry, allowing environmentally benign species 
and restricting problematic ones, is preferable to 
indiscriminate underground traffic that would result 
from legal bans on the majority of non-native 
organisms. 
 
STATUS OF NON-NATIVE SPECIES IN 
FLORIDA 
 
There are approximately 123 established non-
native species in Florida. Established means 
unlikely to be extirpated without human 
intervention. For freshwater fishes and marine 
species, the definition is a subjective assessment 
based on collective expert opinion. For wildlife, 
species are considered established if they have 
reproduced for five or more years. The list includes 
22 non-native freshwater fishes (Shafland et al. In 
Review), 4 amphibians, 36 reptiles, 12 birds, and 
18 mammals. There are at least 31 marine species, 
although this number is an estimate at best, owing 
to the difficulty in surveying the marine 
environment and the fact that global ship travel pre-
dated virtually all biological surveys. With the 
exception of the red lionfish (Pterois volitans) that 
is possibly established along Florida’s Atlantic 
Coast, introduced marine species are invertebrates 
or algae. 
 
Among the freshwater fishes, most introduced 
species are aquarium releases or escapes from 
aquaculture, although one species, the pike killifish 
(Belanesox belizanus) escaped from a medical 
research facility. Of the 22 permanently established 
species, 13 are in the widely distributed tropical-
subtropical Cichlid family and four are South 
American catfishes. Investigation of introduced 
fishes in southeast Florida canals has indicated no 
reductions in absolute abundance or biomass of 
native species, while the standing crop of all fishes 
has increased (some due to sterile grass carp 
[Ctenopharyngodon idella] purposefully introduced 
for vegetation control). Recently, non-native 
catfishes, sailfin catfish (Pterygoplythys 
multiradiatus) and brown hoplo (Hoplosternum 
littorale) have experienced population expansions 
over south and central Florida. Study of fish 
population abundance and diet has not revealed 
competition or displacement of native fishes. 
However, sailfin catfish dig spawning burrows, and 
localized erosion has resulted from this activity. In 
2000, a prohibited species, bullseye snakehead 
(Channa marulius) from southeast Asia, were 
discovered in a canal system in southeast Florida. 
Six years later, no major changes in fish 
populations have been observed. 
 
Although only three amphibians are established 
or potentially established, the Cuban tree frog 
(Osteopilus septentrionalis), introduced in 1931, is 
now found as far north and west as Tallahassee 
(with reports in south Georgia). This large, invasive 
frog is associated with declines attributed to 
predation in native hylid frogs, including green tree 
frogs (Hyla cinerea) and squirrel tree frogs (H. 
squirella). By contrast, the marine toad (Bufo 
marinus), native to central America and south 
Texas, garnered much attention following its 
introduction in 1971, but has had negligible impact 
on native wildlife and appears to be declining in the 
southern part of its range in Florida. 
 
Roughly three quarters of the introduced reptiles 
are now established in Florida. The list of 
established reptiles is dominated by lizards (31 
species), but includes one turtle (red-eared slider 
[Trachemys scripta elegans]), one crocodilian 
(spectacled caiman [Caiman crocodiles]), and three 
snakes. Of the lizards, most were pet releases from 
owners or dealers, primarily from the families 
Iguanidae and Gekkonidae, and have caused minor 
concern in conservation areas. Several large species 
are established, including the herbivorous green 
iguana (Iguana iguana) and omnivorous spinytail 
iguana (Ctenosaurus similis) which are considered 
nuisances by many Floridians, but no evidence 
exists for ecological damage. The Nile monitor 
(Varanus niloticus), a generalist predator and the 
largest of the African lizards, is established in a 
small urban area of southwest Florida, causing 
concern over potential impacts to a nearby 
population of burrowing owls (Athene cunicularia), 
a Florida Species of Special Concern. Additionally, 
Nile monitors are predators of crocodile eggs in 
Africa, and southward expansion of the Florida 
population would overlap that of the endangered 
American crocodile (Crocodilus acutus). 
 
In the past decade, considerable attention has 
been focused on a reproducing population of 
Burmese pythons (Python molurus) in extreme 
south Florida. The distribution of collected snakes 
suggests that the population may have been the 
result of released pets. Other speculation centers on 
the escape of collections of specimens from dealers 
during Hurricane Andrew in 1992. Regardless, 
Burmese pythons span the width of Everglades 
National Park and are commonly found on adjacent 
 
45 
lands. Although there is no evidence at this time of 
landscape-level effects, the sociological impact has 
led to greater restrictions on ownership of this 
species and several other large reptile species. Less 
well known is an isolated population of Boa 
constrictor confined to a tropical hammock “habitat 
island” in Miami. This population has existed since 
the 1970s with no expansion or other impacts. 
 
Relatively few introduced birds have become 
established, with 68% having no more than 9 
breeding pairs (72 species are not reported 
breeding), and only 7 species reported from more 
than 9 of Florida’s 67 counties (B. Pranty, personal 
communication). The largest group of introduced 
birds are the Psittacines, with over 70 species 
reported, undoubtedly pet releases, yet only two 
species are confirmed established. Noteworthy 
among resident non-native birds is the monk 
parakeet (Myiopsitta monachus), well established in 
south Florida, which builds large colony nests in 
electrical transformers causing significant 
economic impact from power outages and 
equipment loss. A recent introduction, the purple 
swamphen (Porphyrio porphyrio), has expanded 
from coastal southeast Florida into the Everglades 
Conservation Areas, and has been observed on 
Lake Okeechobee. Its ecological similarity to the 
native common moorhen (Gallinula chloropus) and 
purple gallinule (Porphyrula martinica) have 
prompted efforts to eliminate this member of the 
rail family native to central Europe and Asia. One 
non-native bird species, cattle egret (Bubulcus ibis), 
arrived without human assistance, apparently blown 
by hurricane winds from nearby Caribbean islands.  
 
Florida’s non-native mammals include species 
with cosmopolitan distributions, such as the house 
mouse (Mus musculus), black rat (Rattus rattus) 
and Norway rat (R. norvegicus), as well as four 
feral species: pig, dog (Canis familiaris), cat (Felis 
catus), and goat (Capra hircus). Three non-native 
mammals have become established both by human 
introduction as well as natural migration: nine-
banded armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus), red fox 
(Vulpes vulpes), and coyote (Canis latrans), 
although the latter species’ success is at least 
partially attributed to extirpation of the red wolf 
(Canis rufus) in the early 1900s.  Among the more 
interesting non-native mammals, the rhesus 
monkey (Macaca mulatta) was introduced to a 
central Florida tourist attraction in the 1930s and 
now has an established, stable population in river 
floodplains, as well as a smaller population in south 
Florida. Similarly, a population of vervet monkeys 
(Chlorocebus atheiops) has been established 
without apparent consequence in an isolated  
tropical hammock area within the highly urbanized 
corridor of Broward County in southeast Florida for 
50 years. The Sambar deer (Cervus unicolor) has 
been established on St. Vincent Island in northwest 
Florida for 100 years; the National Wildlife Refuge 
conducts periodic hunts to control this population. 
In the Florida Keys, Gambian giant pouched rats 
(Cricetomys gambianus) have established a 
localized, reproducing population and are the 
subject of a multi-agency eradication effort. 
 
INTRODUCTION PATHWAYS 
 
Florida has had a long history of tourist 
attractions, many of which featured exotic animals, 
prior to the establishment of captive wildlife 
regulations. Several non-native species escaped 
from these facilities either from lax security or from 
defunct businesses that abandoned their operations. 
Florida aquaculture, though well regulated in recent 
years, has contributed to the release of freshwater 
non-native species. Anecdotal evidence suggests 
that a possibly established population of Argentine 
black and white tegu (Tupinambis merianae) may 
have originated when a dealer released his stock in 
response to falling market prices. Many non-native 
lizard observations are in proximity to reptile 
dealers. 
 
In addition, Florida has three significant ports, 
and the Port of Miami receives shipments of tens of 
thousands of imported tropical fish, reptiles, 
amphibians and plants. Although most specimens 
have destinations outside Florida, many are 
consigned to local dealers and breeders.  
 
With the ready availability of non-native pets, it 
is not surprising that released animals are a major 
source of introduction. For reptiles, prior to 1950, 
the few introductions occurred collaterally with 
freight shipments. Since that time, the volume of 
introductions has increased sharply, primarily 
through the pet trade (Figure 1). 
 
Florida’s tropical and subtropical climate further 
improve the likelihood of success for non-native 
species, particularly fishes and reptiles. Another 
aspect conducive to establishment is the relatively 
depauperate ichthyofauna and herpetofauna in 
much of peninsular Florida. Unlike most tropical 
areas of the world, Florida is isolated from land 
with similar climate. Most native species originated 
from temperate regions of the southeastern United 
States, many at the extreme southern end of their  
 
46 
0
10
20
30
40
50
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
no. species imported
 
 
Figure 1.  Introduction pathways for non-native reptiles 
and amphibians in Florida, 1880 - 2000. The Texas 
horned lizard (Phrynosoma cornutum) was imported by 
the pet trade in 1934, and is the sole exception to the 
freight pathway prior to 1940. 
 
 
range. As a result, introduced species find a less 
species, including one native anole, whereas Cuba 
has 83 native lizard species, including 54 
anoles. South Florida only has 10 native lizards and 
over three times as many exotic lizard species (K. 
Enge, FWC, personal communication). Of the 175 
species of freshwater fish, many are cyprinids and 
darters restricted to the temperate streams in north 
Florida. 
 
Cultural influence appears to have opened new 
pathways, particularly for non-native fishes. Asian 
food markets frequently sell live fish, and the 
bullseye snakehead (Canna marulius), and possibly 
the swamp eel (Monopterus alba) originated from 
such operations. Live northern snakeheads (C. 
argus), a prohibited species, have been confiscated 
by FWC law enforcement. Brown hoplo 
(Hoplosternum littorale), a small South American 
catfish prized as food item, may have been spread 
by immigrants with no knowledge of laws to the 
contrary. A Venezuelan immigrant confided to an 
FWC biologist that he regularly placed hoplo in 
southeast Florida canals to have a readily available 
food source. 
 
FWC HISTORY 
 
In response to a growing number of introduced 
freshwater fishes, biological investigations 
commenced in the early 1960s, and the Non-Native 
Fish Research Laboratory was established in south 
Florida in 1966. Based on investigations by Lab 
staff, in 1976 several freshwater fishes were legally 
designated for restricted possession, i.e., these 
could be possessed only under strict biosecurity by 
research institutions and public exhibitors, and, 
under more limited circumstances, commercial 
producers. This list was re-evaluated in the early 
1980s when several species were designated as 
prohibited, removing the possibility of commercial 
use. These regulations have been modified 
periodically, including the addition of aquatic 
organisms other than fishes, zebra mussel 
(Dreissena polymorpha) in 1993, Australian red 
claw crayfish (Cherax quadricarinatus) in 1996, 
and Chinese mitten crab (Eriocheir sinensis) in 
1999, the latter at the suggestion of the aquaculture 
industry. 
 
The first regulations for the possession of 
captive wildlife, primarily exotic species, were 
established in 1970. This was followed by the 
creation of a specialized law enforcement unit 
staffed by officers with degrees in biology to 
inspect facilities and survey ports to intercept 
restricted and prohibited imports. Florida’s captive 
wildlife regulations, the most comprehensive in the 
United States, continue to evolve. In 2005, a 
comprehensive review of the regulations was 
undertaken in conjunction with stakeholders from 
affected industries and organizations (Table 1), and 
the first of a series of modified regulations was 
approved by FWC in 2006. 
 
In 2004, in response to stakeholder concerns, 
FWC created a section to provide a seamless and 
comprehensive approach to non-native species 
issues. This alignment will increase the agency’s 
capability to respond to terrestrial non-native 
species. Additional emphasis will be placed on 
interagency coordination at the local, state and 
federal level. This cooperative approach is evident 
in the management examples cited below. 
 
MANAGEMENT APPROACH 
 
The primary tenet in management of non-native 
species is prevention. There are three aspects of 
prevention: regulation, outreach, and surveillance. 
 
Regulation 
 
FWC’s position toward prevention is reflected 
in its primary non-native species regulation, which 
states that it is unlawful to “to possess, transport or 
otherwise bring into the state or to release or 
introduce in the state any freshwater fish, aquatic 
invertebrate, marine plant, marine animal, or wild 
animal life that is not native to the state unless such 
person shall first secure a permit from the 
Commission” (Rule 68-5.001, Florida 
Administrative Code). Violation of this rule is a 
first degree misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up  
PET TRADE 
FREIGHT 
Year 
47 
Table 1. Captive wildlife technical assistance representation, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation 
Commission, 2007. 
Representative 
Organization 
Interest 
Alexa Strauss 
FELD Entertainment, Inc. 
Ringling Brothers and 
Barnum & Bailey Circus 
Entertainment 
Terri Parrot-Nenezian, DVM 
 
Wildlife Rehabilitator 
Dan Martinelli 
Treasure Coast Wildlife Hospital 
Wildlife Rehabilitator 
Eugene Bessette 
Ophiological Services, Inc. 
Pet Industry 
Joe Christman 
Disney’s Animal Kingdom 
Entertainment 
Leroy Coffman, DVM 
Consultant 
Pet Industry 
Ken Johnson 
Humane Society of the US 
Animal Welfare 
Susan Clubb, DVM 
Hurricane Aviaries 
Parrot Jungle Island 
Pet Industry and Entertainment 
Bill Armstrong 
Hillsborough County Animal 
Control 
Florida Animal Control Assoc. 
Animal Control 
R. Donavan Smith 
Close Up Creatures, Inc. 
NGALA Private Reserve 
Pet Industry 
Kathy Stearns 
Stearns Zoological Rescue 
and Rehabilitation 
Wildlife Rehabilitator 
 
 
 
to $1,000 and imprisonment for as long as one year. 
However, this general proscription against  
unauthorized release does not prevent the 
possession and display of non-native species, which 
is addressed through risk-based captive wildlife and 
non-native species regulations. 
 
Captive wildlife regulations deal primarily with 
species maintained as personal pets and for public 
exhibition. There are three classes of captive 
wildlife, based on the potential danger to human 
safety, each with permitting requirements (Table 2). 
Caging and confinement requirements reflect 
concerns over safety as well as for the welfare of 
the animal. 
 
Prior to 2007, permits were not required to 
possess non-venomous, non-native reptiles. In 
response to the established Burmese python and 
Nile monitor populations, effective January 1, 
2008, a $100 permit will be required to possess five 
species of large constrictor and one large lizard. 
Additionally, all specimens of these “reptiles of 
concern” must be permanently identified with a 
passive integrated transponder tag. These 
regulations are designed to discourage impulse 
purchases, and subsequent illegal release, that may 
lead to establishment of these large species.  
 
Non-native species regulations originated from 
freshwater fish investigations and list species as 
‘conditional’ or ‘prohibited’ based on risks posed to 
native fish and wildlife, economic impacts, or 
human health and safety (Table 3). In 2007, two 
species of personal pets were added to the list, 
based on ecological and economic risks. The red-
eared slider was designated as conditional due to its 
intergradation with the native yellow-bellied slider 
(T. s. scripta). African giant pouched rats 
(Cricetomys spp.) were designated as prohibited 
based on risks to Florida agriculture, native listed 
rodent species, and to human health. 
 
Outreach 
 
Legal restrictions serve as guidance for owners 
of non-native animals but are ineffective for those 
unaware of regulations, or individuals who do not 
understand their rationale. Many residents have 
moved only recently to Florida, and have no 
appreciation of native species and habitats. 
Accordingly, outreach has substantial preventive 
value and FWC has endeavored to more fully 
embrace this management tool. The FWC website 
has a second level page dedicated to non-native 
species (www.myfwc.com/nonnatives). 
 
 
 
48 
Table 2. Regulatory classes of wildlife in Florida. 
Species/Group Class I (for exhibition 
only; no personal 
possession, except for 
those owned prior to 1980; 
$250 permit fee) 
Class II (permit fee $140; 
applicant must 
demonstrate one year or 
1000 hours experience for 
each species possessed) 
Class III (no cost permit; 
applicant must be at least 
16 years old)  Other 
Wildlife not classified as I 
or II or exempt fall into 
this class. 
Primates 
Chimpanzees (Pan), 
Gorillas (Gorilla), Gibbons 
(Hylobates), Drills and 
mandrills (Mandrillus), 
Orangutans (Pongo), 
Baboons (Papaio), 
Siamangs (Symphalangus), 
Gelada baboons 
(Theropithecus) 
Howler monkeys 
(Alouatta), Uakaris 
(Cacajao), Mangabeys 
(Cercocebus), Guenons 
(Ceropithecus), Bearded 
sakis (Chiropotes), Guereza 
monkeys (Colobus), 
Celebes black apes 
(Cynopithecus), Idris 
(Indri), Macaques 
(Macaca), Langurs 
(Presbytis), Douc langurs 
(Pygathrix), Snub-nosed 
langurs 
 
Felids 
Snow leopards (Panthera 
uncia), Leopards (Panthera 
pardus), Jaguars (Panthera 
onca), Tigers (Panthera 
tigris), Lions (Panthera leo) 
Servals (Leptailurus 
serval), European and 
Canadian lynx (Lynx lynx), 
Cougars & panthers (Puma 
concolor), Bobcats (L. 
rufus), Cheetahs
 
Canids 
 
Coyotes (Canis latrans), 
Gray wolves (C. lupus), 
Red wolves (C. niger), 
Asiatic jackals (C. aureus), 
Black-backed jackals (C. 
mesomelas), Side-striped 
jackals (C. adustus), Indian 
dholes (Cuon alpinus), 
African hunting dogs 
(Lycaon pictus) 
 
Mustelids 
 
Wolverines (Gulo gulo), 
Honey badgers 
 
Other 
Bears(Ursidae), Rhinoceros 
(Rhinocerotidae), Elephants 
(Elephantidae)  
Hippopotamuses 
(Hippopotamidae), Cape 
buffalos (Syncerus caffer 
caffer) 
Binturongs (Arctictis 
binturong), Hyenas 
(Hyaenidae) 
 
Reptiles 
Crocodiles, except dwarf 
and Congo (Crocodilidae), 
Gavials (Gavialidae), Black 
caimans (Melanosuchus 
niger), Komodo dragons 
(Varanus komodoensis) 
Dwarf crocodiles 
(Osteolaemus tetraspis), 
Alligators, caimans (except 
American alligator), 
(Alligatoridae) 
 
Rattites 
 
Ostrich (Struthio camelus), 
Cassowary (Casuarius) 
 
 
 
49 
Table 3.  Non-native species with restrictions on possession in Florida. Refer to regulations in the 
Florida Administrative Code for more details. 
Conditional Species (may be possessed for the purpose of public exhibition, research, or 
commercial purposes) 
 
Freshwater fishes 
 
Grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella), Bighead carp 
(Aristichthys nobilis), Silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys 
molitrix), Snail or black carp (Mylopharyngodon piceus), 
Dorados (Salminus spp.), Nile perches (Lates spp.), Blue 
tilapia (Oreochromis aureus), Wami tilapia (O. 
hornorum), Mozambique tilapia (O. mossambicus), Nile 
tilapia (O. niloticus), Walking catfish (Clarias batrachus), 
Blue catfish (Ictalurus furcatus), Freshwater stingrays 
(Potamotrygonidae), and Bony-tongue fishes 
(Osteoglossidae) (except silver arowana [Osteoglossum 
bicirrhosum]) 
 
 
Freshwater Invertebrates 
Australian red claw crayfish (Cherax quadricarinatus), 
Red swamp crayfish (Procambarus clarkii), and White 
river crayfish (Procambarus zonangulas) 
 
 
Reptiles 
Red-eared slider (Trachemys scripta elegans) 
 
 
Mammals 
Nutria (Myocastor coypu) 
Prohibited Species (may be possessed only by accredited public exhibitors or by research 
institutions with an approved research plan) 
 
Freshwater fishes 
 
African electric catfishes (Malapteruridae), African 
tigerfishes (Hydrocyninae), Airbreathing catfishes 
(Clariidae) (except Walking catfish [Clarias batrachus]), 
Candiru catfishes (Trichomycteridae), Freshwater electric 
eels (Electrophoridae), Lampreys (Petromyzonidae), 
Piranhas and pirambebas (Serrasalminae), Snakeheads 
(Channidae), Tilapias (Tilapia spp., Sarotherodon spp., 
Oreochromis spp.) (except  conditional Oreochromis 
species), Trahiras or tigerfishes (Erythrinidae), Airsac 
catfishes (Heteropneustidae), and Green sunfish (Lepomis 
cyanellus) 
Freshwater Invertebrates 
Australian crayfish (Cherax spp.), except C. 
quadricarinatus in a closed tank system, Zebra mussels 
(Dreissena polymorpha) 
 
 
Mammals 
African giant pouched rats (Cricetomys spp.) 
 
 
Marine species 
Mitten crabs (Eriocheir), Sea snakes (Hydrophiidae), 
Weeverfishes (Trachinidae), Stone fishes (Synanceia spp.) 
 
 
50 
 
To close the personal pet release pathway, FWC 
has initiated a Non-native Pet Amnesty program. 
Conducted on weekends, these well-publicized 
events provide an opportunity to surrender non-
native pets without penalty. The format calls for 
multi-agency involvement with substantial focus on 
outreach. Two events have been conducted with a 
third planned for February 2008 in Miami. A major 
concern of pet owners is the welfare of their 
animal, and arrangements are made for adopters to 
be at events to minimize the possibility that animals 
will be euthanized. All pets have been successfully 
adopted, with the exception of two specimens that 
were unhealthy at the time of surrender. 
 
The volume of animals surrendered at one-day 
events is miniscule compared to the number of 
exotic pets in the state, and the principal value of 
the weekend Amnesty program is to increase 
awareness of the problem of non-native species in 
Florida. The decision to release a pet is based on 
the circumstances at hand, and we have no illusion 
that owners will postpone their choice to discard a 
non-native animal until an event occurs. FWC’s 
ultimate objective is to develop a pet surrender 
network, with qualified adopters ready to accept 
animals on an ongoing basis. The network will be 
mediated through the website. 
 
Other outreach efforts target specific audiences 
and leverage exposure. FWC developed a poster 
highlighting several non-native freshwater fishes, 
their native continent and their pathway to Florida. 
This will be distributed at county nature centers, 
museums, and science classrooms. FWC has 
pursued a cooperative, rather than adversarial, 
relationship with the pet industry, and agency 
attendance at trade shows provides an opportunity 
to efficiently reach out to dealers as well as 
potential pet owners. 
 
Florida’s diverse socioeconomic profile presents 
significant challenges for outreach and education. 
Extensive Cuban, Mexican, Haitian, and 
Vietnamese communities, among others, present 
language as well as cultural barriers. Simple 
translation of English-language media will be 
inadequate, and research is needed to determine 
effective methods to overcome these cultural 
challenges. 
 
Surveillance and Rapid Detection 
 
When preventive measures fail, it is important 
to detect non-native species as soon as possible to 
improve the likelihood of eradication or 
containment. Florida has an interagency working 
group to coordinate efforts to prevent and manage 
non-native and invasive plants and animals. 
Recognizing that many agencies have staff in the 
field, Florida state agencies are attempting to utilize 
this resource to improve surveillance. An initial 
attempt to map the distribution of exotic applesnails 
(Pomacea spp.) by providing reporting forms to 
field staff had limited success, likely due to 
competition with internal priorities. 
 
The vast majority of introduced species are 
reported by the public, frequently well after their 
initial discovery. Accordingly, FWC is in the initial 
stages of developing a web-based reporting system. 
The difficulty is in finding the balance of providing 
adequate information to limit bogus reporting while 
not overwhelming the non-professional. A 
simplified version has been employed to solicit 
reports on Gambian giant pouched rat sightings in 
the vicinity of their distribution in Grassy Key, 
Florida (myfwc.com/nonnatives/gambianRat.htm), 
using photographs to help the public distinguish 
similar species. This effort has not been widely 
publicized and has yielded few submissions, 
including some from areas hundreds of miles from 
the putative Florida distribution of this species. 
 
Unlike the simple on-line reporting format, a 
more complex reporting process is in place for non-
native applesnails, capitalizing on the visibility and 
distinctiveness of their eggs. The web document 
provides background on biology, potential impacts, 
control, and federal regulations, accompanied by 
photos of eggs and snails (myfwc.com/nonnatives/ 
Docs/FWC_applesnails_FLMS_handout.pdf). The 
reporting process calls for the observer to complete 
a one-page form and submit via facsimile. We have 
not had an opportunity to assess the quality of 
reports to date. A reporting format for Reptiles of 
Concern is under development. 
 
RAPID RESPONSE 
 
FWC’s approach calls for elimination of non-
native species populations where practical. The 
majority of introduced species will not become 
invasive. Regardless, FWC would prefer to 
eradicate incipient populations rather than risk 
ecological or economic damage, or harm to human 
health. Upon detection of a non-native species, a 
rapid assessment is recommended to determine if 
eradication is practical, i.e., within financial means, 
without unacceptable impacts to native species, and 
commensurate with the potential impact of the 
introduced organism. 
 
Prior to 2004, several isolated non-native fishes 
were eradicated by rotenone poisoning of the water 
 
51 
body. Since 2004, four rapid assessments have been 
conducted to gauge the potential for eradication. In 
one instance a limited number of an exotic 
aquarium species, silver dollar (Metynnis spp., 
Characidae), were discovered in an isolated 40-ha 
lake, including evidence of reproduction. Based on 
the cost of applying rotenone to this water body, the 
presence of native predatory fish, and the small 
number of silver dollar encountered, a decision was 
made to continue sampling rather than pursue 
eradication. Subsequent observations indicate this 
introduced species has been eliminated by natural 
causes. 
 
In 2004, a population of Gambian giant pouched 
rats in Grassy Key was reported to the U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service (USFWS). Following 
preliminary investigations by that agency and 
USDA APHIS Wildlife Services (WS), FWC 
organized a multi-agency planning effort in March 
2005, which led to an initial abundance index 
conducted by WS, along with live trapping and 
camera surveys to delineate the range of the 
population. Funding for eradication was 
unavailable, so FWC obtained a $20,000 grant 
matched by WS to conduct a pilot eradication 
project on a portion of the range in June 2006. 
Subsequently, FWC and WS committed internal 
funds, along with a grant from USFWS, and in-kind 
contributions from the South Florida Water 
Management District (SFWMD) and the Florida 
Department of Environmental Protection, to initiate 
an eradication project in early 2007. The first full-
scale operation to eliminate this population 
occurred over two years after the initial report. 
However, based on field observations, this did not 
decrease the likelihood of success. As of this 
writing, the first of several periodic surveys to 
assess survival of Gambian giant pouched rats was 
underway. 
 
Purple swamphens were first observed in urban 
southeast Florida in 1996, likely having escaped 
from a local aviculturist. Over the next several 
years, this population increased to over 200 birds 
but remained confined to developed areas. In early 
2006, SFWMD vegetation management contractors 
reported purple swamphens in the Everglades 
Conservation Areas. Subsequently, SFWMD staff 
observed these birds in some of their water 
treatment areas. In May 2006, FWC and SFWMD 
conducted a survey of the areas, which indicated a 
population of approximately 100 birds. In August 
2006, night capture methods were evaluated and 
found to be ineffective. In October 2006, FWC and 
SFWMD initiated an eradication effort using 
shotguns and actively pursuing purple swamphens 
from airboats. As of March 2007, 601 purple 
swamphens had been killed, leaving a casual 
estimate of about 50 birds. Subsequent observations 
have been limited by extremely low water, but 
additional removal efforts were scheduled for 
summer 2007, and both agencies remain guardedly 
optimistic that, at the least, potential impact to 
native wildlife and vegetation can be minimized. 
 
Argentine black and white tegus were reported 
from west central Florida in 2006 by Hillsborough 
County Environmental Services staff, as well as by 
private land managers in neighboring Polk County. 
Initial surveys in summer 2006 indicated usage by 
juvenile tegus of gopher tortoise (Gopherus 
polyphemus) burrows on public land, corroborating 
observations by consultants conducting habitat 
reclamation projects on disturbed lands. Posters 
were developed to solicit public observations in an 
attempt to delineate the range of this introduced 
lizard. Based on credible public reports, it appears 
that this tegu species occurs over at least 100 km2, 
although its distribution and habitat preference are 
not well understood. A member of the Teidae 
family, tegus were presumed to enter hibernation in 
late summer, delaying further sampling or removal. 
A lack of funding and staffing have hampered 
further efforts at gathering the data requisite to 
determining if eradication is feasible, and FWC is 
not optimistic that this species will be eliminated. 
 
ASSESSMENT 
 
In the event that extirpation of an introduced 
species is deemed to be impractical, assessment of 
its ecological role is in order to determine 
appropriate management. Among the factors to be 
considered are age and growth, diet, reproduction, 
limiting factors (e.g., temperature, habitat, salinity), 
and population abundance and composition of 
introduced and native species. These data may be 
used to estimate impact, and, consequently the 
appropriate level of intervention. At the outset, 
intensity of these studies is high, followed by a 
reduced level of effort over an extended period. 
 
Most FWC assessments have been of freshwater 
exotic fishes, focused primarily in the canals of 
southeast Florida where the greatest number of 
introductions have occurred. Studies over the past 
three decades have documented no impacts to 
native fishes exclusively attributed to introduced 
species, contrary to our original suppositions. 
Similar longitudinal studies have not been 
conducted for non-native terrestrial wildlife, and 
 
52 
FWC will be pursuing research in this area to 
determine if the response is similar to our 
observations from the aquatic environment. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Fortunately, very few of Florida’s established 
non-native species have resulted in significant 
adverse ecological or economic impacts. However, 
the minority of problematic introductions can exact 
substantial ecological or economic damage and it is 
incumbent upon natural resource agencies to take 
all reasonable measures to discourage release and 
escape of non-indigenous fish and wildlife. FWC 
has chosen to encourage responsible pet ownership 
rather than adopt a prohibitionist approach, which 
they believe would be ineffective with the 
substantial level of pet ownership and the industry 
that services this demand. 
 
There is a suggestion that the pace of vertebrate 
introductions or establishment in Florida is slowing 
in the current decade following an increase during 
the 1990s (Figure 2). This may be due to increased  
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
prior to
1960
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
no. of species reported
mammal
amphibian 
reptile
 
 
Non-native Freshwater Fish
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
prior to
1960
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
no. species reproducing
 
 
 
Figure 2. Introduction of non-native vertebrates in 
Florida by decade. 
agency focus at the state and national level. 
However, the pattern of explosive population 
growth, including diverse cultural influences will 
continue to be a challenge to natural resource 
managers.  The most effective barrier to the 
introduction of non-native organisms is to identify 
species that pose the greatest risks and limit their 
possession. Since the development of FWC’s non-
native species rules, only two fishes have become 
permanently established, along with two possibly 
established species. One of the established species, 
spotted tilapia (Tilapia mariea) may have been 
present yet not observed at the time of its listing. 
Better screening (i.e., risk analyses) are needed to 
aid in this process, and this should be a focus of 
research. 
 
LITERATURE CITED 
BOMFORD, M., F. KRAUS, M. BRAYSHER, L. WALTER, 
AND L. BROWN. 2005. Risk assessment model for the 
import and keeping of exotic reptiles and 
amphibians. Report to the Australia Bureau of Rural 
Sciences. 
SHAFLAND, P. L., K. B. GESTRING, AND M. S. STANFORD. 
In review. Criteria for categorizing introduced fishes 
collected from open waters. Fisheries. 
WILLIAMSON, N. AND A. FITTER. 1996. The varying 
success of invaders. Advances in Invasion Biology 
77:1651-1666. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Decade 
Decade 
