SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
(Release No. 34-59164; File No. S7-34-08) 
 
December 24, 2008 
 
ORDER GRANTING TEMPORARY EXEMPTIONS UNDER THE SECURITIES 
EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 IN CONNECTION WITH REQUEST OF LIFFE 
ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT AND LCH.CLEARNET LTD. RELATED 
TO CENTRAL CLEARING OF CREDIT DEFAULT SWAPS, AND REQUEST FOR 
COMMENTS 
 
I.  
Introduction 
 
In response to the recent turmoil in the financial markets, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (“Commission”) has taken multiple actions to protect investors and ensure the 
integrity of the nation’s securities markets.1  Today the Commission is taking further action 
designed to address concerns related to the market in credit default swaps  (“CDS”).  The over-
the-counter (“OTC”) market for CDS has been a source of concerns to us and other financial 
regulators.  These concerns include the systemic risk posed by CDS, highlighted by the possible 
                                                 
1  
A nonexclusive list of the Commission's actions to stabilize financial markets during this credit 
crisis include:  adopting a package of measures to strengthen investor protections against naked short 
selling, including rules requiring a hard T+3 close-out, eliminating the options market maker exception of 
Regulation SHO, and expressly targeting fraud in short selling transactions (See Securities Exchange Act 
Release No. 58572 (September 17, 2008), 73 FR 54875 (September 23, 2008)); issuing an emergency 
order to enhance protections against naked short selling in the securities of primary dealers, Federal 
National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”), and Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation 
(“Freddie Mac”) (See Securities Exchange Act Release No. 58166 (July 15, 2008), 73 FR 42379 (July 21, 
2008)); taking temporary emergency action to ban short selling in financial securities (See Securities 
Exchange Act Release No. 58592 (September 18, 2008), 73 FR 55169 (September 24, 2008)); approving 
emergency rulemaking to ensure disclosure of short positions by hedge funds and other institutional 
money managers (See Securities Exchange Act Release No. 58591A (September 21, 2008), 73 FR 55557 
(September 25, 2008)); proposing rules to strengthen the regulation of credit rating agencies and making 
the limits and purposes of credit ratings clearer to investors (See Securities Exchange Act Release No. 
57967 (June 16, 2008), 73 FR 36212 (June 25, 2008); entering into a Memorandum of Understanding 
with the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System ("FRB") to make sure key federal financial 
regulators share information and coordinate regulatory activities in important areas of common interest 
(See Memorandum of Understanding Between the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission and the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Regarding Coordination and Information Sharing in 
Areas of Common Regulatory and Supervisory Interest (July 7, 2008), 
http://www.sec.gov/news/press/2008/2008-134_mou.pdf). 
 
2
inability of parties to meet their obligations as counterparties and the potential resulting adverse 
effects on other markets and the financial system.2  Recent credit market events have 
demonstrated the seriousness of these risks in a CDS market operating without meaningful 
regulation, transparency,3 or central counterparties (“CCPs”). 4  These events have emphasized 
the need for CCPs as mechanisms to help control such risks.5  A CCP for CDS could be an 
important step in reducing the counterparty risks inherent in the CDS market, and thereby help 
mitigate potential systemic impacts.  In November 2008, the President’s Working Group on 
Financial Markets stated that the implementation of a CCP for CDS was a top priority6 and, in 
furtherance of this recommendation, the Commission, the FRB and the Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission (“CFTC”) signed a Memorandum of Understanding7 that establishes a 
framework for consultation and information sharing on issues related to CCPs for CDS.  Given 
the continued uncertainty in this market, taking action to help foster the prompt development of 
                                                 
2  
In addition to the potential systemic risks that CDS pose to financial stability, we are concerned 
about other potential risks in this market, including operational risks, risks relating to manipulation and 
fraud, and regulatory arbitrage risks. 
3  
See Policy Objectives for the OTC Derivatives Market, The President’s Working Group on 
Financial Markets, November 14, 2008, available at http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/reports/ 
policyobjectives.pdf (“Public reporting of prices, trading volumes and aggregate open interest should be 
required to increase market transparency for participants and the public.”). 
4  
See The Role of Credit Derivatives in the U.S. Economy Before the H. Agric. Comm., 110th 
Cong. (2008) (Statement of Erik Sirri, Director of the Division of Trading and Markets, Commission). 
5  
See id. 
6  
See Policy Objectives for the OTC Derivatives Market, The President’s Working Group on 
Financial Markets (November 14, 2008), 
http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/reports/policyobjectives.pdf.  See also Policy Statement on 
Financial Market Developments, The President's Working Group on Financial Markets (March 13, 2008), 
http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/reports/pwgpolicystatemktturmoil_03122008.pdf; Progress Update 
on March Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments, The President's Working Group on 
Financial Markets (October 2008), http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/reports/q4progress%20update.pdf. 
7  
See Memorandum of Understanding Between the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System, the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission and the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission Regarding Central Counterparties for Credit Default Swaps (November 14, 2008), 
http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/reports/finalmou.pdf. 
 
3
CCPs, including granting conditional exemptions from certain provisions of the federal securities 
laws, is in the public interest.   
A CDS is a bilateral contract between two parties, known as counterparties.  The value of 
this financial contract is based on underlying obligations of a single entity or on a particular 
security or other debt obligation, or an index of several such entities, securities, or obligations.  
The obligation of a seller under a CDS to make payments under a CDS contract is triggered by a 
default or other credit event as to such entity or entities or such security or securities.  Investors 
may use CDS for a variety of reasons, including to offset or insure against risk in their fixed-
income portfolios, to take positions in bonds or in segments of the debt market as represented by 
an index, or to capitalize on the volatility in credit spreads during times of economic uncertainty.  
In recent years, CDS market volumes have rapidly increased.8  This growth has coincided with a 
significant rise in the types and number of entities participating in the CDS market. 9   
The Commission’s authority over this OTC market for CDS is limited.  Specifically, 
Section 3A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (“Exchange Act”) limits the Commission’s 
authority over swap agreements, as defined in Section 206A of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.10  
For those CDS that are swap agreements, the exclusion from the definition of security in Section 
3A of the Exchange Act, and related provisions, will continue to apply.  The Commission’s 
                                                 
8   
See Semiannual OTC derivatives statistics at end-December 2007, Bank for International 
Settlements (“BIS”), available at http://www.bis.org/statistics/otcder/dt1920a.pdf. 
9  
CDS were initially created to meet the demand of banking institutions looking to hedge and 
diversify the credit risk attendant with their lending activities.  However, financial institutions such as 
insurance companies, pension funds, securities firms, and hedge funds have entered the CDS market.   
10  
15 U.S.C. 78c-1.  Section 3A excludes both a non-security-based and a security-based swap 
agreement from the definition of “security” under Section 3(a)(10) of the Exchange Act, 15 U.S.C. 
78c(a)(10).  Section 206A of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act defines a “swap agreement” as “any 
agreement, contract, or transaction between eligible contract participants (as defined in section 1a(12) of 
the Commodity Exchange Act. . .) . . . the material terms of which (other than price and quantity) are 
subject to individual negotiation.”  15 U.S.C. 78c note. 
 
4
action today does not affect these CDS, and this Order does not apply to them.  For those CDS 
that are not swap agreements (“non-excluded CDS”), the Commission’s action today provides 
conditional exemptions from certain requirements of the Exchange Act. 
The Commission believes that using well-regulated CCPs to clear transactions in CDS 
would help promote efficiency and reduce risk in the CDS market and among its participants.  
These benefits could be particularly significant in times of market stress, as CCPs would mitigate 
the potential for a market participant’s failure to destabilize other market participants, and reduce 
the effects of misinformation and rumors.  CCP-maintained records of CDS transactions would 
also aid the Commission’s efforts to prevent and detect fraud and other abusive market practices.   
A well-regulated CCP also would address concerns about counterparty risk by 
substituting the creditworthiness and liquidity of the CCP for the creditworthiness and liquidity 
of the counterparties to a CDS.  In the absence of a CCP, participants in the OTC CDS market 
must carefully manage their counterparty risks because the default by a counterparty can render 
worthless, and payment delay can reduce the usefulness of, the credit protection that has been 
bought by a CDS purchaser.  CDS participants currently attempt to manage counterparty risk by 
carefully selecting and monitoring their counterparties, entering into legal agreements that permit 
them to net gains and losses across contracts with a defaulting counterparty, and often requiring 
counterparty exposures to be collateralized.11  A CCP could allow participants to avoid these 
risks specific to individual counterparties because a CCP “novates” bilateral trades by entering 
                                                 
11  
See generally R. Bliss and C. Papathanassiou, “Derivatives clearing, central counterparties and 
novation:  The economic implications” (March 8, 2006), at 6.  See also “New Developments in Clearing 
and Settlement Arrangements for OTC Derivatives,” Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, 
BIS, at 25 (March 2007), available at http://www.bis.org/pub/cpss77.pdf; “Reducing Risks and Improving 
Oversight in the OTC Credit Derivatives Market,” Before the Sen. Subcomm. On Secs., Ins. and 
Investments, 110th Cong. (2008) (Statement of Patrick Parkinson, Deputy Director, Division of Research 
and Statistics, FRB). 
 
5
into separate contractual arrangements with both counterparties – becoming buyer to one and 
seller to the other.12  Through novation, it is the CCP that assumes counterparty risks.   
For this reason, a CCP for CDS would contribute generally to the goal of market stability.  
As part of its risk management, a CCP may subject novated contracts to initial and variation 
margin requirements and establish a clearing fund.  The CCP also may implement a loss-sharing 
arrangement among its participants to respond to a participant insolvency or default.   
A CCP would also reduce CDS risks through multilateral netting of trades.13  Trades 
cleared through a CCP would permit market participants to accept the best bid or offer from a 
dealer in the OTC market with very brief exposure to the creditworthiness of the dealer.  In 
addition, by allowing netting of positions in similar instruments, and netting of gains and losses 
across different instruments, a CCP would reduce redundant notional exposures and promote the 
more efficient use of resources for monitoring and managing CDS positions.  Through uniform 
margining and other risk controls, including controls on market-wide concentrations that cannot 
be implemented effectively when counterparty risk management is decentralized, a CCP can help 
prevent a single market participant’s failure from destabilizing other market participants and, 
ultimately, the broader financial system.   
In this context, LIFFE Administration and Management (“LIFFE A&M”) and 
LCH.Clearnet Ltd. (“LCH.Clearnet”) have requested that the Commission grant exemptions 
                                                 
12   
“Novation” is a “process through which the original obligation between a buyer and seller is 
discharged through the substitution of the CCP as seller to buyer and buyer to seller, creating two new 
contracts.”  Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, Technical Committee of the International 
Organization of Securities Commissioners, Recommendations for Central Counterparties (November 
2004) at 66. 
13  
See “New Developments in Clearing and Settlement Arrangements for OTC Derivatives,” supra 
note 11, at 25.  Multilateral netting of trades would permit multiple counterparties to offset their open 
transaction exposure through the CCP, spreading credit risk across all participants in the clearing system 
and more effectively diffusing the risk of a counterparty's default than could be accomplished by bilateral 
netting alone. 
 
6
from certain requirements under the Exchange Act with respect to their proposed activities in 
clearing and settling certain index-based CDS, as well as the proposed activities of certain other 
persons, as described below.14  
Based on the facts that LIFFE A&M and LCH.Clearnet have presented and the 
representations they have made,15 and for the reasons discussed in this Order, the Commission 
temporarily is exempting, subject to certain conditions, LCH.Clearnet from the requirement to 
register as a clearing agency under Section 17A of the Exchange Act solely to perform the 
functions of a clearing agency for certain non-excluded CDS transactions.  The Commission also 
temporarily is exempting eligible contract participants and others from certain Exchange Act 
requirements with respect to non-excluded CDS cleared by LCH.Clearnet.  The Commission’s 
exemptions are temporary and will expire on September 25, 2009.  To facilitate the operation of 
one or more CCPs for the CDS market, the Commission has also approved interim final 
temporary rules providing exemptions under the Securities Act of 1933 and the Exchange Act for 
non-excluded CDS.  Finally, the Commission is providing temporary exemptions in connection 
with Sections 5 and 6 of the Exchange Act for transactions in non-excluded CDS.16   
                                                 
14   
See Letter from Arthur W. Hahn, KattenMuchinRosenman LLP, to Florence Harmon, Acting 
Secretary, Commission, December 24, 2008.       
15   
See id.  The exemptions we are granting today are based on representations made by LIFFE 
A&M and LCH.Clearnet.  We recognize, however, that there could be legal uncertainty in the event that 
one or more of the underlying representations were to become inaccurate.  Accordingly, if any of these 
exemptions were to become unavailable by reason of an underlying representation no longer being 
materially accurate, the legal status of existing open positions in non-excluded CDS associated with 
persons subject to those unavailable exemptions would remain unchanged, but no new positions could be 
established pursuant to the exemptions until all of the underlying representations were again accurate.   
16   
See Securities Exchange Act Release No. 59165 (December 24, 2008). 
 
7
II. 
Discussion 
A. 
Description of LIFFE A&M and LCH.Clearnet’s Proposal  
 
The exemptive request by LIFFE A&M and LCH.Clearnet describes how their proposed 
arrangements for central clearing of CDS would operate, and makes representations about the 
safeguards associated with those arrangements, as described below: 
1.  
LCH Central Counterparty Services for CDS  
LIFFE A&M has developed and makes available to its members an OTC derivatives 
processing service, called Bclear, that will provide a mechanism for the processing and 
centralized clearing of CDS based on credit default swap indices.  The Bclear service processes 
OTC transactions that are submitted to it by LIFFE A&M members or authorized customers of 
those members.  The Bclear service submits these transactions for clearance to LCH.Clearnet, 
which stands as the central counterparty to all transactions processed through Bclear.17  LIFFE 
A&M will begin processing index CDS through Bclear and would like to make such services 
available to certain market participants in the U.S.  LIFFE A&M represents that the following 
information regarding index CDS will be available on its Web site (www.nyx.com): (a) contract 
specifications for index CDS that may be processed and cleared through the Bclear Service, and 
(b) a description of the Bclear Service and rules applicable thereto.   
                                                 
17  
Bclear provides a means by which counterparties to an index CDS may negotiate a transaction on 
a bilateral basis and then submit the transaction for processing and clearance by LCH.Clearnet.  Bclear 
accepts only completed transactions and is not a matching system for counterparties. 
 
8
LCH.Clearnet provides CCP services to the following markets and services:  London 
Stock Exchange, SWX Europe Ltd., LIFFE, EDX London, London Metal Exchange, other 
European Multilateral Trading Facilities (“MTF”), and RepoClear and SwapClear.18 
LIFFE A&M has been granted recognition as a Recognised Investment Exchange under 
the United Kingdom (“U.K.”) Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (“FSMA”) by the 
Financial Services Authority (“FSA”).  LCH.Clearnet has been granted recognition as a 
Recognized Clearing House (“RCH”) under FSMA by the FSA.19  Regulation and oversight in 
the U.K. is carried out by the FSA and the Bank of England.  The FSA is the main regulator of 
LCH.Clearnet as an RCH, while the Bank of England’s oversight is confined to LCH.Clearnet’s 
payment system.20 
The FSA has a regulatory supervision relationship with LIFFE A&M and with 
LCH.Clearnet.  On an annual basis, the FSA undertakes a risk assessment of LIFFE A&M and 
LCH.Clearnet pursuant to which the FSA determines whether relevant regulatory obligations 
                                                 
18  
LCH.Clearnet publishes its rules and procedures for the various markets cleared, together with 
information on risk management, application costs and procedures, minimum contributions towards and 
interest rates on the default fund, and transactions tariffs. 
19   
LCH.Clearnet has been approved as a Derivatives Clearing Organization (“DCO”) by the CFTC.  
In addition, FSA and the Bank of England performed a risk assessment of LCH in June 2006 against the 
Recommendations for Central Counterparties (“RCCP”), which was drafted by a joint task force 
composed of representative members of the International Organization of Securities Commissions 
(“IOSCO”) and Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (“CPSS”) and published in November 
2004.   
The Task Force consisted of securities regulators and central bankers from 19 countries and the 
European Union.  The U.S. representatives on the Task Force included staff from the Commission, FRB, 
and the CFTC.  The complete RCCP Report is available on the Web sites of the Bank for International 
Settlements and the International Organization of Securities Commission at, 
http://www.bis.org/publ/cpss64.htm, and at http://www.iosco.org, respectively.  LCH.Clearnet has 
assured the Commission that it is in full compliance with the Recommendations for Central 
Counterparties.  The assessment can be found at http://www.fsa.gov.uk/pubs/other/lchclearnet.pdf. 
20  
LCH.Clearnet is owned 73.3 percent by users, 10.9 percent by exchanges, and 15.8 percent by 
Euroclear.  Euroclear is a user-owned, user-governed Brussels, Belgium-based financial services 
company that specializes in the settlement of securities transactions. 
 
9
continue to be met and whether the activities of either LIFFE A&M or LCH.Clearnet pose any 
risks to the FSA’s statutory objectives, including maintaining market confidence and providing 
customer protection.  The FSA approves the business continuity plans of LCH.Clearnet. 
2. 
CCP Role of LCH.Clearnet in Connection with LIFFE A&M 
LIFFE A&M has two categories of members, clearing members and non-clearing 
members.  LIFFE A&M further has two types of clearing members:  Individual Clearing 
Members that clear and settle business for their own account or, in the case of broker-dealers, on 
behalf of their customers; and General Clearing Members that, in addition, clear and settle 
business on behalf of other LIFFE A&M members.  All transactions of non-clearing members 
must be cleared through a specific clearing member.  All clearing members must also be 
members of LCH.Clearnet and all are subject to standards of capital adequacy (set by 
LCH.Clearnet as well as by their respective regulators).  Clearing members must also satisfy 
LIFFE A&M and LCH.Clearnet that they have adequate systems and controls to clear and settle 
transactions. 
The rules of LIFFE A&M provide for members to trade for their own account and/or for 
their customers, but all transactions must be in the name of the member effecting the trade and 
that member will be the counterparty for those transactions.  Thus, a LIFFE A&M member will 
be considered to be “acting as principal.”  This means that a transaction on LIFFE A&M 
automatically generates a sequence of matching contracts.  For example, a sequence could be 
between a customer and a LIFFE A&M member, between that member and a clearing member, 
and between the clearing member and LCH.Clearnet. 
The purpose of the LIFFE A&M rules is to ensure that a party to a transaction need only 
look to its immediate counterparty for performance and need not concern itself with parties at 
 
10
other points on the contractual chain.  Thus, LCH.Clearnet need only look to its clearing 
members and would have no contractual relationship with, or knowledge of, the non-clearing 
members of LIFFE A&M or customers on whose behalf the transaction was executed. 
Hence, LCH.Clearnet is the CCP to clearing firms each acting as principal in respect of 
index CDS.  Non-clearing members and non-member customers are not party to any contracts 
registered by clearing members with LCH.Clearnet.  Once an index CDS contract has been 
accepted by LIFFE A&M, a chain of linked contracts is created, all having the same terms.  
Specifically, the process by which the chain of linked contracts is created is as follows: 
a. 
When a non-member customer enters into an index CDS with or through a non-
clearing member, the non-clearing member submits the contract to Bclear.  Once LIFFE A&M 
has accepted the contract, an exchange contract21 is created between the non-clearing member, as 
principal, and its customer.  If another customer was originally a counterparty to the index CDS, 
an exchange contract is created between the non-clearing member, as principal, and the second 
customer.  The contracts are referred to as “customer contracts.”  The customer contracts replace 
the initial index CDS, which ceases to exist at that point. 
b. 
Simultaneously, a matching contract between the non-clearing member and its 
clearing member, called a “parallel contract,” comes into existence for each of the customer 
contracts. 
c. 
If the counterparty to the trade is a customer of another non-clearing member, a 
“related contract” is created between the respective clearing members.  The related contract is 
presented to LCH.Clearnet for registration.  If there is a single non-clearing member involved in 
the transaction, the parallel contracts are presented to LCH.Clearnet for registration.   
                                                 
21   
An “exchange contract” refers to a contract that is subject to the rules of LIFFE A&M.  The term 
does not indicate that a central order book exists for a product.   
 
11
d. 
The related contract is replaced by contracts between LCH.Clearnet and the 
clearing member on each side of the transaction. 
Through this process, the index CDS is discharged and a set of on-exchange contracts 
arise imposing equivalent obligations on and granting equivalent rights to the original parties to 
the index CDS, but with LCH.Clearnet as the CCP.  Because the non-member customer will not 
be a party to a contract registered with LCH.Clearnet by the clearing member, the relationship 
between the non-member customer and the non-clearing member will remain intact, although 
such relationship will now be based upon the exchange contract, rather than the index CDS 
originally entered into by the respective parties. 
3. 
LCH Risk Management   
 
LCH.Clearnet requires the posting of initial margin and maintenance (“variation”) margin 
for all clearing accounts.  The initial margin and maintenance margin is determined utilizing the 
London SPAN (Standard Portfolio Analysis of Risk) methodology.  London SPAN was adapted 
from the Chicago Mercantile Exchange’s margining system.   
The initial margin requirement for a member’s CDS portfolio is the largest loss identified 
under these various market conditions that might reasonably occur taking into account risk 
offsets within the CDS portfolio.  Initial margin is refunded when the margined index CDS 
position is closed.  This risk management methodology is designed to protect LCH.Clearnet 
against the worst likely loss from one or two days’ move in the market. 
Net Liquidation Value (“NLV”), the value of a member’s portfolio at closing market 
prices representing the income or expenditure which would be associated with closing out an 
index CDS position, is added to initial margin to give the total margin requirement. 
 
12
LCH.Clearnet revalues the margin positions of its members on at least a daily basis to 
account for changes or volatility in the market price of the underlying index and in 
LCH.Clearnet’s valuation of margin collateral provided in the form of securities.  During the 
day, LCH.Clearnet monitors market prices and clearing members’ positions and may call for 
additional margin payments from members.  LCH.Clearnet then revalues each member’s margin 
requirements each night.22 
LCH.Clearnet’s margin requirements are only applicable to clearing members.  All 
clearing members must provide LCH.Clearnet with enough margin to cover the risk on their total 
net positions for each account they clear.  Clearing members and/or non-clearing members in 
turn set the margin requirements applicable to their customers.  
4. 
Margin Collateral 
LCH.Clearnet accepts a wide variety of collateral types from clearing members in 
meeting their initial and NLV margin payments.  Members may meet their margin requirements 
by cash payments in the following currencies: sterling, U.S. dollars, yen, Swiss francs, and euros.  
In addition, LCH.Clearnet will accept an extensive range of collateral including approved bank 
                                                 
22   
While LCH.Clearnet’s margin requirements are central to its risk management, LCH.Clearnet 
also has other measures at its disposal, including:   
1. 
additional financial resource requirements (buffers); 
2. 
additional initial margin requirements; 
3. 
imposition of position limits; 
4. 
trading for liquidation only; 
5. 
prior authorization of trades above a certain size; and 
6. 
issuing instructions to reduce positions. 
LCH.Clearnet also monitors large cumulative profits or losses. If large and unusual trading activity is 
detected (relative to previous exposures), LCH.Clearnet will contact compliance officers and seek 
assurances from the senior executives or boards of a member firm or parent company. 
 
13
guarantees, certain U.K. treasury bills, U.K. gilts, sterling, U.S. dollar certificates of deposit, 
German, Italian, and Spanish government bonds and U.K. equities.   
To avoid frequent margin payments, clearing members may deposit margin in excess of 
the LCH.Clearnet required minimum.  In such cases, LCH.Clearnet pays interest to clearing 
members on excess cash margin on deposit currently at the overnight London Inter-Bank Bid 
Rate (“LIBID”) minus twenty-five basis points. 
5. 
Member Default 
If a clearing member appears to LCH.Clearnet to be unable, or likely to become unable, 
to meet its obligations to LCH.Clearnet, it may be declared by LCH.Clearnet in default under 
LCH.Clearnet’s default rules in relation to the contracts registered by it with LCH.Clearnet.  
Where a clearing member has been declared in default by LCH.Clearnet, contracts between such 
clearing member and its non-clearing members and clients will be dealt with under LIFFE 
A&M’s default rules.  A default by a non-clearing member will also be dealt with under LIFFE 
A&M’s default rules.  Where the defaulting party is an LCH.Clearnet clearing member, 
LCH.Clearnet’s default rules take primacy over LIFFE A&M’s, although all actions in such 
circumstances are typically coordinated between LCH.Clearnet and LIFFE A&M to take 
advantage of statutory protections afforded to LCH.Clearnet as an RCH. 
As the legal counterparty to each clearing member, LCH.Clearnet bears any loss arising 
from the default of a clearing member, beyond the margin deposits held as security in respect of 
the defaulting member’s liabilities.  LCH.Clearnet’s supplementary resources for use in default 
cases, should a member’s margin deposits prove insufficient, comprise a Default Fund, totaling 
approximately £600 million, which is provided by members and held in cash by LCH.  Each 
member’s Default Fund contribution is assessed every three months on the basis of that 
 
14
member’s initial margin and (in the case of exchange traded derivatives) trading volumes over 
the preceding three months. 
The Default Fund is “mutualized” in that any loss faced by LCH.Clearnet as a result of a 
default which cannot be met from the defaulter’s margin on deposit at LCH.Clearnet or from its 
contribution to the Default Fund will be met by the Default Fund generally.  Customers of a 
defaulting clearing member have no contractual relationship with LCH.Clearnet, but are 
protected to the extent of their client agreement with the defaulting member and any segregation 
arrangements in place with the defaulting member.23 
LCH.Clearnet uses a stress testing model to ensure that its post-default financial backing 
is sufficient.  The stress testing model assesses the adequacy of initial margin requirements and 
the Default Fund on the basis of extreme price movement scenarios in all contracts cleared by 
LCH. 
The sequence of protections to be applied in the event of a default is as follows:24 
a. 
Defaulting Member’s Initial Margin (including excess collateral posted). 
b. 
Defaulting Member’s Default Fund Contribution. 
c. 
Up to £20 million of LCH.Clearnet’s capital and reserves. 
d. 
Remainder of the Default Fund. 
e. 
Remainder of LCH.Clearnet’s capital and reserves. 
As the counterparty to every clearing member, LCH.Clearnet reduces the scope of 
counterparty risk between clearing members.  LCH.Clearnet is legally responsible for the 
financial performance of the contracts that it has registered and any resulting delivery 
                                                 
23  
LCH is not a counterparty to contracts that clearing members have with their customers.  
24  
The sequence does not take into account the anticipated replenishment of the Default Fund by 
market members and/or national governments between steps d. and e. 
 
15
obligations.  LCH.Clearnet represents that its rules and procedures are available on its Web site 
and such rules and procedures generally set forth the sequence of protections to be applied in the 
event of a default by a clearing member. 
6. 
Client Money Rules and Other Member Requirements 
Clearing members that undertake business for clients are subject to UK client money and 
client asset rules or, if they are authorized outside the UK, similar rules of their relevant 
regulator.  In the European Union, the client money rules are governed by the Markets in 
Financial Instruments Directive, although the UK client money rules prescribe some extended 
conditions in certain cases.  Clearing members may have two accounts with LCH.Clearnet, one 
for segregated customer business and one for all house and non-segregated client business, and 
neither LCH.Clearnet nor the clearing member can offset liabilities on the house margin account 
with credits arising on the client margin account.  Clearing members are required to segregate 
customer funds and securities except in instances where the investor, if permitted to do so, 
contracts out of the segregation requirement.     
LIFFE A&M represents that it only considers for membership entities located in 
jurisdictions with regulatory arrangements it deems satisfactory regarding: (i) supervision of 
investment activity; (ii) information sharing and cooperation between the supervisory authority 
of the jurisdiction concerned and LIFFE A&M and/or the FSA; and (iii) capital adequacy, 
liquidity, and segregation of customers’ funds and securities (and related books and records 
provisions).  LIFFE A&M further represents that before offering Index CDS services to U.S. 
persons, LIFFE A&M will adopt a requirement that will prohibit a member from directly or 
indirectly submitting, or permitting an authorized customer to submit, an Index CDS to the 
Bclear service when the member receives or holds funds or securities of U.S. persons for the 
 
16
purpose of purchasing, selling, clearing, settling, or holding that Index CDS position, unless the 
member, in connection with such Index CDS activities, is regulated by:  (i) a signatory to the 
IOSCO Multilateral Memorandum of Understanding Concerning Consultation and Cooperation 
and the Exchange of Information, (ii) a signatory to a bilateral arrangement with the Commission 
for enforcement cooperation, or (iii) a financial regulatory authority in Ireland or Sweden.  In 
that regard, LIFFE A&M states that it intends to launch the Index CDS service for non-U.S. 
persons on December 22, 2008.  LIFFE A&M will notify members at that time that the service 
may not be offered to U.S. persons until LIFFE A&M issues an additional notice. 
In addition, LCH.Clearnet represents that its rules require its clearing members to:  (i) 
meet specific capital adequacy standards that vary depending on the type of activities undertaken 
by the member; (ii) provide copies of audited annual financial statements to LCH.Clearnet; and 
(iii) notify LCH.Clearnet upon the happening of certain material events, such as significant 
reductions in shareholders’ funds or net capital. 
B. 
Temporary Conditional Exemption from Clearing Agency Registration Requirement 
Section 17A of the Exchange Act sets forth the framework for the regulation and 
operation of the U.S. clearance and settlement system, including CCPs.  Specifically, Section 
17A directs the Commission to use its authority to promote enumerated Congressional objectives 
and to facilitate the development of a national clearance and settlement system for securities 
transactions.  Absent an exemption, a CCP that novates trades of non-excluded CDS that are 
securities and generates money and settlement obligations for participants is required to register 
with the Commission as a clearing agency.   
Section 36 of the Exchange Act authorizes the Commission to conditionally or 
unconditionally exempt any person, security, or transaction, or any class or classes of persons, 
 
17
securities, or transactions, from any provision or provisions of the Exchange Act or any rule or 
regulation thereunder, by rule, regulation, or order, to the extent that such exemption is necessary 
or appropriate in the public interest, and is consistent with the protection of investors.25 
Accordingly, pursuant to Section 36 of the Exchange Act, the Commission finds that it is 
necessary or appropriate in the public interest and is consistent with the protection of investors to 
exercise its authority to grant an exemption until September 25, 2009 to LCH.Clearnet from 
Section 17A of the Exchange Act, solely to perform the functions of a clearing agency for 
Cleared Index CDS,26 subject to the conditions discussed below.     
Our action today balances the aim of facilitating the prompt establishment of 
LCH.Clearnet as a CCP for non-excluded CDS transactions – which should help reduce systemic 
risks during a period of extreme turmoil in the U.S. and global financial markets – with ensuring 
that important elements of Commission oversight are applied to the non-excluded CDS market.  
In doing so, we are mindful that applying the full scope of the Exchange Act to transactions 
involving non-excluded CDS could deter the prompt establishment of LCH.Clearnet as a CCP to 
settle those transactions.     
                                                 
25  
15 U.S.C. 78mm. 
26   
For purposes of this exemption, and the other exemptions addressed in this Order, “Cleared Index 
CDS” means a credit default swap that is submitted (or offered, purchased, or sold on terms providing for 
submission) to LCH.Clearnet, that is offered only to, purchased only by, and sold only to eligible contract 
participants (as defined in Section 1a(12) of the Commodity Exchange Act as in effect on the date of this 
Order (other than a person that is an eligible contract participant under paragraph (C) of that section)), and 
in which the reference index is an index in which 80 percent or more of the index’s weighting is 
comprised of the following entities or securities:  (i) an entity reporting under the Exchange Act, 
providing Securities Act Rule 144A(d)(4) information, or about which financial information is otherwise 
publicly available; (ii) a foreign private issuer whose securities are listed outside the United States and 
that has its principal trading market outside the United States; (iii) a foreign sovereign debt security; (iv) 
an asset-backed security, as defined in Regulation AB, issued in a registered transaction with publicly 
available distribution reports; or (v) an asset-backed security issued or guaranteed by the Fannie Mae, 
Freddie Mac, or the Government National Mortgage Association (“Ginnie Mae”).  As discussed above, 
the Commission’s action today does not affect CDS that are swap agreements under Section 206A of the 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.  See text at note 10, supra.   
 
18
 
While we are acting so that the prompt establishment of LCH.Clearnet as a CCP for non-
excluded CDS will not be delayed by the need to apply the full scope of Exchange Act Section 
17A’s requirements that govern clearing agencies, the relief we are providing is temporary and 
conditional.  The limited duration of the exemptions will permit the Commission to gain more 
direct experience with the non-excluded CDS market after LCH.Clearnet becomes operational, 
giving the Commission the ability to oversee the development of the centrally cleared non-
excluded CDS market as it evolves.  During the exemptive period, the Commission will closely 
monitor the impact of the CCPs on the CDS market.  In particular, the Commission will seek to 
assure itself that the CCPs do not act in anticompetivie manner or indirectly facilitate 
anticompetitive behavior with respect to fees charged to members, the dissemination of market 
data and the access to clearing services by independent CDS exchanges or CDS trading 
platforms.  The Commission will take that experience into account in future actions.   
Moreover, this temporary exemption in part is based on LCH.Clearnet’s representation 
that it meets the standards set forth in the RCCP.27  The RCCP establishes a framework that 
requires a CCP to have: (i) the ability to facilitate the prompt and accurate clearance and 
settlement of CDS transactions and to safeguard its users' assets; and (ii) sound risk management, 
including the ability to appropriately determine and collect clearing fund and monitor its users' 
trading.  This framework is generally consistent with the requirements of Section 17A of the 
Exchange Act.   
In addition, this Order is designed to assure that – as LCH.Clearnet and LIFFE A&M 
have represented – information will be available to market participants about the terms of the 
CDS cleared by LCH.Clearnet, the creditworthiness of LCH.Clearnet or any guarantor, and the 
                                                 
27   
See note 19, supra. 
 
19
clearing and settlement process for the CDS.  Moreover, to be within the definition of Cleared 
Index CDS for purposes of this exemption (as well as the other exemptions granted through this 
Order), at least 80 percent of the weighting of the index must be comprised of reference entities 
or reference securities that satisfy certain conditions relating to the availability of information 
about such persons or securities.  The definition does not prescribe the type of financial 
information that must be available nor the location of the particular information, recognizing that 
eligible contract participants have access to information about reference entities and reference 
securities through multiple sources.  The Commission believes, however, that it is important in 
the CDS market, as in the market for securities generally, that parties to transactions should have 
access to financial information that would allow them to appropriately evaluate the risks relating 
to a particular investment and make more informed investment decisions.28  Such information 
availability also will assist LCH.Clearnet and the buyers and sellers in valuing their Cleared 
Index CDS and their counterparty exposures.  As a result of the Commission’s actions today, the 
Commission believes that information should be available for market participants to be able to 
make informed investment decisions, and value and evaluate their Cleared Index CDS and their 
counterparty exposures. 
 
This temporary exemption is subject to a number of conditions that are designed to 
enable Commission staff to monitor LCH.Clearnet’s clearance and settlement of CDS 
transactions, coordinate and cooperate with the FSA, and help reduce risk in the CDS market.  
These conditions require that LCH.Clearnet:  (i) make available on its Web site annual audited 
                                                 
28  
The Commission notes the recommendations of the President’s Working Group on Financial 
Markets regarding the informational needs and due diligence responsibilities of investors.  See Policy 
Statement on Financial Market Developments, The President’s Working Group on Financial Markets, 
March 13, 2008, available at: http://www.treas.gov/press/releases/reports/ 
pwgpolicystatemktturmoil_03122008.pdf. 
 
20
financial statements; (ii) preserve records related to the conduct of its Cleared Index CDS 
clearance and settlement services for at least five years (in an easily accessible place for the first 
two years); (iii) supply information relating to its Cleared Index CDS clearance and settlement 
services to the Commission; (iv) provide access to the Commission to conduct on-site 
inspections of facilities, records and personnel related to its Cleared Index CDS clearance and 
settlement services, subject to coordination with FSA and upon terms and conditions agreed 
between the FSA and the Commission; (v) notify the Commission about material disciplinary 
actions taken against users of its Cleared Index CDS clearance and settlement services, and about 
the involuntary termination of the membership of an entity using those services; (vi) provide the 
Commission with prior notice of changes to its Default Rules and Default Fund Rules; (vii) 
provide the Commission with reports with respect to certain automated systems used in 
connection with its Cleared Index CDS clearance and settlement services, and with annual 
audited financial statements;29 and (viii) provide notice to the Commission regarding the 
suspension of services or the inability to operate facilities in connection with its Cleared Index 
CDS clearance and settlement services. 
 
In addition, this relief is conditioned on LCH.Clearnet, directly or indirectly, making 
available to the public on terms that are fair and reasonable and not unreasonably discriminatory: 
(i) all end-of-day settlement prices and any other prices with respect to Cleared Index CDS that 
LCH.Clearnet may establish to calculate mark-to market margin requirements for LCH.Clearnet 
                                                 
29   
As a condition of LCH.Clearnet’s exemption, LIFFE A&M has agreed to provide the 
Commission with reports with respect to certain automated systems used in connection with 
LCH.Clearnet’s Cleared Index CDS clearance and settlement services.  These reports will be generated in 
accordance with risk assessments of the areas set forth in the Commission’s Automation Review Policy 
Statements (“ARPs”).  See Automated Systems of Self-Regulatory Organization, Securities Exchange Act 
Release No. 27445 (November 16, 1989), 54 FR 48703 (November 24, 1989), and Automated Systems of 
Self-Regulatory Organization (II), Securities Exchange Act Release No. 29185 (May 9, 1991), 56 FR 
22490 (May 15, 1991). 
 
21
or LIFFE A&M participants; and (ii) any other pricing or valuation information with respect to 
Cleared Index CDS as is published or distributed by LCH.Clearnet or LIFFE A&M. The 
Commission believes this is an appropriate condition for LCH.Clearnet’s exemption from 
registration as a clearing agency.  In Section 11A of the Exchange Act, Congress included a 
finding that "[i]t is in the public interest and appropriate for the protection of investors and the 
maintenance of fair and orderly markets to assure . . . the availability to brokers, dealers, and 
investors of information with respect to quotations for and transactions in securities."30  The 
President's Working Group on Financial Markets has stated that increased transparency is a 
policy objective for the over-the-counter derivatives market,31 which includes the market for 
CDS.  This condition is designed to further this policy objective of both Congress and the 
President's Working Group by requiring LCH.Clearnet and LIFFE A&M to make available to 
the public on terms that are fair and reasonable all end-of-day settlement prices and any other 
prices with respect to Cleared Index CDS that LCH.Clearnet may establish to calculate mark-to-
market margin requirements for  LCH.Clearnet or LIFFE A&M Participants.  In addition, 
LCH.Clearnet or LIFFE A&M  must make available to the public on terms that are fair and 
reasonable and not unfairly discriminatory any other pricing or valuation information with 
respect to Cleared Index CDS as is published or distributed by LCH.Clearnet or LIFFE A&M. 
 
As a CCP, LCH.Clearnet will collect and process information about CDS transactions 
and positions from all of its participants.  With this information, a CCP will, among other things, 
calculate and disseminate current values for open positions for the purpose of setting appropriate 
                                                 
30 
15 U.S.C. 78k-1(a)(1)(C)(iii).  See also 15 U.S.C. 78k-1(a)(1)(D). 
31 
See President's Working Group on Financial Markets, Policy Objectives for the OTC Derivatives 
Market (November 14, 2008), http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/reports/policyobjectives.pdf ("Public 
reporting of prices, trading volumes and aggregate open interest should be required to increase market 
transparency for participants and the public."). 
 
22
margin levels, or have an agent perform these functions on its behalf.  The availability of such 
information can improve fairness, efficiency, and competitiveness of the market – all of which 
enhance investor protection and facilitate capital formation.  Moreover, with pricing and 
valuation information relating to Cleared Index CDS, market participants would be able to derive 
information about underlying securities and indexes.  This may improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the securities markets by allowing investors to better understand credit 
conditions generally. 
C. 
Temporary General Exemption for LCH.Clearnet, LIFFE A&M and Certain Eligible 
Contract Participants 
Applying the full panoply of Exchange Act requirements to participants in transactions in 
non-excluded CDS likely would deter some participants from using CCPs to clear CDS 
transactions.  At the same time, it is important that the antifraud provisions of the Exchange Act 
apply to transactions in non-excluded CDS; indeed, OTC transactions subject to individual 
negotiation that qualify as security-based swap agreements already are subject to these antifraud 
provisions.32 
                                                 
32   
While Section 3A of the Exchange Act excludes “swap agreements” from the definition of 
“security,” certain antifraud and insider trading provisions under the Exchange Act explicitly apply to 
security-based swap agreements.  See (a) paragraphs (2) through (5) of Section 9(a), 15 U.S.C. 78i(a), 
prohibiting the manipulation of security prices; (b) Section 10(b), 15 U.S.C. 78j(b), and underlying rules 
prohibiting fraud, manipulation or insider trading (but not prophylactic reporting or recordkeeping 
requirements); (c) Section 15(c)(1), 15 U.S.C. 78o(c)(1), which prohibits brokers and dealers from using 
manipulative or deceptive devices; (d) Sections 16(a) and (b), 15 U.S.C. 78p(a) and (b), which address 
disclosure by directors, officers and principal stockholders, and short-swing trading by those persons, and 
rules with respect to reporting requirements under Section 16(a); (e) Section 20(d), 15 U.S.C. 78t(d), 
providing for antifraud liability in connection with certain derivative transactions; and (f) Section 
21A(a)(1), 15 U.S.C. 78u-1(a)(1), related to the Commission’s authority to impose civil penalties for 
insider trading violations. 
“Security-based swap agreement” is defined in Section 206B of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act as 
a swap agreement in which a material term is based on the price, yield, value, or volatility of any security 
or any group or index of securities, or any interest therein.   
 
23
 
We thus believe that it is appropriate in the public interest and consistent with the 
protection of investors temporarily to apply substantially the same framework to transactions by 
market participants in non-excluded CDS that applies to transactions in security-based swap 
agreements.  Applying substantially the same set of requirements to participants in transactions 
in non-excluded CDS as apply to participants in OTC CDS transactions will avoid deterring 
market participants from promptly using CCPs, which would detract from the potential benefits 
of central clearing.    
 
Accordingly, pursuant to Section 36 of the Exchange Act, the Commission finds that it is  
necessary or appropriate in the public interest and is consistent with the protection of investors to 
exercise its authority to grant an exemption until September 25, 2009 from certain requirements 
under the Exchange Act.  This temporary exemption applies to LCH.Clearnet and LIFFE A&M, 
and also to certain eligible contract participants33 other than:  eligible contract participants that 
receive or hold funds or securities for the purpose of purchasing, selling, clearing, settling or 
holding Cleared Index CDS positions for other persons;34 eligible contract participants that are 
                                                 
33  
This exemption in general applies to eligible contract participants, as defined in Section 1a(12) of 
the Commodity Exchange Act as in effect on the date of this Order, other than persons that are eligible 
contract participants under paragraph (C) of that section.      
34   
For these purposes, and for the purpose of the definition of “Cleared Index CDS,” the terms 
“purchasing” and “selling” mean the execution, termination (prior to its scheduled maturity date), 
assignment, exchange, or similar transfer or conveyance of, or extinguishing the rights or obligations 
under, a Cleared Index CDS, as the context may require.  This is consistent with the meaning of the terms 
“purchase” or “sale” under the Exchange Act in the context of security-based swap agreements.  See 
Exchange Act Section 3A(b)(4).   
A separate temporary conditional exemption addresses members of LIFFE A&M that hold funds 
or securities for the purpose of purchasing, selling, clearing, settling, or holding Cleared Index CDS 
positions for other persons.  See Part II.D, infra.   
 
24
self-regulatory organizations; or eligible contract participants that are registered brokers or 
dealers.35   
Under this temporary exemption, and solely with respect to Cleared Index CDS, these 
persons generally are exempt from provisions of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations 
thereunder that do not apply to security-based swap agreements.  Those persons thus would still 
be subject to those Exchange Act requirements that explicitly are applicable in connection with 
security-based swap agreements.36  In addition, all provisions of the Exchange Act related to the 
Commission’s enforcement authority in connection with violations or potential violations of such 
provisions would remain applicable.37  In this way, the temporary exemption would apply the 
same Exchange Act requirements in connection with non-excluded CDS as apply in connection 
with OTC credit default swaps. 
This temporary exemption, however, does not extend to Sections 5 and 6 of the Exchange 
Act.  The Commission separately is issuing a conditional exemption from these provisions to all 
broker-dealers and exchanges.38  This temporary exemption also does not extend to Section 17A 
of the Exchange Act; instead, LCH.Clearnet is exempt from registration as a clearing agency 
under the conditions discussed above.  In addition, this exemption does not apply to Exchange 
                                                 
35   
A separate temporary exemption addresses the Cleared Index CDS activities of registered broker-
dealers.  See Part II.E, infra. 
36   
See note 32, supra. 
37   
Thus, for example, the Commission retains the ability to investigate potential violations and bring 
enforcement actions in the federal courts and administrative proceedings, and to seek the full panoply of 
remedies available in such cases.   
38  
See note 16, supra.  A national securities exchange that effects transactions in Cleared Index CDS 
would continue to be required to comply with all requirements under the Exchange Act applicable to such 
transactions.  A national securities exchange could form subsidiaries or affiliates that operate exchanges 
exempt under that order.  Any subsidiary or affiliate of a registered exchange could not integrate, or 
otherwise link, the exempt CDS exchange with the registered exchange including the premises or 
property of such exchange for effecting or reporting a transaction without being considered a “facility of 
the exchange.”  See Section 3(a)(2), 15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(2).  
 
25
Act Sections 12, 13, 14, 15(d) and 16;39 eligible contract participants and other persons instead 
should refer to the interim final temporary rules issued today by the Commission.  Finally, this 
temporary exemption does not extend to the Commission’s administrative proceeding authority 
under Sections 15(b)(4) and (b)(6),40 or to certain provisions related to government securities.41 
D. 
Conditional Temporary General Exemption for Certain Clearing Members of LIFFE 
A&M and LCH.Clearnet 
 
Absent an exception, persons that effect transactions in non-excluded CDS that are 
securities may be required to register as broker-dealers pursuant to Section 15(a)(1) of the 
Exchange Act.42  Moreover, certain reporting and other requirements of the Exchange Act could 
                                                 
39   
15 U.S.C. 78l, 78m, 78n, 78o(d), 78p. 
40   
Exchange Act Sections 15(b)(4) and 15(b)(6), 15 U.S.C. 78o(b)(4) and (b)(6), grant the 
Commission authority to take action against broker-dealers and associated persons in certain situations.  
Accordingly, while this exemption generally extends to persons that act as inter-dealer brokers in the 
market for Cleared Index CDS and do not hold funds or securities for others, such inter-dealer brokers 
may be subject to actions under Sections 15(b)(4) and (b)(6) of the Exchange Act.   
In addition, such inter-dealer brokers may be subject to actions under Exchange Act Section 
15(c)(1), 15 U.S.C. 78o(c)(1), which prohibits brokers and dealers from using manipulative or deceptive 
devices.  As noted above, Section 15(c)(1) explicitly applies to security-based swap agreements.  Sections 
15(b)(4), 15(b)(6) and 15(c)(1), of course, would not apply to persons subject to this exemption who do 
not act as broker-dealers or associated persons of broker-dealers.  
41   
This exemption specifically does not extend to the Exchange Act provisions applicable to 
government securities, as set forth in Section 15C, 15 U.S.C. 78o-5, and its underlying rules and 
regulations; nor does the exemption extend to related definitions found at paragraphs (42) through (45) of 
Section 3(a), 15 U.S.C. 78c(a).  The Commission does not have authority under Section 36 to issue 
exemptions in connection with those provisions.  See Exchange Act Section 36(b), 15 U.S.C. 78mm(b).   
42  
15 U.S.C. 78o(a)(1).  This section generally provides that, absent an exception or exemption, a 
broker or dealer that uses the mails or any means of interstate commerce to effect transactions in, or to 
induce or attempt to induce the purchase or sale of, any security must register with the Commission.  
Section 3(a)(4) of the Exchange Act generally defines a “broker” as “any person engaged in the 
business of effecting transactions in securities for the account of others,” but provides 11 exceptions for 
certain bank securities activities.  15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(4).  Section 3(a)(5) of the Exchange Act generally 
defines a “dealer” as “any person engaged  in the business of buying and selling securities for his own 
account,” but includes exceptions for certain bank activities.  15 U.S.C. 78c(a)(5).  Exchange Act Section 
3(a)(6) defines a “bank” as a bank or savings association that is directly supervised and examined by state 
or federal banking authorities (with certain additional requirements for banks and savings associations 
 
26
apply to such persons, as broker-dealers, regardless of whether they are registered with the 
Commission.   
 
It is consistent with our investor protection mandate to require that intermediaries in 
securities transactions that receive or hold funds and securities on behalf of others comply with 
standards that safeguard the interests of their customers.  For example, registered broker-dealers 
are required to segregate assets held on behalf of customers from proprietary assets, because 
segregation will assist customers in recovering assets in the event the intermediary fails.  To the 
extent that funds and securities are not segregated, they could be used by a participant to fund its 
own business and could be attached to satisfy debts of the participant were the participant to fail.  
Moreover, the maintenance of adequate capital and liquidity protects customers, CCPs and other 
market participants.  Adequate books and records (including both transactional and position 
records) are necessary to facilitate day to day operations as well as to help resolve situations in 
which a participant fails and either a regulatory authority or receiver is forced to liquidate the 
firm.  Appropriate records also are necessary to allow examiners to review for improper 
activities, such as insider trading or fraud.   
 
At the same time, requiring intermediaries that receive or hold funds and securities on 
behalf of customers in connection with transactions in non-excluded CDS to register as broker-
dealers may deter the use of CCPs in CDS transactions, to the detriment of the markets and 
market participants generally.  Also, as noted above with regard to other eligible contract 
participants to non-excluded CDS transactions, immediately applying the panoply of Exchange 
Act requirements to centrally cleared transactions may deter the use of CCPs for CDS 
transactions.   
                                                                                                                                                             
that are not chartered by a federal authority or a member of the Federal Reserve System).  15 U.S.C. 
78c(a)(6). 
 
27
 
Those factors argue in favor of flexibility in applying the requirements of the Exchange 
Act to these intermediaries.  Along with those factors, in granting an exemption here we are 
particularly relying on the representation of LIFFE A&M that it only considers for membership 
entities located in jurisdictions with regulatory arrangements it deems satisfactory regarding:  (i) 
supervision of investment activity; (ii) information sharing and cooperation between the 
supervisory authority of the jurisdiction concerned and LIFFE A&M and/or the FSA; and (iii) 
capital adequacy, liquidity, and segregation of customers’ funds and securities (and related books 
and records provisions).  We also are particularly relying on the representation of LCH.Clearnet 
that its rules require its clearing members to: (i) meet specific capital adequacy standards that 
vary depending on the type of activities undertaken by the member; (ii) provide copies of audited 
annual financial statements to LCH.Clearnet; and (iii) notify LCH.Clearnet upon the happening 
of certain material events, such as significant reductions in shareholders’ funds or net capital.   
 
We further are relying on LIFFE A&M’s representation that before offering Index CDS 
services to U.S. persons,43 LIFFE A&M will adopt a requirement that will prohibit a member 
from directly or indirectly submitting, or permitting an authorized customer to submit, an Index 
CDS to the Bclear service when the member receives or holds funds or securities of U.S. persons 
for the purpose of purchasing, selling, clearing, settling, or holding that Index CDS position, 
unless the member, in connection with such Index CDS activities, is regulated by:  (i) a signatory 
to the IOSCO Multilateral Memorandum of Understanding Concerning Consultation and 
Cooperation and the Exchange of Information, (ii) a signatory to a bilateral arrangement with the 
Commission for enforcement cooperation, or (iii) a financial regulatory authority in Ireland or 
                                                 
43  
As noted above, LIFFE A&M states that it intends to launch the Index CDS service for non-U.S. 
persons on December 22, 2008.  LIFFE A&M will notify members at that time that that the service may 
not be offered to U.S. persons until LIFFE A&M issues an additional notice.   
 
28
Sweden.44  This will help ensure that the Commission can access trading records and other 
information of LIFFE A&M members as needed to enforce the federal securities laws.   
Accordingly, pursuant to Section 36 of the Exchange Act, the Commission finds that it is 
necessary or appropriate in the public interest and is consistent with the protection of investors to 
exercise its authority to grant a conditional exemption until September 25, 2009 from certain 
Exchange Act requirements.  In general, we are providing a temporary exemption, subject to the 
conditions discussed below, to any member of LIFFE A&M that receives or holds funds or 
securities for the purpose of purchasing, selling, clearing, settling or holding Cleared Index CDS 
positions for other persons.  Solely with respect to Cleared Index CDS, those members generally 
will be exempt from those provisions of the Exchange Act and the underlying rules and 
regulations that do not apply to security-based swap agreements.45    
 
As with the exemption discussed above that is applicable to LCH.Clearnet, LIFFE A&M 
and certain eligible contract participants, and for the same reasons, this exemption for LIFFE 
A&M members that receive or hold funds and securities does not extend to Exchange Act 
provisions that explicitly apply in connection with security-based swap agreements,46 or to 
related enforcement authority provisions.47  As with the exemption discussed above, we also are 
                                                 
44   
The Commission has established informal relationships with securities authorities in Ireland and 
Sweden and cooperates with them on an ad hoc basis.  The Commission will explore entering into 
arrangements for cooperation with these authorities and, in the near term, will seek letters of intent to 
cooperate. 
 
45   
This exemption will be available both to clearing members and to non-clearing members of 
LIFFE A&M that hold funds and securities on behalf of others in connection with transactions in Cleared 
Index CDS. 
46   
See note 32, supra. 
47   
See note 37, supra. 
 
29
not exempting those members from Sections 5, 6, 12(a) and (g), 13, 14, 15(b)(4), 15(b)(6), 15(d), 
16 and 17A of the Exchange Act.48   
This temporary exemption is subject to the member complying with conditions that are 
important for protecting customer funds and securities.  Particularly, the member must be in 
material compliance with the rules of LIFFE A&M and, if it is a clearing member, with the rules 
of LCH.Clearnet, and applicable laws and regulations, relating to capital, liquidity, and 
segregation of customers’ funds and securities (and related books and records provisions) with 
respect to non-excluded CDS.49  Also, to the extent that the member receives or holds funds or 
securities of U.S. eligible contract participants for the purpose of purchasing, selling, clearing, 
settling or holding non-excluded CDS positions for those persons, this exemption is predicated 
on the member satisfying the following three conditions:  (i) the U.S. persons cannot be natural 
persons; (ii) the member must segregate such funds and securities of such U.S. persons from the 
member’s own assets (i.e., the member may not permit U.S. persons to “opt out” of applicable 
segregation requirements for such funds and securities even if regulations or laws would permit 
the person to “opt out”); and (iii) the member shall disclose to such U.S. persons that the member 
is not regulated by the Commission and that U.S. broker-dealer segregation requirements and 
protections under the Securities Investor Protection Act will not apply to any funds or securities 
held by the member.  
                                                 
48   
Nor are we exempting those members from provisions related to government securities, as 
discussed above. 
49   
A member would not be “in material compliance” if it failed in any way to segregate customer 
funds and securities consistent with these rules, laws and regulations.  In that circumstance, the member 
could not rely on this exemption. 
 
30
E. 
Temporary General Exemption for Certain Registered Broker-Dealers 
 
The temporary exemptions addressed above – with regard (i) to LCH.Clearnet, LIFFE 
A&M and certain eligible contract participants and (ii) to LIFFE A&M members that receive or 
hold funds and securities of others – are not available to persons that are registered as broker-
dealers with the Commission (other than those that are notice registered pursuant to Section 
15(b)(11)).50  The Exchange Act and its underlying rules and regulations require broker-dealers 
to comply with a number of obligations that are important to protecting investors and promoting 
market integrity.  We are mindful of the need to avoid creating disincentives to the prompt use of 
CCPs, and we recognize that the factors discussed above suggest that the full panoply of 
Exchange Act requirements should not immediately be applied to registered broker-dealers that 
engage in transactions involving Cleared Index CDS.  At the same time, we also are sensitive to 
the critical importance of certain broker-dealer requirements to promoting market integrity and 
protecting customers (including those broker-dealer customers that are not involved with CDS 
transactions). 
 
This calls for balancing the facilitation of the development and prompt implementation of 
CCPs with the preservation of certain key investor protections.  Pursuant to  
Section 36 of the Exchange Act, the Commission finds that it is necessary or appropriate in the 
public interest and is consistent with the protection of investors to exercise its authority to grant 
an exemption until September 25, 2009 from certain Exchange Act requirements.  Consistent 
with the temporary exemptions discussed above, and solely with respect to Cleared Index CDS, 
we are exempting registered broker-dealers in general from provisions of the Exchange Act and 
its underlying rules and regulations that do not apply to security-based swap agreements.  As 
                                                 
50   
Exchange Act Section 15(b)(11) provides for notice registration of certain persons that effect 
transactions in security futures products.  15 U.S.C. 78o(b)(11). 
 
31
above, we are not excluding registered broker-dealers from Exchange Act provisions that 
explicitly apply in connection with security-based swap agreements or from related enforcement 
authority provisions.51  As above, and for similar reasons, we are not exempting registered 
broker-dealers from:  Sections 5, 6, 12(a) and (g), 13, 14, 15(b)(4), 15(b)(6), 15(d), 16 and 17A 
of the Exchange Act.52   
 
Further we are not exempting registered broker-dealers from the following additional 
provisions under the Exchange Act:  (1) Section 7(c),53 which addresses the unlawful extension 
of credit by broker-dealers; (2) Section 15(c)(3),54 which addresses the use of unlawful or 
manipulative devices by broker-dealers; (3) Section 17(a),55 regarding broker-dealer obligations 
to make, keep and furnish information; (4) Section 17(b),56regarding broker-dealer records 
subject to examination; (5) Regulation T57, a Federal Reserve Board regulation regarding 
extension of credit by broker-dealers; (6) Exchange Act Rule 15c3-1, regarding broker-dealer net 
capital; (7) Exchange Act Rule 15c3-3, regarding broker-dealer reserves and custody of 
securities; (8) Exchange Act Rules 17a-3 through 17a-5, regarding records to be made and 
preserved by broker-dealers and reports to be made by broker-dealers; and (9) Exchange Act 
Rule 17a-13, regarding quarterly security counts to be made by certain exchange members and 
broker-dealers.  Registered broker-dealers should comply with these provisions in connection 
                                                 
51   
See notes 32 and 37, supra.  As noted above, broker-dealers also would be subject to Section 
15(c)(1) of the Exchange Act, which prohibits brokers and dealers from using manipulative or deceptive 
devices, because that provision explicitly applies in connection with security-based swap agreements. 
52   
We also are not exempting those members from provisions related to government securities, as 
discussed above. 
53   
15 U.S.C. 78g(c). 
54   
15 U.S.C. 78o(c)(3).  
55   
15 U.S.C. 78q(a). 
56   
15 U.S.C. 78q(b). 
57  
12 CFR 220.1 et seq. 
 
32
with their activities involving non-excluded CDS because these provisions are especially 
important to helping protect customer funds and securities, ensure proper credit practices and 
safeguard against fraud and abuse.58   
F. 
Solicitation of Comments 
The Commission intends to monitor closely the development of the CDS market and 
intends to determine to what extent, if any, additional regulatory action may be necessary.  For 
example, as circumstances warrant, certain conditions could be added, altered, or eliminated.  
Moreover, because these exemptions are temporary, the Commission will in the future consider 
whether they should be extended or allowed to expire.  The Commission believes it would be 
prudent to solicit public comment on its action today, and on what action it should take with 
respect to the CDS market in the future.  The Commission is soliciting public comment on all 
aspects of these exemptions, including: 
1. 
Whether the length of this temporary exemption (until September 25, 2009) is 
appropriate.  If not, what should the appropriate duration be? 
2. 
Whether the conditions to these exemptions are appropriate.  Why or why not?  
Should other conditions apply?  Are any of the present conditions to the 
exemptions provided in this Order unnecessary?  If so, please specify and explain 
why such conditions are not needed.   
3. 
Whether LCH.Clearnet ultimately should be required to register as a clearing 
agency under the Exchange Act.  Why or why not? 
                                                 
58   
Indeed, Congress directed the Commission to promulgate broker-dealer financial responsibility 
rules, including rules regarding custody, the use of customer securities and the use of customers’ deposits 
or credit balances, and regarding establishment of minimum financial requirements.   
 
33
4. 
Whether LIFFE A&M members that receive or hold funds or securities for the 
purpose of purchasing, selling, clearing, settling or holding non-excluded CDS 
positions for other persons ultimately should be required to register as broker-
dealers?  Why or why not?        
Comments may be submitted by any of the following methods: 
Electronic comments: 
• 
Use the Commission’s Internet comment form 
(http://www.sec.gov/rules/other.shtml); or 
• 
Send an e-mail to rule-comments@sec.gov.  Please include File Number S7-34-
08 on the subject line; or 
• 
Use the Federal eRulemaking Portal (http://www.regulations.gov/).  Follow the 
instructions for submitting comments. 
Paper comments: 
• 
Send paper comments in triplicate to Secretary, Securities and Exchange 
Commission, 100 F Street, NE, Washington, DC 20549-1090. 
All submissions should refer to File Number S7-34-08.  This file number should be included on 
the subject line if e-mail is used.  To help us process and review your comments more efficiently, 
please use only one method.  We will post all comments on the Commission’s Internet Web site 
(http://www.sec.gov/rules/other.shtml).  Comments are also available for public inspection and 
copying in the Commission’s Public Reference Room, 100 F Street, NE, Washington, DC 20549, 
on official business days between the hours of 10:00 am and 3:00 pm.  All comments received 
will be posted without change; we do not edit personal identifying information from 
submissions.  You should submit only information that you wish to make available publicly. 
 
34
III. 
Conclusion 
IT IS HEREBY ORDERED, pursuant to Section 36(a) of the Exchange Act, that, until 
September 25, 2009: 
(a) Exemption from Section 17A of the Exchange Act. 
LCH.Clearnet Ltd. (“LCH.Clearnet”) shall be exempt from Section 17A of the Exchange 
Act solely to perform the functions of a clearing agency for Cleared Index CDS (as defined in 
paragraph (e) of this Order), subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  LCH.Clearnet shall make available on its Web site annual audited financial 
statements. 
(2)  LCH.Clearnet shall keep and preserve at least one copy of all documents, 
including all correspondence, memoranda, papers, books, notices, accounts, and other 
such records as shall be made or received by it relating to its Cleared Index CDS 
clearance and settlement services.  These records shall be kept for at least five years and 
for the first two years shall be held in an easily accessible place. 
(3) LCH.Clearnet shall supply such information and periodic reports relating to its 
Cleared Index CDS clearance and settlement services as may be reasonably requested by 
the Commission. 
(4) Subject to coordination with the FSA and upon such terms and conditions as 
may be agreed between the FSA and the Commission, LCH.Clearnet shall provide access 
to the Commission to conduct on-site inspections of all facilities (including automated 
systems and systems environment), records, and personnel related to LCH.Clearnet’s 
Cleared Index CDS clearance and settlement services. 
 
35
(5) LCH.Clearnet shall notify the Commission, on a monthly basis, of any 
material disciplinary actions taken against any of its members utilizing its Cleared Index 
CDS clearance and settlement services, including the denial of services, fines, or 
penalties.  LCH.Clearnet shall notify the Commission promptly when it involuntarily 
terminates the membership of an entity that is utilizing LCH.Clearnet’s Cleared Index 
CDS clearance and settlement services.  Both notifications shall describe the facts and 
circumstances that led to LCH.Clearnet’s disciplinary action.    
(6) LCH.Clearnet shall provide the Commission with notice of all changes to its 
Default Rules and Default Fund Rules, not less than one day prior to effectiveness or 
implementation of such rule changes or, in exigent circumstances, as promptly as 
reasonably practicable under the circumstances.  If LCH.Clearnet gives notice to, or 
seeks approval from, the FSA regarding any other changes to its rules regarding its Index 
CDS clearance and settlement services, LCH.Clearnet will also provide notice to the 
Commission.  All such rule changes will be posted on LCH.Clearnet’s Web site.  Such 
notifications will not be deemed rule filings that require Commission approval.    
(7) LCH.Clearnet shall provide the Commission with reports with respect to 
automated systems used in connection with Cleared Index CDS clearance and settlement 
services, other than the TRS/CPS system, prepared by independent audit personnel that 
are generated in accordance with risk assessment of the areas set forth in the 
Commission’s Automation Review Policy Statements (“ARPs”).  LIFFE A&M shall 
provide the Commission with reports with respect to its TRS/CPS system prepared by 
audit personnel from Risk and Audit Services, an independent department of NYSE 
Euronext, that are generated in accordance with risk assessment of the areas set forth in 
 
36
the ARPs.  LCH.Clearnet shall provide the Commission with annual audited financial 
statements prepared by independent audit personnel. 
(8) LCH.Clearnet shall provide notice to the Commission at the same time it 
provides notice to the FSA in accordance with FSA REC 3.15 and FSA REC 3.16 
regarding the suspension of services or inability to operate its facilities in connection with 
the clearance and settlement of Cleared Index CDS.  
(9) LCH.Clearnet, directly or indirectly, shall make available to the public on 
terms that are fair and reasonable and not unreasonably discriminatory:  (a) all end-of-day 
settlement prices and any other prices with respect to Cleared Index CDS that 
LCH.Clearnet or LIFFE A&M may establish to calculate mark-to-market margin 
requirements for LCH.Clearnet or LIFFE A&M Participants; and (b) any other pricing or 
valuation information with respect to Cleared Index CDS as is published or distributed by 
LCH.Clearnet or LIFFE A&M. 
(b) Exemption for LCH.Clearnet, LIFFE A&M, and certain eligible contract participants. 
(1) Persons eligible.  The exemption in paragraph (b)(2) is available to: 
(i) LCH.Clearnet;  
(ii) LIFFE A&M; and 
(iii) Any eligible contract participant (as defined in Section 1a(12) of the 
Commodity Exchange Act as in effect on the date of this Order (other than a 
person that is an eligible contract participant under paragraph (C) of that section)), 
other than:  (A) an eligible contract participant that receives or holds funds or 
securities for the purpose of purchasing, selling, clearing, settling, or holding 
Cleared Index CDS positions for other persons; (B) an eligible contract 
 
37
participant that is a self-regulatory organization, as that term is defined in Section 
3(a)(26) of the Exchange Act; or (C) a broker or dealer registered under Section 
15(b) of the Exchange Act (other than paragraph (11) thereof). 
(2) Scope of exemption.   
(i) In general.  Such persons generally shall, solely with respect to Cleared 
Index CDS, be exempt from the provisions of the Exchange Act and the rules and 
regulations thereunder that do not apply in connection with security-based swap 
agreements.  Accordingly, under this exemption, those persons would remain 
subject to those Exchange Act requirements that explicitly are applicable in 
connection with security-based swap agreements (i.e., paragraphs (2) through (5) 
of Section 9(a), Section 10(b), Section 15(c)(1), paragraphs (a) and (b) of Section 
16, Section 20(d) and Section 21A(a)(1) and the rules thereunder that explicitly 
are applicable to security-based swap agreements).  All provisions of the 
Exchange Act related to the Commission’s enforcement authority in connection 
with violations or potential violations of such provisions also remain applicable.     
(ii) Exclusions from exemption.  The exemption in paragraph (b)(2)(i), 
however, does not extend to the following provisions under the Exchange Act: 
(A) Paragraphs (42), (43), (44), and (45) of Section 3(a);  
(B) Section 5; 
(C) Section 6; 
(D) Section 12 and the rules and regulations thereunder; 
(E) Section 13 and the rules and regulations thereunder; 
(F) Section 14 and the rules and regulations thereunder; 
 
38
(G) Paragraphs (4) and (6) of Section 15(b); 
(H) Section 15(d) and the rules and regulations thereunder; 
(I) Section 15C and the rules and regulations thereunder;  
(J) Section 16 and the rules and regulations thereunder; and 
(K) Section 17A (other than as provided in paragraph (a)).  
(c) Exemption for certain LIFFE A&M members. 
Any member of LIFFE A&M that receives or holds funds or securities for the purpose of 
purchasing, selling, clearing, settling or holding Cleared Index CDS positions for other persons 
shall be exempt from the provisions of the Exchange Act and the rules and regulations 
thereunder specified in paragraph (b)(2), solely with respect to Cleared Index CDS, subject to the 
following conditions:  
(1) The member shall be in material compliance with the rules of LIFFE A&M 
and, if a clearing member, with the rules of LCH.Clearnet, and applicable laws and 
regulations, relating to capital, liquidity, and segregation of customers’ funds and 
securities (and related books and records provisions) with respect to Cleared Index CDS; 
and 
(2) To the extent that the member receives or holds funds or securities of U.S. 
persons for the purpose of purchasing, selling, clearing, settling, or holding Cleared Index 
CDS positions: 
(i) The U.S. persons shall not be natural persons; 
(ii) The member shall segregate such funds and securities of such U.S. 
persons from the member’s own assets (i.e., the member may not permit U.S. 
 
39
persons to “opt out” of applicable segregation requirements for such funds and 
securities even if regulations or laws would permit the person to “opt out”); and 
(iii) The member shall disclose to such U.S. persons that the member is 
not regulated by the Commission and that U.S. broker-dealer segregation 
requirements and protections under the Securities Investor Protection Act will not 
apply to any funds or securities held by the member.  
(d) Exemption for certain registered broker-dealers. 
A broker or dealer registered under Section 15(b) of the Exchange Act (other than 
paragraph (11) thereof) shall be exempt from the provisions of the Exchange Act and the rules 
and regulations thereunder specified in paragraph (b)(2), solely with respect to Cleared Index 
CDS, except: 
(1) Section 7(c); 
(2) Section 15(c)(3); 
(3) Section 17(a); 
(4) Section 17(b);  
(5) Regulation T, 12 CFR 200.1 et seq.; 
(6) Rule 15c3-1; 
(7) Rule 15c3-3; 
(8) Rule 17a-3; 
(9) Rule 17a-4; 
(10) Rule 17a-5; and 
(11) Rule 17a-13. 
 
40
(e) For purposes of this Order, “Cleared Index CDS” shall mean a credit default swap that 
is submitted (or offered, purchased or sold on terms providing for submission) to LCH.Clearnet, 
that is offered only to, purchased only by, and sold only to eligible contract participants (as 
defined in Section 1a(12) of the Commodity Exchange Act as in effect on the date of this Order 
(other than a person that is an eligible contract participant under paragraph (C) of that section)), 
and in which the reference index is an index in which 80 percent or more of the index’s 
weighting is comprised of the entities or securities described below: 
(1) an entity reporting under the Exchange Act, providing Securities Act Rule 
144A(d)(4) information, or about which financial information is otherwise publicly 
available; 
(2) a foreign private issuer whose securities are listed outside the United States 
and that has its principal trading market outside the United States;  
(3) a foreign sovereign debt security;  
(4) an asset-backed security, as defined in Regulation AB, issued in a registered 
transaction with publicly available distribution reports; or 
(5) an asset-backed security issued or guaranteed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac or 
Ginnie Mae. 
 
By the Commission. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Florence E. Harmon 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acting Secretary 
 
 
