Rhode Island National Wildlife Refuge Complex
D-14
Appendix D
Compatibility Determination
Rhode Island National Wildlife Refuge Complex
Use
Waterfowl hunting.
Refuge names, establishing and acquisition authorities, and purposes
Each National Wildlife Refuge is established under specific legislation or administrative authority .
Similarly, each refuge has one or more specific legal purposes for which it was established. The establish-
ing legislation or authority and the purposes for each refuge in the Rhode Island National Wildlife Refuge
Complex (Refuge Complex) are given below.
Block Island National Wildlife Refuge
Date Established: 2 November 1973
Establishing and Acquisition Authorities:  Block Island National Wildlife Refuge (Block Island Refuge) was
established under 16 U.S. Code 667b, Public Law 80 - 537, an Act Authorizing the Transfer of Certain
Real Property for Wildlife, or other Purposes.
Purpose(s) for which Refuge was established:  Lands acquired under 16 U.S. code 667b, Public Law 80-537
were for. . . “particular value in carrying out the national migratory bird management program.”
Ninigret National Wildlife Refuge
Date Established:  12 August 1970
Establishing and Acquisition Authorities:  Ninigret National Wildlife Refuge (Ninigret Refuge) was
established  under 16 U.S. Code 667b, Public Law 80 - 537, an Act Authorizing the Transfer of Certain
Real Property for Wildlife, or Other Purposes.  Additions to the refuge were acquired under the
Migratory Bird Conservation Act, 16 U.S.C. 715d.
Purpose(s) for which Refuge was established:  Lands acquired under 16 U.S. code 667b, Public Law 80-537
were established for their. . . “particular value in carrying out the national Migratory Bird Management
Program.”  Additional lands acquired under the Migratory Bird Conservation Act (16 U.S.C. ss 715d)
were. . . “for use as an inviolate sanctuary, or for any other management purpose, for migratory birds.”
John H. Chafee National Wildlife Refuge at Pettaquamscutt Cove
Date Established: 5 November 1988 (originally established as Pettaquamscutt Cove National Wildlife Refuge)
Establishing and Acquisition Authorities:   John H. Chafee National Wildlife Refuge (Chafee Refuge) was
established under an Amendment to the Emergency Wetlands Resources Act (102 Stat. 3177) and the
National Wildlife Refuge Administrative Act of 1966, as amended (16 USC 668dd - 668ee; 80 STAT 927).
Purpose(s) for which Refuge was established:  The purposes for which the refuge was established and
managed for are: “(1) to protect and enhance the populations of black ducks and other waterfowl, geese,
shorebirds, terns, wading birds, and other wildlife using the refuge; (2) to provide for the conservation
and management of fish and wildlife within the refuge; (3) to fulfill the international treaty obligations of
the United States respecting fish and wildlife; and (4) to provide opportunities for scientific research,
environmental education, and fish and wildlife-oriented recreation” (102 Stat. 3177).
Sachuest Point National Wildlife Refuge
Date Established: 3 November 1970
Establishing and Acquisition Authorities:  Sachuest Point National Wildlife Refuge (Sachuest Point Refuge)
was established under the Refuge Recreation Act of 1962 and the Fish and Wildlife Act of 1956.
Purpose(s) for which Refuge was established:  Sachuest Point Refuge was established “...for the
development, management, advancement, conservation, and protection of fish and wildlife resources” and
Rhode Island National Wildlife Refuge Complex CCPs  May 2002
   D-15
 Compatibility Determinations    Appendix D
for “(1) incidental fish and wildlife-oriented recreational development; (2) protection of natural resources,
and (3) conservation of endangered or threatened species” (Refuge Recreation Act of 1962).
Trustom Pond National Wildlife Refuge
Date Established: 15 August 1974
Establishing and Acquisition Authorities:  The Trustom Pond National Wildlife Refuge (Trustom Pond
Refuge) was established under the authority of the Migratory Bird Conservation Act, 16 USC 715-715R
and by the Refuge Recreation Act, 16 USC c - 1.
Purpose(s) for which Refuge was established:  For lands acquired under the Migratory Bird Conservation
Act, as amended, the purpose of the acquisition is “. . . for use as an inviolate sanctuary, or for any other
management purpose, for migratory birds.”  16 U.S.C. § 715d (Migratory Bird Conservation Act) and for
“. . . (1) incidental fish and wildlife-oriented recreational development; (2) the protection of natural
resources; and (3) the conservation of endangered or threatened species. . .” as authorized by the Refuge
Recreation Act, 16 USC. c - 1.
National Wildlife Refuge System Mission
The Mission of the National Wildlife Refuge System is “to administer a national network of lands and
waters for the conservation, management, and where appropriate, restoration of fish, wildlife, and plant
resources and their habitats within the United States for the benefit of present and future generations of
Americans.”
Description of Uses
Is the use a priority public uses?
Hunting is identified as a priority, wildlife-dependent recreational use by the National Wildlife Refuge
System Improvement Act of 1997 (Refuge Improvement Act; P.L. 105-57).
Where would the use be conducted?

Ninigret Refuge, on the barrier beach marshlands and in the vicinity of Coon Cove;

Chafee Refuge, in Pettaquamscutt Cove; and

Trustom Pond Refuge, on a 20 acre upland field.
When would the use be conducted?
Hunting would occur according to state regulated seasons.
Why is the use being proposed?
Waterfowl hunting helps us achieve refuge purposes and management goals and objectives, as outlined in
refuge Comprehensive Conservation Plans.  In addition, waterfowl hunting in these areas is an historic,
traditional and sustainable activity.
How would the use be conducted?
The activity includes waterfowl hunting , as well as access across refuge lands to hunting opportunities on
state waters.  All hunting would adhere to state regulations for seasons, bag limits, species, and methods
of taking.   Additional refuge regulations may be determined necessary during development of the re-
quired Hunt Plan.
Ninigret Refuge
Currently, no hunting is allowed on the refuge.  However, hunting is a popular activity on the adjacent
Ninigret Pond, which is state waters.  We are proposing to allow waterfowl hunting and associated dog
retrieval, by boat only, in the marshes along the barrier beach parcel. Following restoration of wetland
habitat at Coons Cove, we will provide for waterfowl hunting at this site as well.   We would administer
this hunting opportunity in cooperation with RI DEM.
Rhode Island National Wildlife Refuge Complex
D-16
Appendix D
Chafee Refuge
Currently, no hunting is allowed on this refuge.   We are proposing a waterfowl hunt and associated dog
retrieval, by boat access only, in Pettaquamscutt Cove.    We would administer this hunting opportunity in
cooperation with RI DEM.
Trustom Pond Refuge
Currently, hunting of Canada geese occurs on 20 acres of refuge upland grasslands (cool season grass-
lands).  Bag limits and seasons are determined by Federal and State regulations, which allow two split
seasons for geese.  Hunter parking is provided on the refuge and access to the upland fields is by foot
only.  We would administer this hunting opportunity in cooperation with  RI DEM.
Availability of Resources
Annual costs required to administer and manage waterfowl hunting activities:
Maintenance of Parking Areas
$     500
Law Enforcement
$  7,000(Seasonal LEO)
Signs / Pamphlets
$  1,000
Administration
$  1,000
TOTAL
            $  9,500
Some costs would be significantly reduced due to cooperative management with the State.  Law enforce-
ment officers from the Complex would have limited involvement.
Anticipated Impacts of Waterfowl Hunting
Migratory birds are managed on a flyway basis.  Hunting regulations are established in each state based
on flyway data.  Current numbers of such birds would be reduced, within allowable limits, as determined
by State and Federal agencies.  Direct disturbance to non-target birds would likely occur from hunting,
but would be short term.   For example, noise from shotguns would cause some birds to flush and go
elsewhere.  These impacts are of a temporary nature and would also be reduced by the presence of
adjacent refuge habitat where hunting does not occur, and where birds can feed and rest relatively undis-
turbed.
Public Review and Comment
In the Draft Rhode Island National Wildlife Refuge Complex Comprehensive Conservation Plan/Envi-
ronmental Assessment (December 2000), a compatibility determination was written which included all six
of the priority public uses.   After a 51 day public review, and consideration of comments received, we
made modifications to several of these programs, including hunting.   We are issuing this new, separate
compatibility determination for hunting as required by Service policy and because we have decided to
offer new waterfowl hunting opportunities on Chafee and Ninigret refuges.
A draft of this Compatibility Determination was made available for public review from December 20, 2001
through January 11, 2002,  in conjunction with issuance of our response to public comments on the CCP.
All persons on our mailing list received a copy, press releases invited comments, and the draft CD was
available for public review at our Charlestown Office.  We received comments from four respondents both
in support of, and opposed to, waterfowl hunting.
One respondent was concerned about the potential high rate of crippling losses as a result of wounded
animals. It is likely that, as refuges are opened to hunting, we will require hunter report cards to assess
take and crippling losses.
Two respondents expressed support for waterfowl hunting as proposed.  Another respondent objected to
the potential for loud noise and gunfire, potential disturbance to waterfowl and other wildlife, and was
Rhode Island National Wildlife Refuge Complex CCPs  May 2002
   D-17
 Compatibility Determinations    Appendix D
opposed to recreational hunting on wildlife refuges.   Hunting is one of the six priority public uses on
national wildlife refuges. Areas slated for hunting either already have hunting adjacent to them or are the
required distance from residences.
The Town of Narragansett pointed out that it is illegal to discharge firearms within the City limit. Our
hunt programs will not allow hunting with firearms within the City limits.
Determination
The use is compatible X .
The use is not compatible     .
Stipulations Necessary to Ensure Compatibility
All hunting will adhere to state and local (Town and City ordinances) regulations for hunting seasons,
species, bag and possession limits, and method of take.   Additional refuge regulations may be identified
during development of the Hunt Plan.
Justification
Hunting does not materially interfere with or detract from the Mission of the System, and contributes to
refuge purposes and management goals and objectives.  Hunting is another priority wildlife-oriented
activity that provides outstanding recreational benefit to the public and promotes an appreciation of
wildlife and the outdoors.  Hunting is also a valid means of population control, and can serve to keep
populations of wildlife in check.  In particular, the hunting program at Trustom Pond Refuge will contrib-
ute to the reduction of local resident Canada geese and reduce the public nuisance of these birds.  Water-
fowl hunting at these refuges will help us to manage populations of resident Canada geese, contributing
to the Mission of the Refuge System and the purposes for which these refuges were established.  The
resources needed to administer this program are well within the means of the refuge to do so.
Rhode Island National Wildlife Refuge Complex
D-18
Appendix D
References
Allin, C.C. 1980.  Canada geese in Rhode Island.   Rhode Island Dept. of Env. Manage. Div. Fish and
Wildl. Pam. no:12. 46pp.
Atlantic Waterfowl Council. 1981.  Canada goose subcommittee nuisance goose flock evaluation and
management plan.  AWC minutes 10pp.
Burger, J. 1981.  The effect of human activity on birds at a coastal bay.  Biol. Conserv. 21: 231-241.
Burger, J.  1986.  The effect of human activity on shorebirds in two coastal bays in northeastern United
States.  Env. Cons.  13(2):  123-130.
Hestbeck, J.B., D.H. Rusch, and R.A. Malecki.  1990.  Estimating population parameters for geese. Trans.
N.A. Wildl. Nat. Res Conf.  55:350-373.
Hindman, L.J.,  and F. Ferrigno. 1990.  Atlantic flyway goose population status and management. Trans.
N.A. Wildl. Nat. Res Conf.  55:293-311.
Klein, M.L.  1993.  Waterbird behavioral responses to human disturbances.  Wildl. Soc. Bull. 21:31-39.
Pfister, C., B.A. Harrington, and M. Lavine.  1992.  The impact of human disturbance on shorebirds at a
migration staging area.  Bio. Cons.  60:  115-126.
Trost, R.E.  and R.A. Malecki. 1985.  Population trends in Atlantic flyway Canada geese: implications for
management.  Wildl. Soc. Bull. 13:502-508.
United States Fish and Wildlife Service.  1985.  Refuge Manual.  Wash. D.C.: U.S. Govt. Print. Off
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.  1989.  Hunting Plan for Trustom Pond National Wildlife Refuge.  Ninigret
NWR. Charlestown, RI.  39pp.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.  1994.  Midwinter waterfowl survey-Atlantic Flyway.  in press. 10pp.
United States Fish and Wildlife Service.  1997.  National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act of
1997.  Public Law 105-57-OCT. 9, 1997.
